---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:12:24
document_pages: 59
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/avandia-epar-product-information_en.pdf
document_name: avandia-epar-product-information_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 11.6957608
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 07:25:37.588732
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
ANNEX I SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT

AVANDIA 2 mg film-coated tablets.

2. QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 2 mg rosiglitazone. Excipient Contains lactose (approximately 108 mg). For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 3. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM Film-coated tablet. Pink film-coated tablets debossed with 'GSK' on one side and \"2\" on the other side. 4. CLINICAL PARTICULARS 4.1 Therapeutic indications Rosiglitazone is indicated in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: as monotherapy -in patients (particularly overweight patients) inadequately controlled by diet and exercise for whom metformin is inappropriate because of contraindications or intolerance as dual oral therapy in combination with -metformin, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite maximal tolerated dose of monotherapy with metformin -a sulphonylurea, only in patients who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated, with insufficient glycaemic control despite monotherapy with a sulphonylurea as triple oral therapy in combination with -metformin and a sulphonylurea, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy (see section 4.4). 4.2 Posology and method of administration Rosiglitazone therapy is usually initiated at 4 mg/day. This dose can be increased to 8 mg/day after eight weeks if greater glycaemic control is required. In patients administered rosiglitazone in combination with a sulphonylurea, an increase in rosiglitazone to 8 mg/day should be undertaken cautiously following appropriate clinical evaluation to assess the patient's risk of developing adverse reactions relating to fluid retention (see 4.4 and 4.8). Rosiglitazone may be given once or twice a day. Rosiglitazone may be taken with or without food. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Elderly (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure) No dose adjustment is required in the elderly.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure)

No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild and moderate renal insufficiency. Limited data are available in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min) and therefore rosiglitazone should be used with caution in these patients.

## Myocardial Ischaemia

Patients with hepatic impairment Rosiglitazone should not be used in patients with hepatic impairment. Children and adolescents There are no data available on the use of rosiglitazone in patients under 10 years of age. For children aged 10 to 17 years, there are limited data on rosiglitazone as monotherapy (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). The available data do not support efficacy in the paediatric population and therefore such use is not recommended. 4.3 Contraindications Use of rosiglitazone is contraindicated in patients with: -known hypersensitivity to rosiglitazone or to any of the excipients -cardiac failure or history of cardiac failure (NYHA class I to IV) -an Acute Coronary Syndrome (unstable angina, NSTEMI and STEMI) (see section 4.4) -hepatic impairment -diabetic ketoacidosis or diabetic pre-coma. 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use Fluid retention and cardiac failure Thiazolidinediones can cause fluid retention which may exacerbate or precipitate signs or symptoms of congestive heart failure. Rosiglitazone can cause dose-dependent fluid retention.  The possible contribution of fluid retention to weight gain should be individually assessed as rapid and excessive weight gain has been reported very rarely as a sign of fluid retention. All patients, particularly those receiving concurrent insulin or sulphonylurea therapy, those at risk for heart failure, and those with reduced cardiac reserve, should be monitored for signs and symptoms of adverse reactions relating to fluid retention, including weight gain and heart failure. Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended if rosiglitazone is used in combination with metformin and insulin.  Rosiglitazone should be discontinued if any deterioration in cardiac status occurs. Heart failure was also reported more frequently in patients with a history of heart failure; oedema and heart failure was also reported more frequently in elderly patients and in patients with mild or moderate renal failure. Caution should be exercised in patients over 75 years because of the limited experience in this patient group. Since NSAIDs and rosiglitazone are associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema. Combination with insulin An increased incidence of cardiac failure has been observed in clinical trials when rosiglitazone is used in combination with insulin. Insulin and rosiglitazone are both associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema and could increase the risk of ischaemic heart disease. Insulin should only be added to established rosiglitazone therapy in exceptional cases and under close supervision. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies indicated that treatment with rosiglitazone may be associated with an increased risk of myocardial ischaemic events. However,

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in their entirety the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive (see section 4.8). There are limited clinical trial data in patients with ischaemic heart disease and/or peripheral arterial disease. Therefore, as a precaution, the use of rosiglitazone is not recommended in these patients, particularly those with myocardial ischaemic symptoms.

Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Patients experiencing an ACS have not been studied in rosiglitazone controlled clinical trials. In view of the potential for development of heart failure in these patients, rosiglitazone should therefore not be initiated in patients having an acute coronary event and it should be discontinued during the acute phase (see section 4.3). Monitoring of liver function There have been rare reports of hepatocellular dysfunction during post-marketing experience (see section 4.8). There is limited experience with rosiglitazone in patients with elevated liver enzymes (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal). Therefore, liver enzymes should be checked prior to the initiation of therapy with rosiglitazone in all patients and periodically thereafter based on clinical judgement. Therapy with rosiglitazone should not be initiated in patients with increased baseline liver enzyme levels (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal) or with any other evidence of liver disease. If ALT levels are increased to &gt;3X upper limit of normal during rosiglitazone therapy, liver enzyme levels should be reassessed as soon as possible. If ALT levels remain &gt;3X the upper limit of normal, therapy should be discontinued. If any patient develops symptoms suggesting hepatic dysfunction, which may include unexplained nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, anorexia and/or dark urine, liver enzymes should be checked. The decision whether to continue the patient on therapy with rosiglitazone should be guided by clinical judgement pending laboratory evaluations. If jaundice is observed, drug therapy should be discontinued. Eye disorders Post-marketing reports of new-onset or worsening diabetic macular oedema with decreased visual acuity have been reported with thiazolidinediones, including rosiglitazone. Many of these patients reported concurrent peripheral oedema. It is unclear whether or not there is a direct association between rosiglitazone and macular oedema but prescribers should be alert to the possibility of macular oedema if patients report disturbances in visual acuity and appropriate ophthalmologic referral should be considered. Weight gain In clinical trials with rosiglitazone there was evidence of dose-related weight gain, which was greater when used in combination with insulin. Therefore weight should be closely monitored, given that it may be attributable to fluid retention, which may be associated with cardiac failure. Anaemia Rosiglitazone treatment is associated with a dose-related reduction of haemoglobin levels. In patients with low haemoglobin levels before initiating therapy, there is an increased risk of anaemia during treatment with rosiglitazone. Hypoglycaemia Patients receiving rosiglitazone in combination therapy with a sulphonylurea or with insulin, may be at risk for dose-related hypoglycaemia. Increased monitoring of the patient and a reduction in the dose of the concomitant agent may be necessary. Triple oral therapy The use of rosiglitazone in triple oral therapy, in combination with metformin and a sulphonylurea, may be associated with increased risks for fluid retention and heart failure, as well as hypoglycaemia (see section 4.8). Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended and adjustment of the dose of sulphonylurea may be necessary. The decision to initiate triple oral therapy should include consideration of the alternative to switch the patient to insulin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bone disorders

Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fractures in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone (see section 4.8). The majority of the fractures have occurred in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs. In females, this increased incidence was noted after the first year of treatment and persisted during long-term treatment. The risk of fracture should be considered in the care of patients, especially female patients, treated with rosiglitazone.

Others Premenopausal women have received rosiglitazone during clinical studies. Although hormonal imbalance has been seen in preclinical studies (see section 5.3), no significant undesirable effects associated with menstrual disorders have been observed. As a consequence of improving insulin sensitivity, resumption of ovulation may occur in patients who are anovulatory due to insulin resistance. Patients should be aware of the risk of pregnancy and if a patient wishes to become pregnant or if pregnancy occurs the treatment should be discontinued (see section 4.6). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution during concomitant administration of CYP2C8 inhibitors (e.g. gemfibrozil) or inducers (e.g. rifampicin). Glycaemic control should be monitored closely. Rosiglitazone dose adjustment within the recommended posology or changes in diabetic treatment should be considered (see section 4.5). AVANDIA tablets contain lactose and therefore should not be administered to patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption. 4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with CYP2C9 as only a minor pathway. Co-administration of rosiglitazone with gemfibrozil (an inhibitor of CYP2C8) resulted in a twofold increase in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. Since there is a potential for an increase in the risk of dose-related adverse reactions, a decrease in rosiglitazone dose may be needed. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Co-administration of rosiglitazone with rifampicin (an inducer of CYP2C8) resulted in a 66% decrease in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. It cannot be excluded that other inducers (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, St John's wort) may also affect rosiglitazone exposure. The rosiglitazone dose may need to be increased. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Clinically significant interactions with CYP2C9 substrates or inhibitors are not anticipated. Concomitant administration with the oral anti-diabetic agents metformin, glibenclamide and acarbose did not result in any clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions with rosiglitazone. Moderate ingestion of alcohol with rosiglitazone has no effect on glycaemic control. No clinically relevant interactions with digoxin, the CYP2C9 substrate warfarin, the CYP3A4 substrates nifedipine, ethinylestradiol or norethindrone were observed after co-administration with rosiglitazone. 4.6 Pregnancy and lactation Medicinal product no longer authorised

Rosiglitazone has been reported to cross the human placenta and to be detectable in foetal tissues. There are no adequate data from the use of rosiglitazone in pregnant women. Studies in animals have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). The potential risk for humans is unknown. Rosiglitazone should not be used during pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

| Adverse reaction                           | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|                                            | RSG                                                  | RSG + MET                                            | RSG + SU                                             | RSG +MET +SU                                         |
| Blood and the lymphatic system disorders   | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             |
| anaemia                                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| leucopaenia                                |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| thrombocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| granulocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Metabolism and nutrition disorders product | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           |
| hypercholesterolaemia 1                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| hypertriglyceridaemia                      | Common                                               |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| hyperlipaemia                              | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| weight increase                            | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| increased appetite                         | Common                                               |                                                      | Uncommon                                             |                                                      |
| hypoglycaemia                              |                                                      | Common                                               | Very common                                          | Very common                                          |
| Nervous system disorders dizziness*        |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               |                                                      |
| headache*                                  |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Cardiac disorders                          | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    |
| cardiac failure 2                          |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| cardiac ischaemia 3*                       | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |

Rosiglitazone has been detected in the milk of experimental animals. It is not known whether breastfeeding will lead to exposure of the infant to drug. Rosiglitazone should therefore not be used in women who are breast-feeding. 4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines AVANDIA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 4.8 Undesirable effects Clinical trial data Adverse reactions for each treatment regimen are presented below by system organ class and absolute frequency. For dose-related adverse reactions the frequency category reflects the higher dose of rosiglitazone. Frequency categories do not account for other factors including varying study duration, pre-existing conditions and baseline patient characteristics. Adverse reaction frequency categories assigned based on clinical trial experience may not reflect the frequency of adverse events occurring during normal clinical practice. Frequencies are defined as: very common ≥ 1/10; common ≥ 1/100, &lt; 1/10; and uncommon ≥ 1/1000, &lt; 1/100. Table 1 lists adverse reactions identified from an overview of clinical trials involving over 5,000 rosiglitazone-treated patients. Within each system organ class, adverse reactions are presented in the table by decreasing frequency for the rosiglitazone monotherapy treatment regimen. Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. Table 1. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data Cardiac disorders Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Gastrointestinal disorders

constipation

Common

Common

Common

Common

Common

Very common

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

4 Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fracture in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone. In a monotherapy study, the incidence in females for rosiglitazone was 9.3% (2.7 patients per 100 patient years) vs 5.1% (1.5 patients per 100 patient years) for metformin or 3.5% (1.3 patients per 100 patient years) for glibenclamide. In another long-term study, there was an increased incidence of bone fracture for subjects in the combined rosiglitazone group compared to active control [8.3% vs 5.3%, Risk ratio 1.57 (95% CI 1.26 - 1.97)]. The risk of fracture appeared to

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders bone fractures 4 Common Common Common myalgia* Common General disorders and administration site conditions oedema Common Very common RSG - Rosiglitazone monotherapy; RSG + MET - Rosiglitazone with metformin; RSG + SU Rosiglitazone with sulphonylurea; RSG + MET + SU - Rosiglitazone with metformin and sulphonylurea *The frequency category for the background incidence of these events, as taken from placebo group data from clinical trials, is 'common'. 1 Hypercholesterolaemia was reported in up to 5.3% of patients treated with rosiglitazone (monotherapy, dual or triple oral therapy). The elevated total cholesterol levels were associated with increase in both LDLc and HDLc, but the ratio of total cholesterol:HDLc was unchanged or improved in long term studies. Overall, these increases were generally mild to moderate and usually did not require discontinuation of treatment. 2 An increased incidence of heart failure has been observed when rosiglitazone was added to treatment regimens with a sulphonylurea (either as dual or triple therapy), and appeared higher with 8 mg rosiglitazone compared to 4 mg rosiglitazone (total daily dose). The incidence of heart failure on triple oral therapy was 1.4% in the main double blind study, compared to 0.4% for metformin plus sulphonylurea dual therapy. The incidence of heart failure in combination with insulin (rosiglitazone added to established insulin therapy) was 2.4%, compared to insulin alone, 1.1%. Moreover in patients with congestive heart failure NYHA class I-II, a placebo-controlled one-year trial demonstrated worsening or possible worsening of heart failure in 6.4% of patients treated with rosiglitazone, compared with 3.5% on placebo. 3 In a retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was higher for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.00% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 1.53% [hazard ratio (HR) 1.30 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.004 - 1.69)]. This risk was increased when rosiglitazone was added to established insulin and in patients receiving nitrates for known ischaemic heart disease. In an update to this retrospective analysis that included 10 further studies that met the criteria for inclusion, but were not available at the time of the original analysis, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was not statistically different for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.21% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 2.08% [HR 1.098 (95% CI 0.809 - 1.354)]. In a prospective cardiovascular outcomes study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) the primary endpoint events of cardiovascular death or hospitalisation were similar between rosiglitazone and active comparators [HR 0.99 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.16)]. Two other long-term prospective randomised controlled clinical trials (9,620 patients, study duration &gt;3 years in each study), comparing rosiglitazone to some other approved oral antidiabetic agents or placebo, have not confirmed or excluded the potential risk of cardiac ischaemia. In their entirety, the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

be higher in females relative to control [11.5% vs 6.3%, Risk ratio 1.82 (95% CI 1.37 - 2.41)], than in males relative to control [5.3% vs 4.3%, Risk ratio 1.23 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.77)]. Additional data are necessary to determine whether there is an increased risk of fracture in males after a longer period of follow-up. The majority of the fractures were reported in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs (see section 4.4).

## 5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties

In double-blind clinical trials with rosiglitazone the incidence of elevations of ALT greater than three times the upper limit of normal was equal to placebo (0.2%) and less than that of the active comparators (0.5% metformin/sulphonylureas). The incidence of all adverse events relating to liver and biliary systems was &lt; 1.5% in any treatment group and similar to placebo. Post-marketing data In addition to the adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data, the adverse reactions presented in Table 2 have been identified in post approval use of rosiglitazone. Frequencies are defined as: rare ≥ 1/10,000, &lt;1/1000 and very rare &lt;1/10,000 including isolated reports. Table 2. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from post-marketing data 5 Rare cases of elevated liver enzymes and hepatocellular dysfunction have been reported. In very rare cases a fatal outcome has been reported. 4.9 Overdose Limited data are available with regard to overdose in humans. In clinical studies in volunteers rosiglitazone has been administered at single oral doses of up to 20 mg and was well tolerated. In the event of an overdose, it is recommended that appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated, as dictated by the patient's clinical status. Rosiglitazone is highly protein bound and is not cleared by haemodialysis. 5. PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES Adverse reaction Frequency Metabolism and nutrition disorders rapid and excessive weight gain Very rare Immune system disorders (see Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders) anaphylactic reaction Very rare Eye disorders macular oedema Rare Cardiac disorders congestive heart failure/pulmonary oedema Rare Hepatobiliary disorders hepatic dysfunction, primarily evidenced by elevated hepatic enzymes 5 Rare Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (see Immune system disorders) angioedema Very rare skin reactions (e.g. urticaria, pruritus, rash) Very rare Medicinal product no longer authorised

Pharmacotherapeutic group: oral blood glucose lowering drugs, thiazolidinediones, ATC code: A10

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## BG 02

Rosiglitazone is a selective agonist at the PPAR γ (peroxisomal proliferator activated receptor gamma) nuclear receptor and is a member of the thiazolidinedione class of anti-diabetic agents. It reduces glycaemia by reducing insulin resistance at adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver.

Preclinical data The antihyperglycaemic activity of rosiglitazone has been demonstrated in a number of animal models of type 2 diabetes. In addition, rosiglitazone preserved ß-cell function as shown by increased pancreatic islet mass and insulin content and prevented the development of overt hyperglycaemia in animal models of type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone did not stimulate pancreatic insulin secretion or induce hypoglycaemia in rats and mice. The major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) with high affinity to the soluble human PPAR γ , exhibited relatively high potency in a glucose tolerance assay in obese mouse. The clinical relevance of this observation has not been fully elucidated. Clinical trials data The glucose lowering effects observed with rosiglitazone are gradual in onset with near maximal reductions in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) evident following approximately 8 weeks of therapy. The improved glycaemic control is associated with reductions in both fasting and post-prandial glucose. Rosiglitazone was associated with increases in weight. In mechanistic studies, the weight increase was predominantly shown to be due to increased subcutaneous fat with decreased visceral and intra-hepatic fat. Consistent with the mechanism of action, rosiglitazone reduced insulin resistance and improved pancreatic ß-cell function. Improved glycaemic control was also associated with significant decreases in free fatty acids. As a consequence of different but complementary mechanisms of action, dual oral therapy of rosiglitazone with a sulphonylurea or metformin resulted in additive effects on glycaemic control in type 2 diabetic patients. In studies with a maximal duration of three years, rosiglitazone given once or twice daily produced a sustained improvement in glycaemic control (FPG and HbA1c). A more pronounced glucose-lowering effect was observed in obese patients. An outcome study has not been completed with rosiglitazone, therefore the long-term benefits associated with improved glycaemic control have not been demonstrated. An active controlled clinical trial (rosiglitazone up to 8 mg daily or metformin up to 2,000 mg daily) of 24 weeks duration was performed in 197 children (10-17 years of age) with type 2 diabetes. Improvement in HbA1c from baseline achieved statistical significance only in the metformin group. Rosiglitazone failed to demonstrate non-inferiority to metformin. Following rosiglitazone treatment, there were no new safety concerns noted in children compared to adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. No long-term efficacy and safety data are available in paediatric patients. ADOPT (A Diabetes Outcome Progression Trial) was a multicentre, double-blind, controlled trial with a treatment duration of 4-6 years (median duration of 4 years), in which rosiglitazone at doses of 4 to 8 mg/day was compared to metformin (500 mg to 2000 mg/day) and glibenclamide (2.5 to 15 mg/day) in 4351 drug naive subjects recently diagnosed ( ≤ 3 years) with type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone treatment significantly reduced the risk of reaching monotherapy failure (FPG&gt;10.0 mmol/L) by 63% relative to glibenclamide (HR 0.37, CI 0.30-0.45) and by 32% relative to metformin (HR 0.68, CI 0.55-0.85) during the course of the study (up to 72 months of treatment). This translates to a cumulative incidence of treatment failure of 10.3% for rosiglitazone, 14.8% for metformin and 23.3% for glibenclamide treated patients. Overall, 43%, 47% and 42% of subjects in the rosiglitazone, glibenclamide and metformin groups respectively withdrew due to reasons other than monotherapy failure. The impact of these findings on disease progression or on microvascular or macrovascular outcomes has not been determined (see section 4.8). In this study, the adverse events observed were consistent with the known adverse event profile for each of the treatments, including continuing weight gain with rosiglitazone. An additional observation of an increased incidence of bone fractures Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

was seen in women with rosiglitazone (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).

| Randomised Treatment †                 | Mean (SD) dose at end of randomised treatment   |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) | 6.7 (1.9) mg                                    |
| Sulphonylurea (background metformin)   |                                                 |
| Glimepiride*                           | 3.6 (1.8) mg                                    |
| Metformin (background sulphonylurea)   | 1995.5 (682.6) mg                               |

The volume of distribution of rosiglitazone is approximately 14 litres in healthy volunteers. Plasma protein binding of rosiglitazone is high (approximately 99.8%) and is not influenced by concentration or age. The protein binding of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) is very high (&gt;99.99%).

The RECORD (Rosiglitazone Evaluated for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of glycaemia in Diabetes) trial was a large (4,447 subjects), open-label, prospective, controlled study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) in which patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin or sulphonylurea were randomised to add-on rosiglitazone or metformin or sulphonylurea. The mean duration of diabetes in these patients was approximately 7 years. The adjudicated primary endpoint was cardiovascular hospitalisation (which included hospitalisations for heart failure) or cardiovascular death. Mean doses at the end of randomised treatment are shown in the following table: Randomised Treatment Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) Sulphonylurea (background metformin) Glimepiride* Metformin (background sulphonylurea) *Similar  relative  effective  doses  (i.e  approximately  half  maximal  dose)  for  other  sulphonylureas (glibenclamide and glicazide). † Patients who took designated treatment as randomised in combination with the correct background treatment and with evaluable data. No difference in the number of adjudicated primary endpoint events for rosiglitazone (321/2220) versus active control (323/2227) (HR 0.99, CI 0.85-1.16) was observed, meeting the pre-defined noninferiority criterion of 1.20 (non-inferiority p = 0.02). HR and CI for key secondary endpoints were: all-cause death (HR 0.86, CI 0.68-1.08), MACE (Major Adverse Cardiac Events - cardiovascular death, acute myocardial infarction, stroke) (HR 0.93, CI 0.74-1.15), cardiovascular death (HR 0.84, CI 0.59-1.18), acute myocardial infarction (HR 1.14, CI 0.80-1.63) and stroke (HR 0.72, CI 0.49-1.06). In a sub-study at 18 months, add-on rosiglitazone dual therapy was non-inferior to the combination of sulphonylurea plus metformin for lowering HbA1c. In the final analysis at 5 years, an adjusted mean reduction from baseline in HbA1c of 0.14% for patients on rosiglitazone added to metformin versus an increase of 0.17% for patients taking sulphonylurea added to metformin was seen during treatment with randomised dual-combination therapy (p&lt;0.0001 for treatment difference). An adjusted mean reduction in HbA1c of 0.24% was seen for patients taking rosiglitazone added to sulphonylurea, versus a reduction in HbA1c of 0.10% for patients taking metformin added to sulphonylurea, (p=0.0083 for treatment difference). There was a significant increase in heart failure (fatal and nonfatal) (HR 2.10, CI 1.35-3.27) and bone fractures (Risk Ratio 1.57, CI 1.26-1.97) in rosiglitazonecontaining treatments compared to active control (see sections 4.4 and 4.8). A total of 564 patients withdrew from cardiovascular follow-up, which accounted for 12.3% of rosiglitazone patients and 13% of control patients; representing 7.2% of patient-years lost for cardiovascular events follow-up and 2.0% of patient-years lost for all cause mortality follow-up. 5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties Absorption Absolute bioavailability of rosiglitazone following both a 4 and an 8 mg oral dose is approximately 99%. Rosiglitazone plasma concentrations peak at around 1 hour after dosing. Plasma concentrations are approximately dose proportional over the therapeutic dose range. Administration of rosiglitazone with food resulted in no change in overall exposure (AUC), although a small decrease in Cmax (approximately 20% to 28%) and a delay in tmax (ca.1.75 h) were observed compared to dosing in the fasting state. These small changes are not clinically significant and, therefore, it is not necessary to administer rosiglitazone at any particular time in relation to meals. The absorption of rosiglitazone is not affected by increases in gastric pH. Distribution Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Metabolism

Metabolism of rosiglitazone is extensive with no parent compound being excreted unchanged. The major routes of metabolism are N-demethylation and hydroxylation, followed by conjugation with sulphate and glucuronic acid. The contribution of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) to the overall anti-diabetic activity of rosiglitazone has not been fully elucidated in man and it cannot be ruled out that the metabolite may contribute to the activity. However, this raises no safety concern regarding target or special populations as hepatic impairment is contraindicated and the phase III clinical studies included a considerable number of elderly patients and patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with a minor contribution by CYP2C9. Since there is no significant in vitro inhibition of CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A or 4A with rosiglitazone, there is a low probability of significant metabolism-based interactions with substances metabolised by these P450 enzymes. Rosiglitazone showed moderate inhibition of CYP2C8 (IC50 18 µM) and low inhibition of CYP2C9 (IC50 50 µM) in vitro (see section 4.5). An in vivo interaction study with warfarin indicated that rosiglitazone does not interact with CYP2C9 substrates in vivo . Elimination Total plasma clearance of rosiglitazone is around 3 l/h and the terminal elimination half-life of rosiglitazone is approximately 3 to 4 hours. There is no evidence for unexpected accumulation of rosiglitazone after once or twice daily dosing. The major route of excretion is the urine with approximately two-thirds of the dose being eliminated by this route, whereas faecal elimination accounts for approximately 25% of dose. No intact drug is excreted in urine or faeces. The terminal half-life for radioactivity was about 130 hours indicating that elimination of metabolites is very slow. Accumulation of the metabolites in plasma is expected upon repeated dosing, especially that of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) for which an 8-fold accumulation is anticipated. Special populations Gender: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis, there were no marked differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone between males and females. Elderly: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis , age was not found to influence the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone to any significant extent . Children and adolescents: Population pharmacokinetic analysis including 96 paediatric patients aged 10 to 18 years and weighing 35 to 178 kg suggested similar mean CL/F in children and adults. Individual CL/F in the paediatric population was in the same range as individual adult data. CL/F seemed to be independent of age, but increased with weight in the paediatric population. Hepatic impairment: In cirrhotic patients with moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, unbound Cmax and AUC were 2- and 3-fold higher than in normal subjects. The inter-subject variability was large, with a 7-fold difference in unbound AUC between patients. Renal insufficiency: There are no clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone in patients with renal impairment or end stage renal disease on chronic dialysis. 5.3 Preclinical safety data Medicinal product no longer authorised

Adverse effects observed in animal studies with possible relevance to clinical use were as follows: An increase in plasma volume accompanied by decrease in red cell parameters and increase in heart weight. Increases in liver weight, plasma ALT (dog only) and fat tissue were also observed. Similar effects have been seen with other thiazolidinediones.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In reproductive toxicity studies, administration of rosiglitazone to rats during mid-late gestation was associated with foetal death and retarded foetal development. In addition, rosiglitazone inhibited ovarian oestradiol and progesterone synthesis and lowered plasma levels of these hormones resulting in effects on oestrus/menstrual cycles and fertility (see section 4.4).

In an animal model for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), treatment with rosiglitazone at 200 times the pharmacologically active dose increased tumour multiplicity in the colon. The relevance of this finding is unknown. However, rosiglitazone promoted differentiation and reversal of mutagenic changes in human colon cancer cells in vitro . In addition, rosiglitazone was not genotoxic in a battery of in vivo and in vitro genotoxicity studies and there was no evidence of colon tumours in lifetime studies of rosiglitazone in two rodent species. 6. PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 6.1 List of excipients Tablet core: Sodium starch glycollate (Type A) hypromellose microcrystalline cellulose lactose monohydrate magnesium stearate. Film coating (Opadry pink OY-L-24802) : Hypromellose 6cP Titanium dioxide E171 Macrogol 3000 Lactose monohydrate Glycerol triacetate Iron oxide red E172. 6.2 Incompatibilities Not applicable. 6.3 Shelf life 2 years. 6.4 Special precautions for storage This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions. 6.5 Nature and contents of container Opaque blister packs (PVC/ aluminium). 56, 112, 168 or 180 film-coated tablets or 56 film-coated tablets, unit dose pack. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 6.6 Special precautions for disposal Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 7. MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

SmithKline Beecham Ltd, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, United Kingdom.

8. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/1/00/137/002-004, EU/1/00/137/013, EU/1/00/137/016 9. DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION Date of first authorisation: 11 July 2000 Date of latest renewal: 11 July 2005 10. DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA)  http://www.ema.europa.eu Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT

AVANDIA 4 mg film-coated tablets.

2. QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 4 mg rosiglitazone. Excipient Contains lactose (approximately 105 mg). For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 3. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM Film-coated tablet. Orange film-coated tablets debossed with 'GSK' on one side and \"4\" on the other side. 4. CLINICAL PARTICULARS 4.1 Therapeutic indications Rosiglitazone is indicated in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: as monotherapy -in patients (particularly overweight patients) inadequately controlled by diet and exercise for whom metformin is inappropriate because of contraindications or intolerance as dual oral therapy in combination with -metformin, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite maximal tolerated dose of monotherapy with metformin -a sulphonylurea, only in patients who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated, with insufficient glycaemic control despite monotherapy with a sulphonylurea as triple oral therapy in combination with -metformin and a sulphonylurea, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy (see section 4.4). 4.2 Posology and method of administration Rosiglitazone therapy is usually initiated at 4 mg/day. This dose can be increased to 8 mg/day after eight weeks if greater glycaemic control is required. In patients administered rosiglitazone in combination with a sulphonylurea, an increase in rosiglitazone to 8 mg/day should be undertaken cautiously following appropriate clinical evaluation to assess the patient's risk of developing adverse reactions relating to fluid retention (see 4.4 and 4.8). Rosiglitazone may be given once or twice a day. Rosiglitazone may be taken with or without food. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Elderly (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure) No dose adjustment is required in the elderly.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure)

No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild and moderate renal insufficiency. Limited data are available in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min) and therefore rosiglitazone should be used with caution in these patients.

## Myocardial Ischaemia

Patients with hepatic impairment Rosiglitazone should not be used in patients with hepatic impairment. Children and adolescents There are no data available on the use of rosiglitazone in patients under 10 years of age. For children aged 10 to 17 years, there are limited data on rosiglitazone as monotherapy (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). The available data do not support efficacy in the paediatric population and therefore such use is not recommended. 4.3 Contraindications Use of rosiglitazone is contraindicated in patients with: -known hypersensitivity to rosiglitazone or to any of the excipients -cardiac failure or history of cardiac failure (NYHA class I to IV) -an Acute Coronary Syndrome (unstable angina, NSTEMI and STEMI) (see section 4.4) -hepatic impairment -diabetic ketoacidosis or diabetic pre-coma. 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use Fluid retention and cardiac failure Thiazolidinediones can cause fluid retention which may exacerbate or precipitate signs or symptoms of congestive heart failure. Rosiglitazone can cause dose-dependent fluid retention.  The possible contribution of fluid retention to weight gain should be individually assessed as rapid and excessive weight gain has been reported very rarely as a sign of fluid retention. All patients, particularly those receiving concurrent insulin or sulphonylurea therapy, those at risk for heart failure, and those with reduced cardiac reserve, should be monitored for signs and symptoms of adverse reactions relating to fluid retention, including weight gain and heart failure. Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended if rosiglitazone is used in combination with metformin and insulin. Rosiglitazone should be discontinued if any deterioration in cardiac status occurs. Heart failure was also reported more frequently in patients with a history of heart failure; oedema and heart failure was also reported more frequently in elderly patients and in patients with mild or moderate renal failure. Caution should be exercised in patients over 75 years because of the limited experience in this patient group. Since NSAIDs and rosiglitazone are associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema. Combination with insulin An increased incidence of cardiac failure has been observed in clinical trials when rosiglitazone is used in combination with insulin. Insulin and rosiglitazone are both associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema and could increase the risk of ischaemic heart disease. Insulin should only be added to established rosiglitazone therapy in exceptional cases and under close supervision. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies indicated that treatment with rosiglitazone may be associated with an increased risk of myocardial ischaemic events. However,

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in their entirety the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive (see section 4.8). There are limited clinical trial data in patients with ischaemic heart disease and/or peripheral arterial disease. Therefore, as a precaution, the use of rosiglitazone is not recommended in these patients, particularly those with myocardial ischaemic symptoms.

Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Patients experiencing an ACS have not been studied in rosiglitazone controlled clinical trials. In view of the potential for development of heart failure in these patients, rosiglitazone should therefore not be initiated in patients having an acute coronary event and it should be discontinued during the acute phase (see section 4.3). Monitoring of liver function There have been rare reports of hepatocellular dysfunction during post-marketing experience (see section 4.8). There is limited experience with rosiglitazone in patients with elevated liver enzymes (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal). Therefore, liver enzymes should be checked prior to the initiation of therapy with rosiglitazone in all patients and periodically thereafter based on clinical judgement. Therapy with rosiglitazone should not be initiated in patients with increased baseline liver enzyme levels (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal) or with any other evidence of liver disease. If ALT levels are increased to &gt;3X upper limit of normal during rosiglitazone therapy, liver enzyme levels should be reassessed as soon as possible. If ALT levels remain &gt;3X the upper limit of normal, therapy should be discontinued. If any patient develops symptoms suggesting hepatic dysfunction, which may include unexplained nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, anorexia and/or dark urine, liver enzymes should be checked. The decision whether to continue the patient on therapy with rosiglitazone should be guided by clinical judgement pending laboratory evaluations. If jaundice is observed, drug therapy should be discontinued. Eye disorders Post-marketing reports of new-onset or worsening diabetic macular oedema with decreased visual acuity have been reported with thiazolidinediones, including rosiglitazone. Many of these patients reported concurrent peripheral oedema. It is unclear whether or not there is a direct association between rosiglitazone and macular oedema but prescribers should be alert to the possibility of macular oedema if patients report disturbances in visual acuity and appropriate ophthalmologic referral should be considered. Weight gain In clinical trials with rosiglitazone there was evidence of dose-related weight gain, which was greater when used in combination with insulin. Therefore weight should be closely monitored, given that it may be attributable to fluid retention, which may be associated with cardiac failure. Anaemia Rosiglitazone treatment is associated with a dose-related reduction of haemoglobin levels. In patients with low haemoglobin levels before initiating therapy, there is an increased risk of anaemia during treatment with rosiglitazone. Hypoglycaemia Patients receiving rosiglitazone in combination therapy with a sulphonylurea or with insulin, may be at risk for dose-related hypoglycaemia. Increased monitoring of the patient and a reduction in the dose of the concomitant agent may be necessary. Triple oral therapy The use of rosiglitazone in triple oral therapy, in combination with metformin and a sulphonylurea, may be associated with increased risks for fluid retention and heart failure, as well as hypoglycaemia (see section 4.8). Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended and adjustment of the dose of sulphonylurea may be necessary. The decision to initiate triple oral therapy should include consideration of the alternative to switch the patient to insulin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bone disorders

Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fractures in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone (see section 4.8). The majority of the fractures have occurred in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs. In females, this increased incidence was noted after the first year of treatment and persisted during long-term treatment. The risk of fracture should be considered in the care of patients, especially female patients, treated with rosiglitazone.

Others Premenopausal women have received rosiglitazone during clinical studies. Although hormonal imbalance has been seen in preclinical studies (see section 5.3), no significant undesirable effects associated with menstrual disorders have been observed. As a consequence of improving insulin sensitivity, resumption of ovulation may occur in patients who are anovulatory due to insulin resistance. Patients should be aware of the risk of pregnancy and if a patient wishes to become pregnant or if pregnancy occurs the treatment should be discontinued (see section 4.6). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution during concomitant administration of CYP2C8 inhibitors (e.g. gemfibrozil) or inducers (e.g. rifampicin). Glycaemic control should be monitored closely. Rosiglitazone dose adjustment within the recommended posology or changes in diabetic treatment should be considered (see section 4.5). AVANDIA tablets contain lactose and therefore should not be administered to patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption. 4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with CYP2C9 as only a minor pathway. Co-administration of rosiglitazone with gemfibrozil (an inhibitor of CYP2C8) resulted in a twofold increase in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. Since there is a potential for an increase in the risk of dose-related adverse reactions, a decrease in rosiglitazone dose may be needed. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Co-administration of rosiglitazone with rifampicin (an inducer of CYP2C8) resulted in a 66% decrease in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. It cannot be excluded that other inducers (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, St John's wort) may also affect rosiglitazone exposure. The rosiglitazone dose may need to be increased. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Clinically significant interactions with CYP2C9 substrates or inhibitors are not anticipated. Concomitant administration with the oral anti-diabetic agents metformin, glibenclamide and acarbose did not result in any clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions with rosiglitazone. Moderate ingestion of alcohol with rosiglitazone has no effect on glycaemic control. No clinically relevant interactions with digoxin, the CYP2C9 substrate warfarin, the CYP3A4 substrates nifedipine, ethinylestradiol or norethindrone were observed after co-administration with rosiglitazone. 4.6 Pregnancy and lactation Medicinal product no longer authorised

Rosiglitazone has been reported to cross the human placenta and to be detectable in foetal tissues. There are no adequate data from the use of rosiglitazone in pregnant women. Studies in animals have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). The potential risk for humans is unknown. Rosiglitazone should not be used during pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

| Adverse reaction                           | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|                                            | RSG                                                  | RSG + MET                                            | RSG + SU                                             | RSG +MET +SU                                         |
| Blood and the lymphatic system disorders   | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             |
| anaemia                                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| leucopaenia                                |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| thrombocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| granulocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Metabolism and nutrition disorders product | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           |
| hypercholesterolaemia 1                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| hypertriglyceridaemia                      | Common                                               |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| hyperlipaemia                              | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| weight increase                            | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| increased appetite                         | Common                                               |                                                      | Uncommon                                             |                                                      |
| hypoglycaemia                              |                                                      | Common                                               | Very common                                          | Very common                                          |
| Nervous system disorders dizziness*        |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               |                                                      |
| headache*                                  |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Cardiac disorders                          | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    |
| cardiac failure 2                          |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| cardiac ischaemia 3*                       | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |

Rosiglitazone has been detected in the milk of experimental animals. It is not known whether breastfeeding will lead to exposure of the infant to drug. Rosiglitazone should therefore not be used in women who are breast-feeding. 4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines AVANDIA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 4.8 Undesirable effects Clinical trial data Adverse reactions for each treatment regimen are presented below by system organ class and absolute frequency. For dose-related adverse reactions the frequency category reflects the higher dose of rosiglitazone. Frequency categories do not account for other factors including varying study duration, pre-existing conditions and baseline patient characteristics. Adverse reaction frequency categories assigned based on clinical trial experience may not reflect the frequency of adverse events occurring during normal clinical practice. Frequencies are defined as: very common ≥ 1/10; common ≥ 1/100, &lt; 1/10; and uncommon ≥ 1/1000, &lt; 1/100. Table 1 lists adverse reactions identified from an overview of clinical trials involving over 5,000 rosiglitazone-treated patients. Within each system organ class, adverse reactions are presented in the table by decreasing frequency for the rosiglitazone monotherapy treatment regimen. Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. Table 1. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data Cardiac disorders Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Gastrointestinal disorders                           | Gastrointestinal disorders                           | Gastrointestinal disorders                           | Gastrointestinal disorders                           | Gastrointestinal disorders                           |
|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| constipation                                         | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      | Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      | Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      | Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      | Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      |
| bone fractures 4                                     | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |                                                      |
| myalgia*                                             |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| General disorders and administration site conditions | General disorders and administration site conditions | General disorders and administration site conditions | General disorders and administration site conditions | General disorders and administration site conditions |
| oedema                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Very common                                          | Very common                                          |

4 Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fracture in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone. In a monotherapy study, the incidence in females for rosiglitazone was 9.3% (2.7 patients per 100 patient years) vs 5.1% (1.5 patients per 100 patient years) for metformin or 3.5% (1.3 patients per 100 patient years) for glibenclamide. In another long-term study, there was an increased incidence of bone fracture for subjects in the combined rosiglitazone group compared to active control [8.3% vs 5.3%, Risk ratio 1.57 (95% CI 1.26 - 1.97)]. The risk of fracture appeared to

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders bone fractures 4 Common Common Common myalgia* Common General disorders and administration site conditions oedema Very common RSG - Rosiglitazone monotherapy; RSG + MET - Rosiglitazone with metformin; RSG + SU Rosiglitazone with sulphonylurea; RSG + MET + SU - Rosiglitazone with metformin and sulphonylurea *The frequency category for the background incidence of these events, as taken from placebo group data from clinical trials, is 'common'. 1 Hypercholesterolaemia was reported in up to 5.3% of patients treated with rosiglitazone (monotherapy, dual or triple oral therapy). The elevated total cholesterol levels were associated with increase in both LDLc and HDLc, but the ratio of total cholesterol:HDLc was unchanged or improved in long term studies. Overall, these increases were generally mild to moderate and usually did not require discontinuation of treatment. 2 An increased incidence of heart failure has been observed when rosiglitazone was added to treatment regimens with a sulphonylurea (either as dual or triple therapy), and appeared higher with 8 mg rosiglitazone compared to 4 mg rosiglitazone (total daily dose). The incidence of heart failure on triple oral therapy was 1.4% in the main double blind study, compared to 0.4% for metformin plus sulphonylurea dual therapy. The incidence of heart failure in combination with insulin (rosiglitazone added to established insulin therapy) was 2.4%, compared to insulin alone, 1.1%. Moreover in patients with congestive heart failure NYHA class I-II, a placebo-controlled one-year trial demonstrated worsening or possible worsening of heart failure in 6.4% of patients treated with rosiglitazone, compared with 3.5% on placebo. 3 In a retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was higher for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.00% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 1.53% [hazard ratio (HR) 1.30 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.004 - 1.69)]. This risk was increased when rosiglitazone was added to established insulin and in patients receiving nitrates for known ischaemic heart disease. In an update to this retrospective analysis that included 10 further studies that met the criteria for inclusion, but were not available at the time of the original analysis, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was not statistically different for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.21% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 2.08% [HR 1.098 (95% CI 0.809 - 1.354)]. In a prospective cardiovascular outcomes study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) the primary endpoint events of cardiovascular death or hospitalisation were similar between rosiglitazone and active comparators [HR 0.99 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.16)]. Two other long-term prospective randomised controlled clinical trials (9,620 patients, study duration &gt;3 years in each study), comparing rosiglitazone to some other approved oral antidiabetic agents or placebo, have not confirmed or excluded the potential risk of cardiac ischaemia. In their entirety, the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

be higher in females relative to control [11.5% vs 6.3%, Risk ratio 1.82 (95% CI 1.37 - 2.41)], than in males relative to control [5.3% vs 4.3%, Risk ratio 1.23 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.77)]. Additional data are necessary to determine whether there is an increased risk of fracture in males after a longer period of follow-up. The majority of the fractures were reported in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs (see section 4.4).

In double-blind clinical trials with rosiglitazone the incidence of elevations of ALT greater than three times the upper limit of normal was equal to placebo (0.2%) and less than that of the active comparators (0.5% metformin/sulphonylureas). The incidence of all adverse events relating to liver and biliary systems was &lt; 1.5% in any treatment group and similar to placebo. Post-marketing data In addition to the adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data, the adverse reactions presented in Table 2 have been identified in post approval use of rosiglitazone. Frequencies are defined as: rare ≥ 1/10,000, &lt;1/1000 and very rare &lt;1/10,000 including isolated reports. Table 2. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from post-marketing data Adverse reaction Frequency Metabolism and nutrition disorders rapid and excessive weight gain Very rare Immune system disorders (see Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders) anaphylactic reaction Very rare Eye disorders macular oedema Rare Cardiac disorders congestive heart failure/pulmonary oedema Rare Hepatobiliary disorders hepatic dysfunction, primarily evidenced by elevated hepatic enzymes 5 Rare Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (see Immune system disorders) angioedema Very rare skin reactions (e.g. urticaria, pruritus, rash) Very rare 5 Rare cases of elevated liver enzymes and hepatocellular dysfunction have been reported. In very rare cases a fatal outcome has been reported. 4.9 Overdose Limited data are available with regard to overdose in humans. In clinical studies in volunteers rosiglitazone has been administered at single oral doses of up to 20 mg and was well tolerated. In the event of an overdose, it is recommended that appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated, as dictated by the patient's clinical status. Rosiglitazone is highly protein bound and is not cleared by haemodialysis. 5. PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Pharmacotherapeutic group: oral blood glucose lowering drugs, thiazolidinediones, ATC code: A10 BG 02

Rosiglitazone is a selective agonist at the PPAR γ (peroxisomal proliferator activated receptor gamma) nuclear receptor and is a member of the thiazolidinedione class of anti-diabetic agents. It reduces glycaemia by reducing insulin resistance at adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver. Preclinical data The antihyperglycaemic activity of rosiglitazone has been demonstrated in a number of animal models of type 2 diabetes. In addition, rosiglitazone preserved ß-cell function as shown by increased pancreatic islet mass and insulin content and prevented the development of overt hyperglycaemia in animal models of type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone did not stimulate pancreatic insulin secretion or induce hypoglycaemia in rats and mice. The major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) with high affinity to the soluble human PPAR γ , exhibited relatively high potency in a glucose tolerance assay in obese mouse. The clinical relevance of this observation has not been fully elucidated. Clinical trials data The glucose lowering effects observed with rosiglitazone are gradual in onset with near maximal reductions in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) evident following approximately 8 weeks of therapy. The improved glycaemic control is associated with reductions in both fasting and post-prandial glucose. Rosiglitazone was associated with increases in weight. In mechanistic studies, the weight increase was predominantly shown to be due to increased subcutaneous fat with decreased visceral and intra-hepatic fat. Consistent with the mechanism of action, rosiglitazone reduced insulin resistance and improved pancreatic ß-cell function. Improved glycaemic control was also associated with significant decreases in free fatty acids. As a consequence of different but complementary mechanisms of action, dual oral therapy of rosiglitazone with a sulphonylurea or metformin resulted in additive effects on glycaemic control in type 2 diabetic patients. In studies with a maximal duration of three years, rosiglitazone given once or twice daily produced a sustained improvement in glycaemic control (FPG and HbA1c). A more pronounced glucose-lowering effect was observed in obese patients. An outcome study has not been completed with rosiglitazone, therefore the long-term benefits associated with improved glycaemic control have not been demonstrated. An active controlled clinical trial (rosiglitazone up to 8 mg daily or metformin up to 2,000 mg daily) of 24 weeks duration was performed in 197 children (10-17 years of age) with type 2 diabetes. Improvement in HbA1c from baseline achieved statistical significance only in the metformin group. Rosiglitazone failed to demonstrate non-inferiority to metformin. Following rosiglitazone treatment, there were no new safety concerns noted in children compared to adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. No long-term efficacy and safety data are available in paediatric patients. ADOPT (A Diabetes Outcome Progression Trial) was a multicentre, double-blind, controlled trial with a treatment duration of 4-6 years (median duration of 4 years), in which rosiglitazone at doses of 4 to 8 mg/day was compared to metformin (500 mg to 2000 mg/day) and glibenclamide (2.5 to 15 mg/day) in 4351 drug naive subjects recently diagnosed ( ≤ 3 years) with type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone treatment significantly reduced the risk of reaching monotherapy failure (FPG&gt;10.0 mmol/L) by 63% relative to glibenclamide (HR 0.37, CI 0.30-0.45) and by 32% relative to metformin (HR 0.68, CI 0.55-0.85) during the course of the study (up to 72 months of treatment). This translates to a cumulative incidence of treatment failure of 10.3% for rosiglitazone, 14.8% for metformin and 23.3% for glibenclamide treated patients. Overall, 43%, 47% and 42% of subjects in the rosiglitazone, glibenclamide and metformin groups respectively withdrew due to reasons other than monotherapy failure. The impact of these findings on disease progression or on microvascular or macrovascular outcomes has not been determined (see section 4.8). In this study, the adverse events observed were consistent with the known adverse event profile for each of the treatments, including continuing Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

weight gain with rosiglitazone. An additional observation of an increased incidence of bone fractures was seen in women with rosiglitazone (see sections 4.4 and 4.8).

| Randomised Treatment †                 | Mean (SD) dose at end of randomised treatment   |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) | 6.7 (1.9) mg                                    |
| Sulphonylurea (background metformin)   |                                                 |
| Glimepiride*                           | 3.6 (1.8) mg                                    |
| Metformin (background sulphonylurea)   | 1995.5 (682.6) mg                               |

## Distribution

The RECORD (Rosiglitazone Evaluated for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of glycaemia in Diabetes) trial was a large (4,447 subjects), open-label, prospective, controlled study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) in which patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin or sulphonylurea were randomised to add-on rosiglitazone or metformin or sulphonylurea. The mean duration of diabetes in these patients was approximately 7 years. The adjudicated primary endpoint was cardiovascular hospitalisation (which included hospitalisations for heart failure) or cardiovascular death. Mean doses at the end of randomised treatment are shown in the following table: Randomised Treatment Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) Sulphonylurea (background metformin) Glimepiride* Metformin (background sulphonylurea) *Similar  relative  effective  doses  (i.e  approximately  half  maximal  dose)  for  other  sulphonylureas (glibenclamide and glicazide). † Patients who took designated treatment as randomised in combination with the correct background treatment and with evaluable data. No difference in the number of adjudicated primary endpoint events for rosiglitazone (321/2220) versus active control (323/2227) (HR 0.99, CI 0.85-1.16) was observed, meeting the pre-defined noninferiority criterion of 1.20 (non-inferiority p = 0.02). HR and CI for key secondary endpoints were: all-cause death (HR 0.86, CI 0.68-1.08), MACE (Major Adverse Cardiac Events - cardiovascular death, acute myocardial infarction, stroke) (HR 0.93, CI 0.74-1.15), cardiovascular death (HR 0.84, CI 0.59-1.18), acute myocardial infarction (HR 1.14, CI 0.80-1.63) and stroke (HR 0.72, CI 0.49-1.06). In a sub-study at 18 months, add-on rosiglitazone dual therapy was non-inferior to the combination of sulphonylurea plus metformin for lowering HbA1c. In the final analysis at 5 years, an adjusted mean reduction from baseline in HbA1c of 0.14% for patients on rosiglitazone added to metformin versus an increase of 0.17% for patients taking sulphonylurea added to metformin was seen during treatment with randomised dual-combination therapy (p&lt;0.0001 for treatment difference). An adjusted mean reduction in HbA1c of 0.24% was seen for patients taking rosiglitazone added to sulphonylurea, versus a reduction in HbA1c of 0.10% for patients taking metformin added to sulphonylurea, (p=0.0083 for treatment difference). There was a significant increase in heart failure (fatal and nonfatal) (HR 2.10, CI 1.35-3.27) and bone fractures (Risk Ratio 1.57, CI 1.26-1.97) in rosiglitazonecontaining treatments compared to active control (see sections 4.4 and 4.8). A total of 564 patients withdrew from cardiovascular follow-up, which accounted for 12.3% of rosiglitazone patients and 13% of control patients; representing 7.2% of patient-years lost for cardiovascular events follow-up and 2.0% of patient-years lost for all cause mortality follow-up. 5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties Absorption Absolute bioavailability of rosiglitazone following both a 4 and an 8 mg oral dose is approximately 99%. Rosiglitazone plasma concentrations peak at around 1 hour after dosing. Plasma concentrations are approximately dose proportional over the therapeutic dose range. Administration of rosiglitazone with food resulted in no change in overall exposure (AUC), although a small decrease in Cmax (approximately 20% to 28%) and a delay in tmax (ca.1.75 h) were observed compared to dosing in the fasting state. These small changes are not clinically significant and, therefore, it is not necessary to administer rosiglitazone at any particular time in relation to meals. The absorption of rosiglitazone is not affected by increases in gastric pH. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The volume of distribution of rosiglitazone is approximately 14 litres in healthy volunteers. Plasma protein binding of rosiglitazone is high (approximately 99.8%) and is not influenced by concentration

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

or age. The protein binding of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) is very high (&gt;99.99%).

## Metabolism

Metabolism of rosiglitazone is extensive with no parent compound being excreted unchanged. The major routes of metabolism are N-demethylation and hydroxylation, followed by conjugation with sulphate and glucuronic acid. The contribution of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) to the overall anti-diabetic activity of rosiglitazone has not been fully elucidated in man and it cannot be ruled out that the metabolite may contribute to the activity. However, this raises no safety concern regarding target or special populations as hepatic impairment is contraindicated and the phase III clinical studies included a considerable number of elderly patients and patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with a minor contribution by CYP2C9. Since there is no significant in vitro inhibition of CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A or 4A with rosiglitazone, there is a low probability of significant metabolism-based interactions with substances metabolised by these P450 enzymes. Rosiglitazone showed moderate inhibition of CYP2C8 (IC50 18 µM) and low inhibition of CYP2C9 (IC50 50 µM) in vitro (see section 4.5). An in vivo interaction study with warfarin indicated that rosiglitazone does not interact with CYP2C9 substrates in vivo . Elimination Total plasma clearance of rosiglitazone is around 3 l/h and the terminal elimination half-life of rosiglitazone is approximately 3 to 4 hours. There is no evidence for unexpected accumulation of rosiglitazone after once or twice daily dosing. The major route of excretion is the urine with approximately two-thirds of the dose being eliminated by this route, whereas faecal elimination accounts for approximately 25% of dose. No intact drug is excreted in urine or faeces. The terminal half-life for radioactivity was about 130 hours indicating that elimination of metabolites is very slow. Accumulation of the metabolites in plasma is expected upon repeated dosing, especially that of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) for which an 8-fold accumulation is anticipated. Special populations Gender: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis, there were no marked differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone between males and females. Elderly: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis , age was not found to influence the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone to any significant extent . Children and adolescents: Population pharmacokinetic analysis including 96 paediatric patients aged 10 to 18 years and weighing 35 to 178 kg suggested similar mean CL/F in children and adults. Individual CL/F in the paediatric population was in the same range as individual adult data. CL/F seemed to be independent of age, but increased with weight in the paediatric population. Hepatic impairment: In cirrhotic patients with moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, unbound Cmax and AUC were 2- and 3-fold higher than in normal subjects. The inter-subject variability was large, with a 7-fold difference in unbound AUC between patients. Renal insufficiency: There are no clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone in patients with renal impairment or end stage renal disease on chronic dialysis. 5.3 Preclinical safety data Medicinal product no longer authorised

Adverse effects observed in animal studies with possible relevance to clinical use were as follows: An increase in plasma volume accompanied by decrease in red cell parameters and increase in heart weight. Increases in liver weight, plasma ALT (dog only) and fat tissue were also observed. Similar effects have been seen with other thiazolidinediones.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In reproductive toxicity studies, administration of rosiglitazone to rats during mid-late gestation was associated with foetal death and retarded foetal development. In addition, rosiglitazone inhibited ovarian oestradiol and progesterone synthesis and lowered plasma levels of these hormones resulting in effects on oestrus/menstrual cycles and fertility (see section 4.4).

In an animal model for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), treatment with rosiglitazone at 200 times the pharmacologically active dose increased tumour multiplicity in the colon. The relevance of this finding is unknown. However, rosiglitazone promoted differentiation and reversal of mutagenic changes in human colon cancer cells in vitro . In addition, rosiglitazone was not genotoxic in a battery of in vivo and in vitro genotoxicity studies and there was no evidence of colon tumours in lifetime studies of rosiglitazone in two rodent species. 6. PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 6.1 List of excipients Tablet core: Sodium starch glycollate (Type A) hypromellose microcrystalline cellulose lactose monohydrate magnesium stearate. Film coating (Opadry orange OY-L-23028) : Hypromellose 6cP Titanium dioxide E171 Macrogol 3000 Purified talc Lactose monohydrate Glycerol triacetate Iron oxide red E172 Iron oxide yellow E172. 6.2 Incompatibilities Not applicable. 6.3 Shelf life 2 years. 6.4 Special precautions for storage This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions. 6.5 Nature and contents of container Opaque blister packs (PVC/ aluminium). 7, 28, 56, 84, 90 or 112 film-coated tablets or 56 film-coated tablets, unit dose pack. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 6.6 Special precautions for disposal Medicinal product no longer authorised

Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 7. MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

SmithKline Beecham Ltd, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, United Kingdom. 8. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/1/00/137/005-009, EU/1/00/137/014, EU/1/00/137/017 9. DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION Date of first authorisation: 11 July 2000 Date of latest renewal: 11 July 2005 10. DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency (EMEA)  http://www.ema.europa.eu Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT

AVANDIA 8 mg film-coated tablets.

2. QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 8 mg rosiglitazone. Excipient Contains lactose (approximately 209 mg). For a full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 3. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM Film-coated tablet. Red-brown film-coated tablets debossed with 'GSK' on one side and \"8\" on the other side. 4. CLINICAL PARTICULARS 4.1 Therapeutic indications Rosiglitazone is indicated in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: as monotherapy -in patients (particularly overweight patients) inadequately controlled by diet and exercise for whom metformin is inappropriate because of contraindications or intolerance as dual oral therapy in combination with -metformin, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite maximal tolerated dose of monotherapy with metformin -a sulphonylurea, only in patients who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated, with insufficient glycaemic control despite monotherapy with a sulphonylurea as triple oral therapy in combination with -metformin and a sulphonylurea, in patients (particularly overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy (see section 4.4). 4.2 Posology and method of administration Rosiglitazone therapy is usually initiated at 4 mg/day. This dose can be increased to 8 mg/day after eight weeks if greater glycaemic control is required. In patients administered rosiglitazone in combination with a sulphonylurea, an increase in rosiglitazone to 8 mg/day should be undertaken cautiously following appropriate clinical evaluation to assess the patient's risk of developing adverse reactions relating to fluid retention (see 4.4 and 4.8). Rosiglitazone may be given once or twice a day. Rosiglitazone may be taken with or without food. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Elderly (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure) No dose adjustment is required in the elderly.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 Fluid retention and cardiac failure)

No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild and moderate renal insufficiency. Limited data are available in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min) and therefore rosiglitazone should be used with caution in these patients.

## Myocardial Ischaemia

Patients with hepatic impairment Rosiglitazone should not be used in patients with hepatic impairment. Children and adolescents There are no data available on the use of rosiglitazone in patients under 10 years of age. For children aged 10 to 17 years, there are limited data on rosiglitazone as monotherapy (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). The available data do not support efficacy in the paediatric population and therefore such use is not recommended. 4.3 Contraindications Use of rosiglitazone is contraindicated in patients with: -known hypersensitivity to rosiglitazone or to any of the excipients -cardiac failure or history of cardiac failure (NYHA class I to IV) -an Acute Coronary Syndrome (unstable angina, NSTEMI and STEMI) (see section 4.4) -hepatic impairment -diabetic ketoacidosis or diabetic pre-coma. 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use Fluid retention and cardiac failure Thiazolidinediones can cause fluid retention which may exacerbate or precipitate signs or symptoms of congestive heart failure. Rosiglitazone can cause dose-dependent fluid retention.  The possible contribution of fluid retention to weight gain should be individually assessed as rapid and excessive weight gain has been reported very rarely as a sign of fluid retention. All patients, particularly those receiving concurrent insulin or sulphonylurea therapy, those at risk for heart failure, and those with reduced cardiac reserve, should be monitored for signs and symptoms of adverse reactions relating to fluid retention, including weight gain and heart failure. Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended if rosiglitazone is used in combination with metformin and insulin.  Rosiglitazone should be discontinued if any deterioration in cardiac status occurs. Heart failure was also reported more frequently in patients with a history of heart failure; oedema and heart failure was also reported more frequently in elderly patients and in patients with mild or moderate renal failure. Caution should be exercised in patients over 75 years because of the limited experience in this patient group. Since NSAIDs and rosiglitazone are associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema. Combination with insulin An increased incidence of cardiac failure has been observed in clinical trials when rosiglitazone is used in combination with insulin. Insulin and rosiglitazone are both associated with fluid retention, concomitant administration may increase the risk of oedema and could increase the risk of ischaemic heart disease. Insulin should only be added to established rosiglitazone therapy in exceptional cases and under close supervision. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies indicated that treatment with rosiglitazone may be associated with an increased risk of myocardial ischaemic events. However,

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in their entirety the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive (see section 4.8). There are limited clinical trial data in patients with ischaemic heart disease and/or peripheral arterial disease. Therefore, as a precaution, the use of rosiglitazone is not recommended in these patients, particularly those with myocardial ischaemic symptoms.

Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS) Patients experiencing an ACS have not been studied in rosiglitazone controlled clinical trials. In view of the potential for development of heart failure in these patients, rosiglitazone should therefore not be initiated in patients having an acute coronary event and it should be discontinued during the acute phase (see section 4.3). Monitoring of liver function There have been rare reports of hepatocellular dysfunction during post-marketing experience (see section 4.8). There is limited experience with rosiglitazone in patients with elevated liver enzymes (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal). Therefore, liver enzymes should be checked prior to the initiation of therapy with rosiglitazone in all patients and periodically thereafter based on clinical judgement. Therapy with rosiglitazone should not be initiated in patients with increased baseline liver enzyme levels (ALT &gt;2.5X upper limit of normal) or with any other evidence of liver disease. If ALT levels are increased to &gt;3X upper limit of normal during rosiglitazone therapy, liver enzyme levels should be reassessed as soon as possible. If ALT levels remain &gt;3X the upper limit of normal, therapy should be discontinued. If any patient develops symptoms suggesting hepatic dysfunction, which may include unexplained nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, anorexia and/or dark urine, liver enzymes should be checked. The decision whether to continue the patient on therapy with rosiglitazone should be guided by clinical judgement pending laboratory evaluations. If jaundice is observed, drug therapy should be discontinued. Eye disorders Post-marketing reports of new-onset or worsening diabetic macular oedema with decreased visual acuity have been reported with thiazolidinediones, including rosiglitazone. Many of these patients reported concurrent peripheral oedema. It is unclear whether or not there is a direct association between rosiglitazone and macular oedema but prescribers should be alert to the possibility of macular oedema if patients report disturbances in visual acuity and appropriate ophthalmologic referral should be considered. Weight gain In clinical trials with rosiglitazone there was evidence of dose-related weight gain, which was greater when used in combination with insulin. Therefore weight should be closely monitored, given that it may be attributable to fluid retention, which may be associated with cardiac failure. Anaemia Rosiglitazone treatment is associated with a dose-related reduction of haemoglobin levels. In patients with low haemoglobin levels before initiating therapy, there is an increased risk of anaemia during treatment with rosiglitazone. Hypoglycaemia Patients receiving rosiglitazone in combination therapy with a sulphonylurea or with insulin, may be at risk for dose-related hypoglycaemia. Increased monitoring of the patient and a reduction in the dose of the concomitant agent may be necessary. Triple oral therapy The use of rosiglitazone in triple oral therapy, in combination with metformin and a sulphonylurea, may be associated with increased risks for fluid retention and heart failure, as well as hypoglycaemia (see section 4.8). Increased monitoring of the patient is recommended and adjustment of the dose of sulphonylurea may be necessary. The decision to initiate triple oral therapy should include consideration of the alternative to switch the patient to insulin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bone disorders

Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fractures in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone (see section 4.8). The majority of the fractures have occurred in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs. In females, this increased incidence was noted after the first year of treatment and persisted during long-term treatment. The risk of fracture should be considered in the care of patients, especially female patients, treated with rosiglitazone.

Others Premenopausal women have received rosiglitazone during clinical studies. Although hormonal imbalance has been seen in preclinical studies (see section 5.3), no significant undesirable effects associated with menstrual disorders have been observed. As a consequence of improving insulin sensitivity, resumption of ovulation may occur in patients who are anovulatory due to insulin resistance. Patients should be aware of the risk of pregnancy and if a patient wishes to become pregnant or if pregnancy occurs the treatment should be discontinued (see section 4.6). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min). Rosiglitazone should be used with caution during concomitant administration of CYP2C8 inhibitors (e.g. gemfibrozil) or inducers (e.g. rifampicin). Glycaemic control should be monitored closely. Rosiglitazone dose adjustment within the recommended posology or changes in diabetic treatment should be considered (see section 4.5). AVANDIA tablets contain lactose and therefore should not be administered to patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption. 4.5 Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with CYP2C9 as only a minor pathway. Co-administration of rosiglitazone with gemfibrozil (an inhibitor of CYP2C8) resulted in a twofold increase in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. Since there is a potential for an increase in the risk of dose-related adverse reactions, a decrease in rosiglitazone dose may be needed. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Co-administration of rosiglitazone with rifampicin (an inducer of CYP2C8) resulted in a 66% decrease in rosiglitazone plasma concentrations. It cannot be excluded that other inducers (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital, St John's wort) may also affect rosiglitazone exposure. The rosiglitazone dose may need to be increased. Close monitoring of glycaemic control should be considered (see section 4.4). Clinically significant interactions with CYP2C9 substrates or inhibitors are not anticipated. Concomitant administration with the oral anti-diabetic agents metformin, glibenclamide and acarbose did not result in any clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions with rosiglitazone. Moderate ingestion of alcohol with rosiglitazone has no effect on glycaemic control. No clinically relevant interactions with digoxin, the CYP2C9 substrate warfarin, the CYP3A4 substrates nifedipine, ethinylestradiol or norethindrone were observed after co-administration with rosiglitazone. 4.6 Pregnancy and lactation Medicinal product no longer authorised

Rosiglitazone has been reported to cross the human placenta and to be detectable in foetal tissues. There are no adequate data from the use of rosiglitazone in pregnant women. Studies in animals have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). The potential risk for humans is unknown. Rosiglitazone should not be used during pregnancy.

<!-- image -->

| Adverse reaction                           | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   | Frequency of adverse reaction by treatment regimen   |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|                                            | RSG                                                  | RSG + MET                                            | RSG + SU                                             | RSG +MET +SU                                         |
| Blood and the lymphatic system disorders   | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             | Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             |
| anaemia                                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| leucopaenia                                |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| thrombocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| granulocytopaenia                          |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Metabolism and nutrition disorders product | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           | Metabolism and nutrition disorders product           |
| hypercholesterolaemia 1                    | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| hypertriglyceridaemia                      | Common                                               |                                                      | Common                                               |                                                      |
| hyperlipaemia                              | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| weight increase                            | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| increased appetite                         | Common                                               |                                                      | Uncommon                                             |                                                      |
| hypoglycaemia                              |                                                      | Common                                               | Very common                                          | Very common                                          |
| Nervous system disorders dizziness*        |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               |                                                      |
| headache*                                  |                                                      |                                                      |                                                      | Common                                               |
| Cardiac disorders                          | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    | Cardiac disorders                                    |
| cardiac failure 2                          |                                                      | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |
| cardiac ischaemia 3*                       | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               | Common                                               |

Rosiglitazone has been detected in the milk of experimental animals. It is not known whether breastfeeding will lead to exposure of the infant to drug. Rosiglitazone should therefore not be used in women who are breast-feeding. 4.7 Effects on ability to drive and use machines AVANDIA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 4.8 Undesirable effects Clinical trial data Adverse reactions for each treatment regimen are presented below by system organ class and absolute frequency. For dose-related adverse reactions the frequency category reflects the higher dose of rosiglitazone. Frequency categories do not account for other factors including varying study duration, pre-existing conditions and baseline patient characteristics. Adverse reaction frequency categories assigned based on clinical trial experience may not reflect the frequency of adverse events occurring during normal clinical practice. Frequencies are defined as: very common ≥ 1/10; common ≥ 1/100, &lt; 1/10; and uncommon ≥ 1/1000, &lt; 1/100. Table 1 lists adverse reactions identified from an overview of clinical trials involving over 5,000 rosiglitazone-treated patients. Within each system organ class, adverse reactions are presented in the table by decreasing frequency for the rosiglitazone monotherapy treatment regimen. Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. Table 1. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data Cardiac disorders Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Gastrointestinal disorders

constipation

Common

Common

Common

Common

Common

Very common

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

4 Long-term studies show an increased incidence of bone fracture in patients, particularly female patients, taking rosiglitazone. In a monotherapy study, the incidence in females for rosiglitazone was 9.3% (2.7 patients per 100 patient years) vs 5.1% (1.5 patients per 100 patient years) for metformin or 3.5% (1.3 patients per 100 patient years) for glibenclamide. In another long-term study, there was an increased incidence of bone fracture for subjects in the combined rosiglitazone group compared to active control [8.3% vs 5.3%, Risk ratio 1.57 (95% CI 1.26 - 1.97)]. The risk of fracture appeared to

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders bone fractures 4 Common Common Common myalgia* Common General disorders and administration site conditions oedema Common Very common RSG - Rosiglitazone monotherapy; RSG + MET - Rosiglitazone with metformin; RSG + SU Rosiglitazone with sulphonylurea; RSG + MET + SU - Rosiglitazone with metformin and sulphonylurea *The frequency category for the background incidence of these events, as taken from placebo group data from clinical trials, is 'common'. 1 Hypercholesterolaemia was reported in up to 5.3% of patients treated with rosiglitazone (monotherapy, dual or triple oral therapy). The elevated total cholesterol levels were associated with increase in both LDLc and HDLc, but the ratio of total cholesterol:HDLc was unchanged or improved in long term studies. Overall, these increases were generally mild to moderate and usually did not require discontinuation of treatment. 2 An increased incidence of heart failure has been observed when rosiglitazone was added to treatment regimens with a sulphonylurea (either as dual or triple therapy), and appeared higher with 8 mg rosiglitazone compared to 4 mg rosiglitazone (total daily dose). The incidence of heart failure on triple oral therapy was 1.4% in the main double blind study, compared to 0.4% for metformin plus sulphonylurea dual therapy. The incidence of heart failure in combination with insulin (rosiglitazone added to established insulin therapy) was 2.4%, compared to insulin alone, 1.1%. Moreover in patients with congestive heart failure NYHA class I-II, a placebo-controlled one-year trial demonstrated worsening or possible worsening of heart failure in 6.4% of patients treated with rosiglitazone, compared with 3.5% on placebo. 3 In a retrospective analysis of data from 42 pooled short-term clinical studies, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was higher for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.00% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 1.53% [hazard ratio (HR) 1.30 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.004 - 1.69)]. This risk was increased when rosiglitazone was added to established insulin and in patients receiving nitrates for known ischaemic heart disease. In an update to this retrospective analysis that included 10 further studies that met the criteria for inclusion, but were not available at the time of the original analysis, the overall incidence of events typically associated with cardiac ischaemia was not statistically different for rosiglitazone containing regimens, 2.21% versus combined active and placebo comparators, 2.08% [HR 1.098 (95% CI 0.809 - 1.354)]. In a prospective cardiovascular outcomes study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) the primary endpoint events of cardiovascular death or hospitalisation were similar between rosiglitazone and active comparators [HR 0.99 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.16)]. Two other long-term prospective randomised controlled clinical trials (9,620 patients, study duration &gt;3 years in each study), comparing rosiglitazone to some other approved oral antidiabetic agents or placebo, have not confirmed or excluded the potential risk of cardiac ischaemia. In their entirety, the available data on the risk of cardiac ischaemia are inconclusive. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

be higher in females relative to control [11.5% vs 6.3%, Risk ratio 1.82 (95% CI 1.37 - 2.41)], than in males relative to control [5.3% vs 4.3%, Risk ratio 1.23 (95% CI 0.85 - 1.77)]. Additional data are necessary to determine whether there is an increased risk of fracture in males after a longer period of follow-up. The majority of the fractures were reported in the upper limbs and distal lower limbs (see section 4.4).

## 5.1 Pharmacodynamic properties

In double-blind clinical trials with rosiglitazone the incidence of elevations of ALT greater than three times the upper limit of normal was equal to placebo (0.2%) and less than that of the active comparators (0.5% metformin/sulphonylureas). The incidence of all adverse events relating to liver and biliary systems was &lt; 1.5% in any treatment group and similar to placebo. Post-marketing data In addition to the adverse reactions identified from clinical trial data, the adverse reactions presented in Table 2 have been identified in post approval use of rosiglitazone. Frequencies are defined as: rare ≥ 1/10,000, &lt;1/1000 and very rare &lt;1/10,000 including isolated reports. Table 2. The frequency of adverse reactions identified from post-marketing data 5 Rare cases of elevated liver enzymes and hepatocellular dysfunction have been reported. In very rare cases a fatal outcome has been reported. 4.9 Overdose Limited data are available with regard to overdose in humans. In clinical studies in volunteers rosiglitazone has been administered at single oral doses of up to 20 mg and was well tolerated. In the event of an overdose, it is recommended that appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated, as dictated by the patient's clinical status. Rosiglitazone is highly protein bound and is not cleared by haemodialysis. 5. PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES Adverse reaction Frequency Metabolism and nutrition disorders rapid and excessive weight gain Very rare Immune system disorders (see Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders) anaphylactic reaction Very rare Eye disorders macular oedema Rare Cardiac disorders congestive heart failure/pulmonary oedema Rare Hepatobiliary disorders hepatic dysfunction, primarily evidenced by elevated hepatic enzymes 5 Rare Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (see Immune system disorders) angioedema Very rare skin reactions (e.g. urticaria, pruritus, rash) Very rare Medicinal product no longer authorised

Pharmacotherapeutic group: oral blood glucose lowering drugs, thiazolidinediones, ATC code: A10

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## BG 02

Rosiglitazone is a selective agonist at the PPAR γ (peroxisomal proliferator activated receptor gamma) nuclear receptor and is a member of the thiazolidinedione class of anti-diabetic agents. It reduces glycaemia by reducing insulin resistance at adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver.

Preclinical data The antihyperglycaemic activity of rosiglitazone has been demonstrated in a number of animal models of type 2 diabetes. In addition, rosiglitazone preserved ß-cell function as shown by increased pancreatic islet mass and insulin content and prevented the development of overt hyperglycaemia in animal models of type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone did not stimulate pancreatic insulin secretion or induce hypoglycaemia in rats and mice. The major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) with high affinity to the soluble human PPAR γ , exhibited relatively high potency in a glucose tolerance assay in obese mouse. The clinical relevance of this observation has not been fully elucidated. Clinical trials data The glucose lowering effects observed with rosiglitazone are gradual in onset with near maximal reductions in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) evident following approximately 8 weeks of therapy. The improved glycaemic control is associated with reductions in both fasting and post-prandial glucose. Rosiglitazone was associated with increases in weight. In mechanistic studies, the weight increase was predominantly shown to be due to increased subcutaneous fat with decreased visceral and intra-hepatic fat. Consistent with the mechanism of action, rosiglitazone reduced insulin resistance and improved pancreatic ß-cell function. Improved glycaemic control was also associated with significant decreases in free fatty acids. As a consequence of different but complementary mechanisms of action, dual oral therapy of rosiglitazone with a sulphonylurea or metformin resulted in additive effects on glycaemic control in type 2 diabetic patients. In studies with a maximal duration of three years, rosiglitazone given once or twice daily produced a sustained improvement in glycaemic control (FPG and HbA1c). A more pronounced glucose-lowering effect was observed in obese patients. An outcome study has not been completed with rosiglitazone, therefore the long-term benefits associated with improved glycaemic control have not been demonstrated. An active controlled clinical trial (rosiglitazone up to 8 mg daily or metformin up to 2,000 mg daily) of 24 weeks duration was performed in 197 children (10-17 years of age) with type 2 diabetes. Improvement in HbA1c from baseline achieved statistical significance only in the metformin group. Rosiglitazone failed to demonstrate non-inferiority to metformin. Following rosiglitazone treatment, there were no new safety concerns noted in children compared to adult patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. No long-term efficacy and safety data are available in paediatric patients. ADOPT (A Diabetes Outcome Progression Trial) was a multicentre, double-blind, controlled trial with a treatment duration of 4-6 years (median duration of 4 years), in which rosiglitazone at doses of 4 to 8 mg/day was compared to metformin (500 mg to 2000 mg/day) and glibenclamide (2.5 to 15 mg/day) in 4351 drug naive subjects recently diagnosed ( ≤ 3 years) with type 2 diabetes. Rosiglitazone treatment significantly reduced the risk of reaching monotherapy failure (FPG&gt;10.0 mmol/L) by 63% relative to glibenclamide (HR 0.37, CI 0.30-0.45) and by 32% relative to metformin (HR 0.68, CI 0.55-0.85) during the course of the study (up to 72 months of treatment). This translates to a cumulative incidence of treatment failure of 10.3% for rosiglitazone, 14.8% for metformin and 23.3% for glibenclamide treated patients. Overall, 43%, 47% and 42% of subjects in the rosiglitazone, glibenclamide and metformin groups respectively withdrew due to reasons other than monotherapy failure. The impact of these findings on disease progression or on microvascular or macrovascular outcomes has not been determined (see section 4.8). In this study, the adverse events observed were consistent with the known adverse event profile for each of the treatments, including continuing weight gain with rosiglitazone. An additional observation of an increased incidence of bone fractures was seen in women with rosiglitazone (see sections 4.4 and 4.8). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The RECORD (Rosiglitazone Evaluated for Cardiac Outcomes and Regulation of glycaemia in Diabetes) trial was a large (4,447 subjects), open-label, prospective, controlled study (mean follow-up 5.5 years) in which patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin or sulphonylurea were randomised to add-on rosiglitazone or metformin or sulphonylurea. The mean duration of diabetes in these patients was approximately 7 years. The adjudicated primary endpoint was cardiovascular hospitalisation (which included hospitalisations for heart failure) or cardiovascular death. Mean doses at the end of randomised treatment are shown in the following table:

| Randomised Treatment †                 | Mean (SD) dose at end of randomised treatment   |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) | 6.7 (1.9) mg                                    |
| Sulphonylurea (background metformin)   |                                                 |
| Glimepiride*                           | 3.6 (1.8) mg                                    |
| Metformin (background sulphonylurea)   | 1995.5 (682.6) mg                               |

The volume of distribution of rosiglitazone is approximately 14 litres in healthy volunteers. Plasma protein binding of rosiglitazone is high (approximately 99.8%) and is not influenced by concentration or age. The protein binding of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) is very high (&gt;99.99%).

Randomised Treatment Rosiglitazone (either SU or metformin) Sulphonylurea (background metformin) Glimepiride* Metformin (background sulphonylurea) *Similar  relative  effective  doses  (i.e  approximately  half  maximal  dose)  for  other  sulphonylureas (glibenclamide and glicazide). † Patients who took designated treatment as randomised in combination with the correct background treatment and with evaluable data. No difference in the number of adjudicated primary endpoint events for rosiglitazone (321/2220) versus active control (323/2227) (HR 0.99, CI 0.85-1.16) was observed, meeting the pre-defined noninferiority criterion of 1.20 (non-inferiority p = 0.02). HR and CI for key secondary endpoints were: all-cause death (HR 0.86, CI 0.68-1.08), MACE (Major Adverse Cardiac Events - cardiovascular death, acute myocardial infarction, stroke) (HR 0.93, CI 0.74-1.15), cardiovascular death (HR 0.84, CI 0.59-1.18), acute myocardial infarction (HR 1.14, CI 0.80-1.63) and stroke (HR 0.72, CI 0.49-1.06). In a sub-study at 18 months, add-on rosiglitazone dual therapy was non-inferior to the combination of sulphonylurea plus metformin for lowering HbA1c. In the final analysis at 5 years, an adjusted mean reduction from baseline in HbA1c of 0.14% for patients on rosiglitazone added to metformin versus an increase of 0.17% for patients taking sulphonylurea added to metformin was seen during treatment with randomised dual-combination therapy (p&lt;0.0001 for treatment difference). An adjusted mean reduction in HbA1c of 0.24% was seen for patients taking rosiglitazone added to sulphonylurea, versus a reduction in HbA1c of 0.10% for patients taking metformin added to sulphonylurea, (p=0.0083 for treatment difference). There was a significant increase in heart failure (fatal and nonfatal) (HR 2.10, CI 1.35-3.27) and bone fractures (Risk Ratio 1.57, CI 1.26-1.97) in rosiglitazonecontaining treatments compared to active control (see sections 4.4 and 4.8). A total of 564 patients withdrew from cardiovascular follow-up, which accounted for 12.3% of rosiglitazone patients and 13% of control patients; representing 7.2% of patient-years lost for cardiovascular events follow-up and 2.0% of patient-years lost for all cause mortality follow-up. 5.2 Pharmacokinetic properties Absorption Absolute bioavailability of rosiglitazone following both a 4 and an 8 mg oral dose is approximately 99%. Rosiglitazone plasma concentrations peak at around 1 hour after dosing. Plasma concentrations are approximately dose proportional over the therapeutic dose range. Administration of rosiglitazone with food resulted in no change in overall exposure (AUC), although a small decrease in Cmax (approximately 20% to 28%) and a delay in tmax (ca.1.75 h) were observed compared to dosing in the fasting state. These small changes are not clinically significant and, therefore, it is not necessary to administer rosiglitazone at any particular time in relation to meals. The absorption of rosiglitazone is not affected by increases in gastric pH. Distribution Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Metabolism

Metabolism of rosiglitazone is extensive with no parent compound being excreted unchanged. The major routes of metabolism are N-demethylation and hydroxylation, followed by conjugation with sulphate and glucuronic acid. The contribution of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) to the overall anti-diabetic activity of rosiglitazone has not been fully elucidated in man and it cannot be ruled out that the metabolite may contribute to the activity. However, this raises no safety concern regarding target or special populations as hepatic impairment is contraindicated and the phase III clinical studies included a considerable number of elderly patients and patients with mild to moderate renal impairment.

5.3

In vitro studies demonstrate that rosiglitazone is predominantly metabolised by CYP2C8, with a minor contribution by CYP2C9. Since there is no significant in vitro inhibition of CYP1A2, 2A6, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, 3A or 4A with rosiglitazone, there is a low probability of significant metabolism-based interactions with substances metabolised by these P450 enzymes. Rosiglitazone showed moderate inhibition of CYP2C8 (IC50 18 µM) and low inhibition of CYP2C9 (IC50 50 µM) in vitro (see section 4.5). An in vivo interaction study with warfarin indicated that rosiglitazone does not interact with CYP2C9 substrates in vivo . Elimination Total plasma clearance of rosiglitazone is around 3 l/h and the terminal elimination half-life of rosiglitazone is approximately 3 to 4 hours. There is no evidence for unexpected accumulation of rosiglitazone after once or twice daily dosing. The major route of excretion is the urine with approximately two-thirds of the dose being eliminated by this route, whereas faecal elimination accounts for approximately 25% of dose. No intact drug is excreted in urine or faeces. The terminal half-life for radioactivity was about 130 hours indicating that elimination of metabolites is very slow. Accumulation of the metabolites in plasma is expected upon repeated dosing, especially that of the major metabolite (para-hydroxy-sulphate) for which an 8-fold accumulation is anticipated. Special populations Gender: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis, there were no marked differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone between males and females. Elderly: In the pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis , age was not found to influence the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone to any significant extent . Children and adolescents: Population pharmacokinetic analysis including 96 paediatric patients aged 10 to 18 years and weighing 35 to 178 kg suggested similar mean CL/F in children and adults. Individual CL/F in the paediatric population was in the same range as individual adult data. CL/F seemed to be independent of age, but increased with weight in the paediatric population. Hepatic impairment: In cirrhotic patients with moderate (Child-Pugh B) hepatic impairment, unbound Cmax and AUC were 2- and 3-fold higher than in normal subjects. The inter-subject variability was large, with a 7-fold difference in unbound AUC between patients. Renal insufficiency: There are no clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone in patients with renal impairment or end stage renal disease on chronic dialysis. Preclinical safety data Adverse effects observed in animal studies with possible relevance to clinical use were as follows: An increase in plasma volume accompanied by decrease in red cell parameters and increase in heart weight. Increases in liver weight, plasma ALT (dog only) and fat tissue were also observed. Similar effects have been seen with other thiazolidinediones. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In reproductive toxicity studies, administration of rosiglitazone to rats during mid-late gestation was

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

associated with foetal death and retarded foetal development. In addition, rosiglitazone inhibited ovarian oestradiol and progesterone synthesis and lowered plasma levels of these hormones resulting in effects on oestrus/menstrual cycles and fertility (see section 4.4).

6.6

In an animal model for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), treatment with rosiglitazone at 200 times the pharmacologically active dose increased tumour multiplicity in the colon. The relevance of this finding is unknown. However, rosiglitazone promoted differentiation and reversal of mutagenic changes in human colon cancer cells in vitro . In addition, rosiglitazone was not genotoxic in a battery of in vivo and in vitro genotoxicity studies and there was no evidence of colon tumours in lifetime studies of rosiglitazone in two rodent species. 6. PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 6.1 List of excipients Tablet core: Sodium starch glycollate (Type A) hypromellose microcrystalline cellulose lactose monohydrate magnesium stearate. Film coating (Opadry pink OY-L-24803) : Hypromellose 6cP Titanium dioxide E171 Macrogol 3000 Lactose monohydrate Glycerol triacetate Iron oxide red E172. 6.2 Incompatibilities Not applicable. 6.3 Shelf life 2 years. 6.4 Special precautions for storage This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions. 6.5 Nature and contents of container Opaque blister packs (PVC/ aluminium). 7, 28, 84, 90 or 112 film-coated tablets. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. Special precautions for disposal Any unused product should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements. 7. MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER Medicinal product no longer authorised

SmithKline Beecham Ltd, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, United Kingdom.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 8. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)

EU/1/00/137/010-012, EU/1/00/137/015, EU/1/00/137/018 9. DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION Date of first authorisation: 11 July 2000 Date of latest renewal: 11 July 2005 10. DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines Agency(EMEA) http://www.ema.europa.eu Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- ANNEX II A. MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE B. CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## A. MANUFACTURING AUTHORISATION HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE

<!-- image -->

- -When new information is received that may impact on the current Safety Specification, Pharmacovigilance Plan or risk minimisation activities

Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release Glaxo Wellcome Production Z.I. Du Terras 53100 Mayenne France or Glaxo Wellcome S.A. Avenida de Extremadura 3 09400 Aranda de Duero Burgos Spain The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch. B. CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION · CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. · CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT Not applicable. · OTHER CONDITIONS Pharmacovigilance system The Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 7.2 presented in Module 1.8.1. of the Marketing Authorisation, is in place and functioning before and whilst the product is on the market. Risk Management Plan The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version 4 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP. As per the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use, any updated RMP should be submitted at the same time as the following Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR). In addition, an updated RMP should be submitted: Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -Within 60 days of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -At the request of the EMEA.

## PSURs

Following the renewal of the Marketing Authorisation, the Marketing Authorisation Holder will submit yearly PSURs unless otherwise decided by the CHMP. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

ANNEX III LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A. LABELLING Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING

OUTER CARTON 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 2 mg film-coated tablets rosiglitazone 2. STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 2 mg rosiglitazone 3. LIST OF EXCIPIENTS Contains lactose, see leaflet for further information 4. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 56 film-coated tablets 112 film-coated tablets 168 film-coated tablets 180 film-coated tablets 56 film-coated tablets, unit dose pack 5. METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION For oral use Read the package leaflet before use Use only as directed by your doctor 6. SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN Keep out of the reach and sight of children 7. OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY EXPIRY DATE Medicinal product no longer authorised

8.

EXP

## 9. SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

10. SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE 11. NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 980 Great West Road Brentford, Middlesex TW8 9GS United Kingdom 12. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/1/00/137/002  56  tablets EU/1/00/137/003  112 tablets EU/1/00/137/013  168 tablets EU/1/00/137/016  180 tablets EU/1/00/137/004  56 tablet unit dose pack 13. BATCH NUMBER LOT 14. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 15. INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 16. INFORMATION IN BRAILLE avandia 2 mg Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| BLISTERS                                              |

| 5.   | OTHER   |
|------|---------|

1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 2 mg tablets rosiglitazone 2. NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 3. EXPIRY DATE EXP 4. BATCH NUMBER LOT 5. OTHER Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING

OUTER CARTON 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 4 mg film-coated tablets rosiglitazone 2. STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 4 mg rosiglitazone 3. LIST OF EXCIPIENTS Contains lactose, see leaflet for further information 4. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 7 film-coated tablets 28 film-coated tablets 56 film-coated tablets 84 film-coated tablets 90 film-coated tablets 112 film-coated tablets 56 film-coated tablets, unit dose pack 5. METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION For oral use Read the package leaflet before use Use only as directed by your doctor 6. SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN Keep out of the reach and sight of children OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 8. EXPIRY DATE EXP Medicinal product no longer authorised

7.

## 9. SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 10. SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE

11. NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 980 Great West Road Brentford, Middlesex TW8 9GS United Kingdom 12. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/1/00/137/005  7 tablets EU/1/00/137/006  28 tablets EU/1/00/137/007  56 tablets EU/1/00/137/014  84 tablets EU/1/00/137/017  90 tablets EU/1/00/137/008  112 tablets EU/1/00/137/009  56 tablet unit dose pack 13. BATCH NUMBER LOT 14. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY Medicinal product subject to medical prescription 15. INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 16. INFORMATION IN BRAILLE avandia 4 mg Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| BLISTERS                                              |

1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 4 mg tablets rosiglitazone 2. NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 3. EXPIRY DATE EXP 4. BATCH NUMBER LOT 5. OTHER Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING

OUTER CARTON 1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 8 mg film-coated tablets rosiglitazone 2. STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) Each tablet contains rosiglitazone maleate corresponding to 8 mg rosiglitazone 3. LIST OF EXCIPIENTS Contains lactose, see leaflet for further information 4. PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 7 film-coated tablets 28 film-coated tablets 84 film-coated tablets 90 film-coated tablets 112 film-coated tablets 5. METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION For oral use Read the package leaflet before use Use only as directed by your doctor 6. SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE REACH AND SIGHT OF CHILDREN Keep out of the reach and sight of children 7. OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY EXPIRY DATE Medicinal product no longer authorised

8.

EXP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 9. SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS

10. SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE 11. NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 980 Great West Road Brentford, Middlesex TW8 9GS United Kingdom 12. MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) EU/1/00/137/010  7 tablets EU/1/00/137/011  28 tablets EU/1/00/137/015  84 tablets EU/1/00/137/018  90 tablets EU/1/00/137/012  112 tablets 13. BATCH NUMBER LOT 14. GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY Medicinal product subject to medical prescription 15. INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 16. INFORMATION IN BRAILLE avandia 8 mg Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| BLISTERS                                              |

1. NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AVANDIA 8 mg tablets rosiglitazone 2. NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER SmithKline Beecham Ltd 3. EXPIRY DATE EXP 4. BATCH NUMBER LOT 5. OTHER Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

B. PACKAGE LEAFLET Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

•

Avandia is not recommended for people aged under 18 , as the effectiveness in children has not been shown.

## PACKAGE LEAFLET: INFORMATION FOR THE USER

AVANDIA 2 mg film-coated tablets AVANDIA 4 mg film-coated tablets AVANDIA 8 mg film-coated tablets rosiglitazone

Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine. -Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. -If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. -This medicine has been prescribed for you. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, even if their symptoms are the same as yours. -If  any  of  the  side  effects  gets  serious,  or  if  you  notice  any  side  effects  not  listed  in  this leaflet, tell your doctor or pharmacist. In this leaflet: 1. What Avandia is and what it is used for 2. Before you take Avandia 3. How to take Avandia 4. Possible side effects 5 How to store Avandia 6. Further information 1. WHAT AVANDIA IS AND WHAT IT IS USED FOR Avandia is used to treat type 2 diabetes. People with type 2 diabetes either don't make enough insulin (a hormone that controls blood sugar levels), or don't respond normally to the insulin their body makes.  Avandia helps to reduce your blood sugar towards a normal level, by helping your body make better use of the insulin it produces. Avandia can be used alone or in combination with other medicines to treat diabetes (such as metformin or a sulphonylurea). 2. BEFORE YOU TAKE AVANDIA To help manage your diabetes, it is important that you follow any diet and lifestyle advice from your doctor as well as taking Avandia. Don't take Avandia: · if  you  are  allergic ( hypersensitive )  to  rosiglitazone  or  any  of  the  other  ingredients  of Avandia ( listed in Section 6) · if you have had a heart attack or severe angina, that's being treated in hospital · if you have heart failure, or have had heart failure in the past · if you have liver disease if  you  have  had  diabetic  ketoacidosis (a  complication  of  diabetes  causing  rapid  weight loss, nausea or vomiting) Î Check with your doctor if you think any of these apply to you. Don't take Avandia. Take special care with Avandia Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

If you have been diagnosed with angina (chest pain), or peripheral arterial disease (reduced blood flow to the legs):

- Î Check with your doctor, as Avandia may not be suitable for you.

Conditions to look out for Avandia and other medicines for diabetes can make some existing conditions worse, or cause serious side effects.  You must look out for certain symptoms while you are taking Avandia, to reduce the risk of any problems. See ' Conditions you need to look out for' in Section 4. Ovulation may restart Women who are infertile due to a condition affecting their ovaries (such as Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome ), may start ovulating again when they start taking Avandia. If this applies to you, use appropriate contraception to avoid the possibility of an unplanned pregnancy (see 'Pregnancy and breast-feeding' later in Section 2). Taking other medicines Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any other medicines, if you've taken any recently, or if you start taking new ones. This includes herbal medicines and other medicines you bought without a prescription. Certain medicines are especially likely to affect the amount of sugar in your blood: · gemfibrozil (used to lower cholesterol ) · rifampicin (used to treat tuberculosis and other infections) Î Tell a doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any of these. Your blood sugar will be checked, and your dose of Avandia may need to be changed. Pregnancy and breast-feeding · Avandia is not recommended during pregnancy. If you are pregnant or could be pregnant, tell your doctor. · Don't breast-feed while you are taking Avandia. The ingredients may pass into breast milk and so may harm your baby. Driving and using machines This medicine should not affect your ability to drive or use machines. Avandia contains lactose Avandia tablets contain a small amount of lactose. Patients who are intolerant to lactose or have a rare hereditary problem of galactose intolerance, the Lapp lactase deficiency, or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this medicine. 3. HOW TO TAKE AVANDIA Always take Avandia tablets exactly as your doctor has told you. Do not take more than the recommended dose. Check with your doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. How much to take The usual starting dose is 4 mg a day.  This can be taken as one 4 mg tablet once a day, or as one 2 mg tablet taken twice a day. After about 8 weeks your doctor may need to increase your dose. The maximum dose is 8 mg of Avandia a day. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## How to take

Swallow the tablets with some water. You can take Avandia with or without food.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Take your tablets around the same time every day and follow any dietary advice that your doctor has given you.

<!-- image -->

If you take more Avandia than you should If you accidentally take too many tablets, contact your doctor or pharmacist for advice. If you forget to take Avandia Don't take extra tablets to make up for a missed dose. Just take your next dose at the usual time. Don't stop taking Avandia Take Avandia for as long as your doctor recommends. If you stop taking Avandia, your blood sugar will not be controlled, and you may become unwell. Talk to your doctor if you want to stop. 4. POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS Like all medicines, Avandia can cause side effects, but not everybody gets them. Conditions you need to look out for Allergic reactions: These are very rare in people taking Avandia. Signs include: · raised and itchy rash ( hives ) · swelling, sometimes of the face or mouth ( angioedema ), causing difficulty in breathing · collapse. Î Contact a doctor immediately if you get any of these symptoms. Stop taking Avandia. Fluid retention and heart failure: Avandia can cause you to retain water ( fluid retention ) which leads to swelling and weight gain.  Extra body fluid can make some existing heart problems worse or lead to heart failure. This is more likely if you are also taking other medicines for your diabetes (like insulin), if you have kidney problems, or if you are over 65. Check your weight regularly; if it goes up rapidly, tell your doctor. Symptoms of heart failure include: · shortness of breath, waking up short of breath at night · getting tired easily after light physical activity such as walking · rapid increase in your weight · swollen ankles or feet. Î Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you get any of these symptoms - either for the first time or if they get worse. Low blood sugar ( hypoglycaemia ): If you are taking Avandia with other medicines for diabetes, it is more likely that your blood sugar could fall below the normal level. Early symptoms of low blood sugar are: y shaking, sweating, faintness y nervousness, palpitations y hunger. The severity can increase, leading to confusion and loss of consciousness. Î Tell  your  doctor  as  soon  as  possible if  you  get  any  of  these  symptoms.  The  dose  of  your medicines may need to be reduced. Liver problems: Before you start taking Avandia you will have a blood sample taken to check your liver function. This check may be repeated at intervals. These may be signs of liver problems: · nausea and vomiting · stomach ( abdominal ) pain · loss of appetite Medicinal product no longer authorised

- dark-coloured urine.
- Î Tell your doctor as soon as possible if you get these symptoms.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Eye problems: Swelling of the retina at the back of the eye which can cause blurred vision ( macular oedema ) can be a problem for people with diabetes. New or worse cases of macular oedema have occurred on rare occasions in people taking Avandia and similar medicines.

Î Discuss with your doctor any concerns about your eyesight. Broken bones: Bone fractures can occur in people with diabetes. The chances of this happening may be higher in people, particularly women, taking Avandia for more than one year. The most common are breaks in feet, hands and arms. Common side effects These may affect up to 1 in 10 people: · chest pain ( angina ) · broken bones · reduction in blood count ( anaemia ) · small increases in blood cholesterol, increased amount of fats in the blood · increased weight, increased appetite · constipation · swelling ( oedema) due to water retention. Rare side effects These may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people: · fluid in the lungs ( pulmonary oedema ) causing breathlessness · heart failure · swelling of the retina at the back of the eye ( macular oedema ) · liver doesn't function as well as it should ( increase in liver enzymes ). Very rare side effects These may affect up to 1 in 10,000 people: · allergic reactions · rapid and excessive weight gain caused by fluid retention. If you get side effects Î Tell your doctor or pharmacist if any of the side effects listed gets severe or troublesome, or if you notice any side effects not listed in this leaflet. 5. HOW TO STORE AVANDIA Keep out of the reach and sight of children. Do not use Avandia after the expiry date shown on the pack. This medicine does not require any special storage conditions. If you have any unwanted tablets, don't put them in waste water or household rubbish. Ask your pharmacist how to dispose of tablets you don't need. This will help to protect the environment. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 6. FURTHER INFORMATION

## What Avandia contains

The active substance is rosiglitazone. Avandia tablets come in different strengths.  Each tablet contains either: 2 mg, 4 mg or 8 mg rosiglitazone. The other ingredients are: sodium starch glycollate (Type A), hypromellose, hypromellose 6cP, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, titanium dioxide (E171), macrogol 3000, glycerol triacetate and iron oxide red (E172). The 4 mg tablet also contains purified talc and iron oxide yellow (E172). What Avandia looks like and contents of the pack Avandia 2 mg tablets are pink and marked \"GSK\" on one side and \"2\" on the other. The tablets are provided in blister packs containing 56, 112, 168 or 180 film-coated tablets or 56 film-coated tablets in a unit dose pack. Avandia 4 mg tablets are orange, marked \"GSK\" on one side and \"4\" on the other. The tablets are provided in blister packs containing 7, 28, 56, 84, 90 or 112 film-coated tablets or 56 film-coated tablets in a unit dose pack. Avandia 8 mg tablets are red-brown, marked \"GSK\" on one side and \"8\" on the other. The tablets are provided in blister packs containing 7, 28, 84, 90 or 112 film-coated tablets. Not all pack sizes or tablet strengths may be available in your country. Marketing Authorisation Holder : SmithKline Beecham Ltd, 980 Great West Road, Brentford, Middlesex, TW8 9GS, United Kingdom. Manufacturer: Glaxo Wellcome Production, ZI du Terras, 53100 Mayenne, France. or Glaxo Wellcome S.A., Avenida de Extremadura 3, 09400 Aranda de Duero, Burgos, Spain. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

For  any  information  about  this  medicinal  product,  please  contact  the  local  representative  of  the Marketing Authorisation Holder.

<!-- image -->

België/Belgique/Belgien GlaxoSmithKline s.a./n.v. Tél/Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11 Luxembourg/Luxemburg GlaxoSmithKline s.a./n.v. Belgique/Belgien Tél/Tel: + 32 (0)2 656 21 11 България ГлаксоСмитКлайн ЕООД Te л .: + 359 2 953 10 34 Magyarország GlaxoSmithKline Kft. Tel.: + 36 1 225 5300 Č eská republika GlaxoSmithKline s.r.o. Tel: + 420 222 001 111 gsk.czmail@gsk.com Malta GlaxoSmithKline Malta Tel: + 356 21 238131 Danmark GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/S Tlf: + 45 36 35 91 00 dk-info@gsk.com Nederland GlaxoSmithKline BV Tel: + 31 (0)30 6938100 nlinfo@gsk.com Deutschland GlaxoSmithKline GmbH &amp; Co. KG Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 produkt.info@gsk.com Norge GlaxoSmithKline AS Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 firmapost@gsk.no Eesti GlaxoSmithKline Eesti OÜ Tel: + 372 6676 900 estonia@gsk.com Österreich GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 at.info@gsk.com Ελλάδα GlaxoSmithKline A.E.B.E. Τηλ : + 30 210 68 82 100 Polska GSK Commercial Sp. z o.o. Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000 España GlaxoSmithKline, S.A. Tel: + 34 902 202 700 es-ci@gsk.com Portugal GlaxoSmithKline - Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 FI.PT@gsk.com France Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline Tél.: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 diam@gsk.com România GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) S.R.L. Tel: + 4021 3028 208 Ireland GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000 Slovenija GlaxoSmithKline d.o.o. Tel: + 386 (0)1 280 25 00 medical.x.si@gsk.com Ísland GlaxoSmithKline ehf. Sími: + 354 530 3700 Slovenská republika GlaxoSmithKline Slovakia s. r. o. Tel: + 421 (0)2 48 26 11 11 recepcia.sk@gsk.com Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Italia

GlaxoSmithKline S.p.A.

<!-- image -->

Tel: + 39 (0)45 9218 111 Κύπρος GlaxoSmithKline Cyprus Ltd Τηλ : + 357 22 39 70 00 Sverige GlaxoSmithKline AB Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 info.produkt@gsk.com Latvija GlaxoSmithKline Latvia SIA Tel: + 371 67312687 lv-epasts@gsk.com United Kingdom GlaxoSmithKline UK Tel: + 44 (0)800 221441 customercontactuk@gsk.com Lietuva GlaxoSmithKline Lietuva UAB Tel: + 370 5 264 90 00 info.lt@gsk.com This leaflet was last approved in Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) web site: http://www.ema.europa.eu Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Suomi/Finland

GlaxoSmithKline Oy Puh/Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 Finland.tuoteinfo@gsk.com

<!-- image -->