---
document_datetime: 2024-08-02 11:16:33
document_pages: 37
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/evicel-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
document_name: evicel-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 13.655005
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 02:04:33.693981
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

Doc.Ref.: EMEA/CHMP/449199/2008

<!-- image -->

FOR

Evicel

ASSESSMENT REPORT Common Name: human fibrinogen / human thrombin Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/000898 Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

|   1. | BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE........................................... 3                                                             |
|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  1.1 | Submission of the dossier ........................................................................................................ 3             |
|  1.2 | Steps taken for the assessment of the product.......................................................................... 3                        |
|  2   | SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 4                         |
|  2.1 | Introduction.............................................................................................................................. 4     |
|  2.2 | Quality aspects......................................................................................................................... 4       |
|  2.3 | Non-clinical aspects............................................................................................................... 12           |
|  2.4 | Clinical aspects ...................................................................................................................... 17       |
|  2.5 | Pharmacovigilance................................................................................................................. 33 authorised |
|  2.6 | Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation ...................................... 35                                        |

1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product.......................................................................... 3 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 4 2.1 Introduction.............................................................................................................................. 4 2.2 Quality aspects......................................................................................................................... 4 2.3 Non-clinical aspects............................................................................................................... 12 2.4 Clinical aspects ...................................................................................................................... 17 2.5 Pharmacovigilance................................................................................................................. 33 2.6 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation ...................................... 35 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE

## 1.1 Submission of the dossier

•

- The Rapporteurs circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the List of Outstanding Issues to all CHMP members on 7 July 2008.

The  applicant  OMRIX  biopharmaceuticals  S.A.  submitted  on  25  July  2007  an  application  for Marketing  Authorisation  to  the  European  Medicines  Agency  (EMEA)  for  Evicel,  through  the centralised  procedure  under  Article  3  (2)  b  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004.  The  eligibility  to  the centralised procedure was agreed upon by the EMEA/CHMP on 23-26 January 2006. The eligibility to the centralised procedure under Article 3(2)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 was on the basis that it is a new medicinal product derived from human plasma: The formulation of the fibrin sealant kit is novel  in  that  its  fibrinogen  component  is  not  formulated  with  any  antifibrinolytic  agent  (such  as aprotinin or tranexamic acid). The legal basis for this application refers to: Article 8.3 of Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended - complete and independent application The application submitted is a complete dossier: Composed of administrative information, complete quality data, non-clinical and clinical data based on  applicants'  own  tests  and  studies  and/or  bibliographic  literature  substituting/supporting  certain test(s) or study(ies). Licensing status: Evicel has been given a Marketing Authorisation in USA on 06.06.2006. The Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur appointed by the CHMP were: Rapporteur:  Dr. Christian K. Schneider Co-Rapporteur: Prof. Michal Pirozynski 1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product · The application was received by the EMEA on 25 July 2007. · The procedure started on 15 August 2007. · The Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all CHMP members on 5 November 2007. The Co-Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all CHMP members on 7 November 2007. · During the meeting on 10-13 December 2007, the CHMP agreed on the consolidated List of Questions to be sent to the applicant. The final consolidated List of Questions was sent to the applicant on 13 December 2007. · The  applicant  submitted  the  responses  to  the  CHMP  consolidated  List  of  Questions  on 27  March 2008. · The summary report of the inspection carried out at the following site(s) Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., Kiryat Ono, Israel between 13-17 April 2008 was issued on 10 July 2008. · The Rapporteurs circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the List of Questions to all CHMP members on 13 May 2008. · During the CHMP meeting on 27-30 May 2008 the CHMP agreed on a list of outstanding issues to be addressed in writing and/or in an oral explanation by the applicant. The applicant submitted the responses to the CHMP consolidated List of Questions on 23 June 2008. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- During the meeting on 21-24 July 2008, the CHMP, in the light of the overall data submitted and  the  scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued  a  positive  opinion  for  granting  a Marketing  Authorisation  to  Evicel  on  24  July  2008.  The  applicant  provided  the  letter  of undertaking on the follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation on 22 July 2008.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 2.1 Introduction

Evicel is a fibrin sealant kit consisting of two human plasma-derived components, Human Fibrinogen and Human Thrombin.

The term fibrin sealant denotes a product containing coagulation factors, to be administered topically in order to produce a fibrin clot. Typical fibrin sealant kits consist of at least two components, which are kept separately until allowed to mix in topical application. One of the components usually contains human fibrinogen, as substrate of the clot. The other component contains biologically active thrombin, which will convert the fibrinogen of the first component to fibrin. Fibrinogen is cleaved to fibrin by thrombin, and consequently the fibrin clot is formed. Factor XIII (contained in low amounts in the preparation) crosslinks fibrin fibers, after activation to Factor XIIIa by thrombin. By this mechanism haemostasis is achieved and a matrix generated, which supports the natural  wound  healing  process.  The  final  stage  of  the  blood  coagulation  process,  i.e.  the  natural mechanism of clot formation, is imitated by fibrin sealant. Evicel is a further development of Quixil, which is approved for marketing in 14 EU countries since 2003, first in 1999 in UK. One difference between Evicel and Quixil is the final composition of the fibrinogen component whereas the thrombin component remains the same. The fibrinogen component of  Quixil  contains  the  synthetic  antifibrinolytic  agent  tranexamic  acid  (TA),  which  inhibits  the degradation  of  fibrinogen.  However,  because  tranexamic  acid  is  potentially  neurotoxic  Quixil  is contraindicated for use in neurosurgery and all procedures where contact with the CSF and dura mater might occur. By specific removal of plasminogen the need for stabilization with tranexamic acid is avoided, and Evicel's fibrinogen is formulated without tranexamic acid. Its protein concentration is 30-50% higher requiring the submission of a new application for marketing authorisation. The indication claimed by the applicant is 'Evicel is intended for clinical use as supportive treatment in surgery where standard surgical techniques are insufficient, for improvement of haemostasis and to promote sealing, or as suture support for haemostasis in vascular surgery'. The approved indication is 'Evicel is used as supportive treatment in surgery where standard surgical techniques are insufficient, for improvement of haemostasis. Evicel is also indicated as suture support for haemostasis in vascular surgery'. Evicel is intended for epilesional use only. The posology should always be oriented towards the underlying clinical needs of the patient. In clinical trials in vascular surgery, the individual dosage used was up to 4 ml, whereas in retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery the individual dosage used was up to 10 ml, however application of the product must be individualised by the treating physician. 2.2 Quality aspects Introduction Evicel  Solutions  for  Sealant  is  a  Fibrin  Sealant  Kit  (Ph.  Eur.  01/2005:0903)  consisting  of  two biological,  double  virus-inactivated  components,  Human  Fibrinogen  and  Human  Thrombin,  each supplied as frozen solution with an application device. Upon thawing component 1 is to be mixed with component 2 in equal volumes. Human Fibrinogen is a concentrate of clottable protein and Thrombin is  an  enzyme that causes clottable protein to coagulate. Thus, when the two components are mixed together  they  immediately  form  a  fibrin  clot.  Evicel  is  intended  for  epilesional  use  in  a  surgical context. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Component 1 - Human Fibrinogen

The primary difference between the Fibrinogen components of Quixil and Evicel, is that plasminogen is  removed from the preparation by an affinity chromatography, so that the need to add tranexamic acid as a stabiliser is avoided. Tranexamic acid serves as a competitive inhibitor of plasminogen, and is used in Quixil as an anti-fibrinolytic agent. However, tranexamic acid is potentially neurotoxic, and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

as a result, Quixil is contraindicated for use in neurosurgery and procedures where contact with the CSF and dura mater might occur.

All  the  earlier  manufacturing  steps,  including  the  viral  inactivation,  are  identical  to  those  in manufacture of Quixil's Human Fibrinogen component. The concentration of protein in the fibrinogen component of Evicel is 30-50% higher than in the Quixil component.

<!-- image -->

The applicant has established in-process-controls and defined acceptance criteria at critical steps of the manufacturing process to assure that the process is controlled. A rationale is given for all in-process controls supported by experimental data from 21 human fibrinogen batches. The in-process controls performed  during  manufacture  of  human  fibrinogen  bulk  are  appropriate  to  ensure  the  quality  and consistency of the drug substance.

Composition Human Fibrinogen component is a non-pyrogenic solution, pH 6.8 - 7.2, consisting of a concentrate of clottable proteins with a concentration of 50-90 mg/ml. It principally consists of fibrinogen, but also of  fibronectin,  albumin,  immune  globulins  and  trace  amounts  of  other  plasma  proteins  (e.g.  Factor VIII, Factor XIII, von Willebrand Factor). In addition, it contains arginine hydrochloride as stabiliser as  well  as  glycine,  sodium  chloride,  sodium  citrate  and  calcium  chloride  as  buffer  agents.  Human Fibrinogen component is supplied to the user as frozen solution. Container and closure Human Fibrinogen drug product is filled in 5 ml aliquots into 10ml Ph.Eur. Type I glass vials; or 1ml or  2ml  aliquots  into  7ml  vials.  Rubber  infusion  stoppers  of  type  I  (Ph.  Eur.,  Rubber  Closures  for Containers for Aqueous Preparations for Parenteral Use) are used as closures for the vials. Both vials and  stoppers  are  siliconised.  The  closures  are  sealed  in  place  with  aluminium  crimps  with  flip-off caps.  The  specifications  of  the  glass  vials  and  the  infusion  stoppers  as  well  as  the  corresponding Quality  Certificates  are  provided.  In  summary,  the  container  closure  system  for  Human  Fibrinogen drug product is in compliance with Ph.Eur. requirements. Drug Substance Manufacturing process development The manufacturing process development is sufficiently described. The rationale for the introduction of the affinity chromatography for selective removal of plasminogen is sufficiently justified. By specific removal  of  plasminogen  the  need  for  stabilization  with  tranexamic  acid  is  avoided,  and  Evicel's Fibrinogen is formulated without tranexamic acid. Some of the validation and developmental studies were conducted on batches of Human Fibrinogen for Quixil. However, all steps up to (and including) the pasteurization are identical, and all development and validation studies of these steps are equally applicable  to  Evicel's  Fibrinogen.  For  the  steps  that  differ,  relevant  development  and  validation studies have been performed. A second modification of the manufacturing process was a scale-up of production by 3.5 fold. Starting material Human  plasma  is  used  as  starting  material  for  the  production  of  fibrinogen.  The  collection,  viral marker  testing,  transport  and  storage  of  single  donations  as  well  as  the  viral  marker  testing  of  the plasma pool are documented in the PMF which is evaluated and certified in parallel to the centralised procedure for Evicel (EMEA/H/PMF/000013/07). Description of manufacturing process The manufacturing process of the fibrinogen component is described in detail and comprehensively. It consists of precipitation and purification steps and includes two steps for virus inactivation. In-process controls Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Batch size

The batch size for the production of fibrinogen drug substance is adequately defined. The only step where pooling of intermediates may take place is at the cryoprecipitation level.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Reprocessing

In  case  of  a  mechanical  failure  of  the  centrifugation,  filtration,  or  chromatography  systems,  the repetition  of  the  processing  step  would  be  permitted,  provided  that  the  manufacturer's  Quality Assurance department confirms that this repetition is unlikely to affect the quality of the product. The repetition of the virus inactivation is not allowed and the drug substance is not reworked.

<!-- image -->

Control of materials Certificates of Analysis are provided for all ingredients, reagents and auxiliary material purchased and retested by the manufacturer according to Ph. Eur. in the manufacture of drug substance fibrinogen. In the  case  where  there  is  no  pharmacopoeial  specification,  the  supplier's  specifications  are  provided. Water for injection for production is manufactured and controlled by the manufacturer's PFI. Intermediates Cryoprecipitate used as intermediate for the production of fibrinogen is produced from human plasma which collection, testing, storage and transport is documented and evaluated within the OMRIX PMF certification procedure ((EMEA/H/PMF/000013/07). Analytical data from cryoprecipitate used for the production of 3 batches of fibrinogen were submitted for characterisation of cryoprecipitate. The storage of the cryoprecipitate intermediate is justified by stability data. Process validation Manufacturing steps critical for safety and quality of fibrinogen drug substance were identified and adequately validated based on data from three commercial scale validation batches. In addition, data from the analysis of final product from the validation batches as well as in-process control data from 21 batches produced in 2006 were provided. In conclusion, the manufacturing process is sufficiently controlled to ensure batch to batch consistency. · Specification Appropriate drug substance specifications are set for Human Fibrinogen and are sufficiently justified. Analytical procedures The analytical methods used for the control testing of the fibrinogen drug substance are adequately described and validated. Assay for fibrinogen Initially, the applicant applied for a modified version of the clottable protein test for determining the active substance in the fibrinogen component and called this assay clottable fibrinogen test. However, as  there  was  a  statistical  significant  difference  between  this  test  and  the  Ph.  Eur.  test,  the  applicant agreed  within  the  response  to  the  List  of  outstanding  Issues  to  measure  potency  of  fibrinogen  by 'Determination  of  Clottable  Protein'  as  specified  by  Ph.  Eur.  monograph  for  Fibrin  Sealant  Kit (01/2008:0903)  with  the  modification  that  the  determination  of  protein  will  be  done  by  a  method which  compares  the  UV  absorbance  at  280  nm  of  the  test  sample  with  that  of  a  standard  protein solution.  A  batch  of  Human  Fibrinogen,  calibrated  for  total  protein  is  used  as  the  standard.  The proposed  method  has  been  compared  with  the  Ph.  Eur.  method  (Kjeldahl  method).  Statistical evaluation revealed no statistically significant differences between the two methods. The  active  ingredient  of  the  Fibrinogen  component  will  be  declared  as  'Clottable  Protein'. The specification is 50-90 mg/ml (71 % to 129 %) corresponding to the specification range defined by the Ph. Eur. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Stability

The provided stability data support the storage of Human Fibrinogen drug substance.

- Comparability Exercise for Fibrinogen Drug Substance of Quixil vs Evicel

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For comparison the applicant provided the composition of Human Fibrinogen of Quixil versus Evicel.

## Drug Product

· Pharmaceutical Development By specific removal of the product related impurity plasminogen during the purification process of the fibrinogen  drug  substance  of  Evicel  (see  above)  the  need  for  stabilisation  of  fibrinogen  with tranexamic  acid  is  not  required.  The  excipients  used  for  formulation  are  non-toxic  and  act  as stabilising agents. They are also contained in the formulation of the predecessor product Quixil. Description of the manufacturing process The manufacturing process of the Human Fibrinogen drug product is adequately described. The  batch  formula  has  been  provided.  Critical  process  steps  were  identified  and  validated  at commercial scale to ensure batch to batch consistency. Control of excipients All excipients are already present at their final concentration in the drug substance and are adequately controlled. · Product Specification The specifications for the Human Fibrinogen drug product are adequately set and justified. Analytical  methods  are  appropriate  to  control  the  defined  parameters  and  comply  with  the  Ph.Eur monograph. Validations of analytical methods were provided according to ICH guideline Q2 (R1). The  Ph.Eur.  requires  that  in  case  a  Human  Fibrinogen  drug  product  contains  factor  XIII  at  a concentration exceeding 10 U/ml, its estimated potency should appear on the label. The applicant does not consider factor XIII to be an active ingredient in the Human Fibrinogen component of Evicel. · Stability of the Product The provided stability data justify the shelf life and storage conditions as described in the SPC. In use stability data support the wording of the SPC (section 6.6) that the incubation period at 37 o C for thawing of Evicel's frozen Fibrinogen component is defined to not more than 10 minutes. Component 2 - Human Thrombin Introduction Thrombin  belongs  to  the  family  of  Trypsin-like  serine  proteases  which  are  synthesized  as  inactive precursor  to  be  cleaved  by  limited  proteolysis  into  the  active  form.  In  the  manufacture  of  Evicel's Human  Thrombin,  Prothrombin  is  cleaved  and  released  as  Thrombin  during  a  chromatographic purification  step.  Thrombin  is  a  highly  specific  protease  which  cleaves  fibrinogen  into  fibrin. Thrombin ( α thrombin) is subject to slow auto-degradation to the smaller proteins, β - and γ -thrombin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  manufacture  of  Human  Thrombin  starts  with  cryopoor  plasma  followed  by  purification  steps using  anion  and  cation  exchange  chromatography.  The  applicant  claims  that  no  manufacturing changes occur in Evicel's Thrombin component compared to the predecessor product Quixil.

## Composition

Evicel's  Thrombin  component  is  a  non-pyrogenic  solution  consisting  of  800-1200  IU/ml  human thrombin with human albumin  and mannitol as stabilisers and as well as calcium chloride and sodium

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

acetate as buffer agents. The pH of the solution is 6.8 - 7.2. Thrombin component is supplied to the user as frozen solution.

## Container closure system

The container closure system for Human Thrombin is the same as for Human Fibrinogen.

<!-- image -->

Drug Substance Human Thrombin drug substance is defined as the formulated bulk prior to sterile filtration and filling into vials. Manufacturing process development A summary of pharmaceutical  development  studies  performed  to  optimize  and  validate  the  critical steps of the manufacturing process are provided. Starting material The human plasma used as starting material for the production of Human Thrombin is the same as the one used for the production of Human Fibrinogen. The collection, viral marker testing, transport and storage of single donations as well as the viral marker testing of the plasma pool are documented in the PMF  which is evaluated and certified in parallel to the centralised procedure for Evicel (EMEA/H/PMF/000013/07). Description of the manufacturing process The applicant has provided extensive information to adequately describe the manufacturing process and process controls. It consists of purification steps and two steps for virus inactivation/removal. In-process controls Adequate in-process controls and acceptance criteria are established at critical steps to ensure that the manufacturing process is sufficiently controlled. Batch size The batch size is defined. Reprocessing The criteria for reprocessing are the same as for the manufacture of Human Fibrinogen. Control of materials Certificates of Analysis are provided for all ingredients, reagents and auxiliary material purchased and retested by the manufacturer according to Ph. Eur. in the manufacture of drug substance. In the case where there is no pharmacopoeial specification, the supplier's specifications are provided. Water for injection for production is manufactured and controlled by the manufacturer's PFI. Albumin Human Thrombin component contains Human Albumin for stabilisation. It complies with the Ph. Eur. monograph 'Human Albumin Solution'. The  information  related  to  the  plasma  used  as  starting  material  in  the  manufacture  of  Albumin  is provided in a Plasma Master File, which is certified. This PMF is valid to its full extent for Human Albumin. Certificate  of  Analysis  for  Human  Albumin  has  been  provided.  The  applicant  confirms  to  use  the albumin  only  when  it  is  within  its  shelf  life.  EU  OMCL  batch  release  testing  of  the  albumin  is performed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Intermediates

There is no pooling of intermediates during the production of Human Thrombin drug substance.

Process validation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The consistency and robustness of the manufacturing process used for production of Human Thrombin was  validated  by  the  manufacture  of  three  consecutive  batches.  Critical  manufacturing  steps  were identified and adequately validated. In addition, in-process controls of the three validation batches and batches manufactured in 2006 were analysed. All results were within the specified limits demonstrating the batch to batch consistency of drug substance production. In line with this finding were the results from testing and additional characterisation of the finished product of the validation batches.

<!-- image -->

· Specification Adequate specifications are set for the Human Thrombin drug substance and sufficiently justified. Analytical procedures for the testing of the Human Thrombin drug substance are submitted. Thrombin is determined by the clotting assay described for Component 2 of Fibrin sealant Kit in the Ph.Eur.. In compliance with ICH guideline Q2(R1) (Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology) the applicant has provided method validations for all analytical methods used in the quality control during  release  of  Human  Thrombin  drug  substance.  For  analytical  procedures  which  are  not  fully compendial,  a  justification  was  provided  why  comparability  could  not  be  fully  shown  between  the Ph.Eur. method and the method used. Batch analysis Batch results from 5 successive batches of Human Thrombin drug substance were submitted. All test results  are  within  the  defined  specifications  and  demonstrate  the  consistency  in  the  manufacture  of Human Thrombin component of Evicel. Container closure Human Thrombin drug substance is filled in bags. The contact layer is Polyethylene-vinyl acetate Ph. Eur. The bags are sterilised by gamma-radiation. · Stability Human  Thrombin  drug  substance  may  be  stored.  For  justification  sufficient  stability  data  were provided. Drug Product · Manufacture of the Product Description of manufacturing process Sufficient information has been provided to adequately describe the manufacturing process of Human Thrombin drug product. The  batch  formula  is  given.  The  process  has  been  sufficiently  validated  for  this  production  scale. Critical parameters at critical steps of the drug product manufacturing process were identified to assure that the process is controlled to ensure the quality and consistency of the drug product. Control of excipients All excipients are already present at their final concentration in the drug substance and are adequately controlled. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Product Specification

The Human Thrombin drug product specifications are adequately set and justified to ensure product quality.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The analytical methods are appropriate to control the defined parameters and comply with the Ph.Eur monograph. Validations of analytical methods were provided according to ICH guideline Q2 (R1).

## Batch analysis

Analysis  of  data  from  five  representative  batches  demonstrates  consistent  batch  to  batch  quality  of Human Thrombin drug product.

<!-- image -->

Appropriate donor selection criteria are in place. Donors with an increased risk for sporadic or variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob-Disease  are  excluded.  Systems  are  in  place  which  allow  traceability  of  each donation supplied for the manufacture of fibrinogen, thrombin and albumin in case a donor develops (or  is  strongly  suspected  to  have  develop)  vCJD.  In  this  case  any  batches  of  Evicel  which  include suspected donations would be withdrawn from the market and the competent authorities informed.

· Stability of the Product The provided stability data justify the shelf life and storage conditions as described in the SPC. Evicel - Assembled Product Description and Composition Evicel  is  a  fibrin  sealant  consisting  of  two  plasma-derived  components,  Human  Fibrinogen  and Human Thrombin solutions.  These are supplied in the frozen state, thawed by the user, and combined for local application with a CE marked application device to achieve haemostasis. The composition of the two components is given above. The application device is not part of this application for marketing authorisation. Container The  Evicel  kit  consists  of  two  cardboard  packages.  One  package  contains  one  vial  of  each  of  the biological  components,  Human  Fibrinogen  and  Human  Thrombin  and  the  other  contains  the  CEmarked application device. · Manufacture Description of the manufacturing process A  package  of  Evicel  contains  one  vial  of  Component  1  -  Human  Fibrinogen  and  one  vial  of Component 2 - Human Thrombin (each 5ml, 2ml or 1ml) and a CE-marked application device (5ml or 1ml/2ml). The manufacturing steps include the final packaging of the biological components and QA approval, release storage, assembly and labeling of device package. · Product Specification An identification test is performed for the fibrin sealant kit to check whether the two components form a clot immediately when mixed and applied with the device to a glass plate. The performance of the application device in producing a homogeneous mixture of the two components has been validated. · Adventitious Agents Both components of Evicel, Human Fibrinogen and Human Thrombin, as well as the Human Albumin used as stabiliser for the thrombin are produced from human plasma sourced in the USA. Risk of contamination with TSE Medicinal product no longer authorised

The prion removal capacity of the manufacturing processes for fibrinogen, thrombin and albumin was investigated. In summary, compliance with Position Statement CPMP/BWP/2879/02 on human TSEs and plasma-derived medicinal products has been demonstrated.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Adventitious viruses

## Human Fibrinogen and Human Thrombin

The overall viral safety strategy includes selection of qualified donors and testing of plasma donations collected in the USA. The donor selection and plasma donation testing strategy for viral markers is considered adequate.

toxicity, interference) ere performed and complete study reports including raw data were submitted. dely used for this purpose, the manufacturer commits to perform a viral activation study with PRV. of enveloped viruses as well as small non-enveloped viruses such s parvoviruses was demonstrated. A. The donor selection and plasma donation testing trategy for viral markers is considered adequate. procedure and final pasteurisation step, the viral sk from albumin has been adequately minimised. he provided data justify the inclusion of the following warning asures  taken  are  considered  effective  for  enveloped  viruses  such  as  HIV,  HBV,  HCV,  and and for individuals ith immunodeficiency or increased erythropoiesis (e.g. haemolytic anaemia). The  applicant  validated  virus  inactivation  steps  included  in  the  manufacture  of  fibrinogen  and thrombin. These steps were validated for their capacity to inactivate/remove viruses. The selection of process steps for validation is considered sufficient. The virus studies are of good quality and comply with the requirements of Guideline CPMP/BWP/268/95. Adequate controls (cyto w In summary, two dedicated steps for virus inactivation/removal were introduced into the manufacture of  fibrinogen.  Enveloped  viruses  are  efficiently  inactivated  at  both  virus  inactivation  steps.  One  of them  also  inactivates  non-enveloped  viruses  such  as  Hepatitis  A  virus.  Nevertheless,  validation  of enveloped virus  reduction  at  pasteurisation  should  include  a  Herpesvirus  (e.g.  PRV).  Having  a  full validation data base is highly recommended for cases when post donation information indicating virus positive samples entering the fractionation pool, would become available. Since there are no general concerns  regarding  enveloped  virus  safety  this  virus  validation  study  can  be  performed  postauthorisation. Since PRV is wi in The  virus  reduction  strategy  for  thrombin  is  based  on  an  efficient  inactivation  step  for  enveloped viruses and a step for which removal a Human Albumin As for fibrinogen and thrombin, the overall viral safety strategy includes selection of qualified donors and testing of plasma donations collected in the US s Due to the established and validated manufacturing ri Risk assessment and Statements in SPC Section 4.4 A  risk  Assessment  according  to  new  chapter  6  of  Guideline  CPMP/BWP/269/95  concerning  HIV, HBV, and HCV has been submitted. T statement into section 4.4 of the SPC: The  me HAV. The measures taken may be of limited value against non-enveloped viruses such as parvovirus B19. Parvovirus B19 infection may be serious for pregnant women (foetal infection) w Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Information  on  development,  manufacture  and  control  of  the  drug  substances  and  drug  products  of both components of Evicel, Human Fibrinogen and Human Thrombin were presented in a satisfactory manner. The results of tests carried out indicate satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important product quality characteristics, and these in turn lead to the conclusion that the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. Safety with regard to transmissible agents, such as human TSE and enveloped and non-enveloped viruses has been demonstrated in compliance with the relevant CHMP guidelines. Medicinal product no longer authorised

At the time of the CPMP opinion, there were a number of minor unresolved quality issues having no impact  on  the  Benefit/Risk  ratio  of  the  product.  The  applicant  gave  a  Letter  of  Undertaking  and committed to resolve these as Follow Up Measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.3 Non-clinical aspects

## Introduction

e formed, in comparison with other marketed fibrin sealants (Quixil, Surgicel, The non-clinical study program for Evicel focussed on the evaluation of its primary pharmacological effects especially haemostatic efficacy, the frequency of occurrence of post-surgical adhesions and the stability of the clot onc Tissucol and Tisseel).

| Study type                       | Route/Administration                         | compliance GLP-   |
|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| Rabbit partial hepatectomy model | Local / sprayed onto resected liver          | yes               |
| Rat kidney haemorrhage model     | prayed onto resected Local / s kidney        | no longer         |
| Rat kidney haemorrhage model     | prayed onto resected Local / s kidney        | no                |
| Rat abdominal wall defect model  | o incised abdominal wall Local / sprayed ont | no                |

tandards. Most of the other non-clinical studies provided were not performed under LP standards. harmacology he pharmacological studies provided are summarised in Table 1: rmacolog r Evicel The pivotal non-clinical studies for Evicel have been conducted in compliance with Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) s G P T Table 1: Pha ical studies performed fo · Primary pharmacodynamics gPDs were added to Evicel's Fibrinogen omponent haemostatic properties were found to be weaker. ted nd localised points of higher pressure appeared at the clot surface in 2/10 animals in each group. .  The  results  of  this  study emonstrate comparability in clot longevity within the treatment groups. The  primary  objective  of  a  rat  kidney  haemorrhage  study  was  to  assess  the  haemostatic  profile  of Evicel  and  secondly  to  investigate  the  influence  on  its  haemostatic  performance,  when  different amounts of Fibrinogen degradation products (FgDPs) were added. The impact of the reduction in the clottable  Fibrinogen  concentration  by  spiking  with  Albumin  was  also  investigated.  The  endpoints measured  (occurrence  of  points  of  high  pressure  =  bubbles  under  the  clot)  were  found  to  be comparable for Evicel and Quixil. When either Albumin or F c In  a  second  rat  kidney  haemorrhage  study,  two  groups  each  consisting  of  10  male  rats  were  either treated  with  Evicel  or  with  Quixil.  Assessment  of  the  haemostatic  performance  of  Evicel  when compared to Quixil revealed that clot performed was similar. In both groups, all 10 animals comple a The goal of the rat abdominal wall incision study was to evaluate the in vivo longevity of a clot formed by the Evicel, in comparison to other fibrin sealants. A 2cm x 1cm flap in the abdominal wall was made, creating a defect that penetrates the wall muscles. The wounds were sprayed with 1ml of the fibrin sealant preparations, followed by closure of incision and skin. 5 groups of 10 animals each of male  rats  were  used  to  test  Evicel  (two  groups),  Quixil,  Tissucol  and  Tisseel.  The  animals  were sacrificed  at  several  time  points  up  to  14  days  following  treatment d Medicinal product no longer authorised

The objective of the rabbit partial hepatectomy study was to evaluate the haemostatic properties of two batches  of  Evicel  using  a  rabbit  partial  hepatectomy  model.  The  batches  differed  in  the  source  of cryoprecipitate. Partial hepatectomy was performed in three groups of 10 animals. Each wound was sprayed  with  at  least  1  ml  of  either  the  test  or  the  reference  fibrin  sealants.  Time  to  achieve haemostasis was recorded for each animal following application of the fibrin sealant. The mean time

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

to haemostasis (ca. 50 s) has been found to be similar within the treated group as well as the amount of fibrin sealant used.

- s · Secondary pharmacodynamic

Studies have not been submitted.

- Excretion

me ctions n submitted. he pharmacokinetics of α -thrombin was examined in two studies using radio-labelled thrombin, jection and topical application to cut surface of liver in rabbits. ion. The tudy  demonstrated  that  the  absorption  of 125 I α thrombin  is  rapid  and  consists  mainly  of r oncentration  tended  to  increase,  decrease  or  remain  the  same,  while  the  plasma  concentration ase up to 20 hours. The Cmax of thrombin related proteins was in 55 - 150 mU/ml. been submitted. · Safety pharmacology program Studies have not been submitted. · Pharmacodynamic drug intera Studies have not bee Pharmacokinetics T which examined intravenous in · Absorption-Bioavailability Absorption of 125 I α thrombin either after intravenous injection or on hepatic wounds in the rabbit was evaluated. The study was performed in randomized comparative designs in which animals received the test material after application to the cut surface or i.v. injection. The results obtained showed that the pharmacokinetic profile in the rabbit was equivalent to that seen in humans after i.v. inject Cmax (7-9 μ g/ml) was reached after 45 - 60 minutes after application and the clearance was rapid about, 0.5 μ g/ml remained after 10 hours and levels were almost undetectable after 24 hours. The  s biologically  inactive  peptides  resulting  from  degradation  by  plasmin  of α thrombin  embedded  in  a clot. A second study addressed the absorption of 125 I-thrombin and 3 H-tranexamic acid after application on hepatic wounds in rabbit. The objective of this study was to evaluate blood levels of 125 I-thrombin and 3 H-tranexamic acid after application to the hepatic wounds in rabbit animal model. All animals showed a similar pattern: up to 6 - 10 hours the curves of plasma and filter concentration are parallel, with  plasma  concentration  approximately  half  of  the  filter  concentrations.  After  6  hours  the  filte c continue to incre · Distribution Studies have not · Metabolism Studies have not been submitted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Studies have not been submitted.

- ons · Pharmacokinetic drug interacti

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Studies have not been submitted.

- Other pharmacokinetics studies

## TnBP and Triton X-100

half life is several secondary anti-SRBC (sheep red ssed. Triton X-100 proved to be toxic pm range. Rapid dilution of the residual amounts of Triton X-100 infused with plasma nd immunoglobulin allows concluding that these in vitro findings have no toxicological s. ies  were  performed  in  full  conformity  with  GLP  regulations.  Table  2 d with d Triton X. The pharmacokinetics of TnBP and Triton X-100 (1+5) were studied in Sprague - Dawley rats after a single intravenous administration of the compounds. A literature search allowed to state that studies on Nonoxynol-9  substance  closely  related  to  Triton  x-100  indicated  that  this  substance  is  excreted primarily via the liver - bile route in the faeces and secondarily in the urine. The days. Intravenous administration of 14 C-labeled Naonoxynol-9 resulted in complete metabolism of the compound, with tissue distribution that concentrated on small and large intestines. A number of studies address the potential neurotoxicity and immunotoxicity of TnBP and Triton X100. When a LD50 (1863 mg/kg) was given to adult hens, there were no demonstrable signs of neural damage or other significant clinical findings. Administration of doses exceeding (over 9000 times) the daily dose of Evicel gave no indication of any effect on primary or blood  cell)  response,  leukocyte  counts,  or  the  sizes  of  vital  organs  (kidneys,  heart,  lungs,  and thymuses). Serum IgG and IgM were also similar to that of controls. The potential cytotoxic effects on the fibroblasts have been addre in  the  25 μ g/mL  area;  however  this  was  reduced  when  the  serum  protein  increased.  There  was  no evidence of significant cell damage in the mutagenicity studies. Triton X-100 inhibits enzyme cell activity in a cell free system. The LC50 for cytochrome oxidase fell within the 22 p a consequence o T xicology · Single dose toxicity Single  dose  toxicology  stud summarises studies performe TnBP an Table 2: Single dose studies Results of single dose studies of TnBP and Triton X - 100 administration shows LD50 values ranging from 5.1 ± 25.5 to 35 ± 177 mg /kg. This depended on the rodent species and route of administration. This  is  at  least  3000  times  greater  than  the  dose  of  TnBP  and  Triton  X-100  expected  in  humans receiving  Evicel.  The  LLD  (lowest  lethal  dose)  ranges  from  5.3  ±  26  to  6.1  ±  122  mg/kg.  The 4 to 7.7 ± 39 mg/kg at least 130 fold greater than the NOALEL (no adverse effect level) was 0.2 ± calculated dose for patients. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

| Substance tested           | species     | route   | stered Dose admini (mg/kg bw)   |
|----------------------------|-------------|---------|---------------------------------|
| TnBP+ Triton X-100 (1+5)   | rat         | i.v.    | 3.16 - 100                      |
| TnBP+ Triton X-100 (1+20)  | Mouse       | i.p.    | 1.56 - 22.8                     |
| TnBP+ Triton X-100 (1+20)  | rat         | i.p.    | 0.49 - 33.5                     |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | Rat mature  | i.p.    | 21.5 - 316.0                    |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | Rat newborn | i.p.    | 10.0 - 316.0                    |

- Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics)

nBP and Triton X - 100 in a mixture ration of 1 + 5 was tested in rats and dogs administration, to mimic the route of administration in humans The combination of T for 13 weeks by means of intravenous (see Table 3).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3: Repeat dose toxicity studies

| Substance tested          | species   | route   | ed bw/day) Doses administer ( μ g/kg/   | ed bw/day) Doses administer ( μ g/kg/   |
|---------------------------|-----------|---------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Substance tested          | species   | route   | P TnB                                   | on X - 100 Trit                         |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | rat       | i.v.    | 12                                      | 60                                      |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | rat       | i.v.    | 60                                      | 300                                     |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | rat       | i.v.    | 300                                     | 0 150                                   |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | dog       | i.v.    | 13                                      | 65                                      |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | dog       | i.v.    | 50                                      | 250                                     |
| TnBP + Triton X-100 (1+5) | dog       | i.v.    | 500                                     | 2500                                    |

<!-- image -->

| Substance tested           | Type of study         | Species/test                                                                                                     | route    | Doses administered                                                                                                       | Doses administered                                                                                                       |
|----------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| thrombin                   | Gene mutation test    | Reverse mutation tests with Salmonella typhimurium (with and without metabolic activation) Prokaryocytes no      | In vitro | 0; 1568; 878; 492 5000; 1600; 512; 164; 52 μ g/plate 000; 280 5 μ g/plate                                                | 0; 1568; 878; 492 5000; 1600; 512; 164; 52 μ g/plate 000; 280 5 μ g/plate                                                |
| fibrinogen                 | Gene mutation test    | Reverse mutation tests with Salmonella typhimurium (with and without metabolic activation) Prokaryocytes product | In vitro | 0; 1568; 878; 492 5000; 1600; 512; 164; 52 μ g/plate 5000; 280 μ g/plate                                                 | 0; 1568; 878; 492 5000; 1600; 512; 164; 52 μ g/plate 5000; 280 μ g/plate                                                 |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | Gene mutation test    | Reverse mutation tests with Salmonella typhimurium (with and without metabolic activation) Prokaryocytes         | In vitro | μ g to 5000 μ g + 25000 μ g 5 μ g -+ 25                                                                                  | μ g to 5000 μ g + 25000 μ g 5 μ g -+ 25                                                                                  |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | Gene mutation test    | c activation) Eukaryocytes HGPRT test (V79 cells) (with and without metaboli                                     | In vitro | ) 0+500 tabolic 1,56+7,81 g to 25+ 125 g (without metabolic activation 6,25+31,25 μ g to 10 μ μ μ g (with me activation) | ) 0+500 tabolic 1,56+7,81 g to 25+ 125 g (without metabolic activation 6,25+31,25 μ g to 10 μ μ μ g (with me activation) |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | mal analysis Chromoso | Rat bone marrow cytogenic test Sampling intervals: 6, 24, 48                                                     | i.v.     | mg/kg /bw                                                                                                                | mg/kg /bw                                                                                                                |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | mal analysis Chromoso | Rat bone marrow cytogenic test Sampling intervals: 6, 24, 48                                                     | i.v.     | TnBP 1,25 - 5,0                                                                                                          | Triton X - 100 6,25-25,0                                                                                                 |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | mal analysis Chromoso | ntervals: 16, 48, 72 hours Rats micronucleus test Sampling i                                                     | i.v.     | mg/kg /bw                                                                                                                | mg/kg /bw                                                                                                                |
| TnBP + Triton X -100 (1+5) | mal analysis Chromoso | ntervals: 16, 48, 72 hours Rats micronucleus test Sampling i                                                     | i.v.     | 1,25 - 5,0 TnBP                                                                                                          | 6,25-25,0 Triton X - 100                                                                                                 |

- Carcinogenicity ·

The calculated NOAEL for local effects was 12 ± 60 μ g/kg in the rat, and 13 ± 65 μ g/kg in the dog. NOAEL for systemic effects was 300 ± 1500 μ g/kg  for  rat  and  500  ±  2500 μ g/kg  for  dog.  These alues being at least 200 fold grater than the calculated exposure to patients. Genotoxicity rats and the micronucleus test in Sprague Dawley rats and MRI mice (see Table 4). y Studies performed fibrinogen and thrombin and the combination of TnBP and 100 v · The mutagenic potential of fibrinogen and thrombin and the combination of TnBP and Triton X-100 has been assessed using the Ames test, mammalian mutagenicity assay (V79 cells) or chromosomal analysis of bone marrow in Sprague Dawley N Table 4: Genotoxicit Triton X-. The  studies  with  thrombin,  fibrinogen  and  combination  of  TnBP  and  Triton  X  100  revealed  no dication of gene or chromosomal damage. in Medicinal product no longer authorised

The carcinogenicity potential of TnBP has been analysed using dietary studies conducted and reported with both the CD-1 mouse and the Sprague-Dawley rat. A treatment-related increase in the incidence of  hepatocellular  adenomas occurred in male mice given 585 mg/kg/day. In rats, there was a doserelated increase in the incidence and severity of hyperplasia and the incidence of papillomas of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

urinary bladder epithelium in animals given 33 mg/kg/day or above. The NOAEL for chronic toxicity was 26 and 10 mg/kg/day for mice and rats, respectively, values significantly above potential patient exposure.

ts  dosed travaginally. At the potential patient exposure there is no indication of a carcinogenic risk. Nonxynol-9  was  non-toxic  and  non-carcinogenic  in  a  lifetime exposure  study  in ra in

Reproduction Toxicity BP or Triton X-100 patients might receive when oetuses,  body eight of living foetuses or malformations. TnBP was considered to be non-teratogenic. Toxicokinetic data oxicokinetics studies were not submitted. Local tolerance was  no  evidence  of  local  intolerance,  systemic  toxicity  and  no  evidence  of munotoxicity. y studies ot nt difference in any of the parameters, between the test groups and the control group. as ted defects generally appeared to be filled by tissue. · Two studies were performed on combinations of TnBP and Triton X-100 in rats and rabbits.  Pregnant animals  in  both  studies  received  daily  intravenously  a  combination  of  TnBP  +  Triton  X-100  (1+5) during the period of organogenesis. The LTD's for either dams or foetuses in these conducted studies was more than 100 times greater than the dose of Tn Evicel is administered. TnBP teratogenicity studies with doses of 0, 62.5, 125,250, 500 mg/kg/day were administered orally to pregnant  Wistar  rats  demonstrating  no  significant  differences  in  dead  or  reabsorbed  f w · T · The local tolerance, systemic toxicity, and haemostatic properties of Evicel in comparison with Quixil were evaluated in one study of a single application in a standardized rabbit partial hepatectomy model. Macroscopic and microscopic examination of the rated site, target organs and haematological analyses were  performed.  No  relevant  clinical  signs  or  effects  were  found.  Only  on-site  adhesions  were observed.  There im · Other toxicit Immunotoxicity Safety differences between Evicel and Quixil were assessed using a rabbit wound model. The number of  cells  present  in  the  blood  did  not  differ  between  both  groups  of  animals.  Results  of  the histopathological evaluation grading of the immunological reaction at the site of the incision did n show significa Neurotoxicity The effects on local tolerance and the neurotoxicity of two batches of Evicel were evaluated following subdural administration of 0.5ml fibrin sealant in the rabbit, with sham operated animals serving as controls. 10 animals were assigned to each of the three testing groups. Neurobehavioral reactions and clinical  signs  were  monitored  in  a  14  days  follow  up  period.  At  sacrifice,  macroscopic  and microscopic examination of surgical sites was performed and samples of cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) were  collected  for  analysis.  The  results  of  this  study  revealed  no  significant  difference  in  all parameters  tested  between  both  batches  of  Evicel.  Clinical  signs  and  neurological  behaviour  was comparable  to  sham  operated  control  group.  Differences  in  CSF  inflammation  markers  in  both treatment compared to control group were found. 2 animals in each treatment group displayed discrete inflammation signs, none in the control animals. Macroscopic observations at sacrifice revealed that in all  treatment  groups  fibrin  sealant  appeared  as  a  thick  translucent  layer  filling  the  defects  and  w easily detached in most cases. The sham opera Medicinal product no longer authorised

## cotoxicity/environmental risk assessment E

No studies were submitted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on the non-clinical aspects

The non-clinical study program for Evicel is considered to be appropriate. It focuses on the evaluation of its primary pharmacological effects especially haemostatic efficacy, the frequency of occurrence of post-surgical adhesions and the stability of the clot once formed. Given the nature of the product and in  view  of  the  epilesional  route  of  administration,  additional  pharmacology  and  pharmacokinetic studies were not deemed necessary. Results of these studies revealed no significant difference in the pharmacological performance of Evicel in comparison to other fibrin sealants. In addition, the risk of xcess fibrinogen resulting from the Evicel is expected to be extremely low because of the epilesional e use of the product.

<!-- image -->

| Study ID   | tions/ t year No. study centres/ loca Star   | Design Control                                                                                   | urgical rocedure S p             | Study Posology                        | m tr Subjects Total By ar Evi/con   | e / e Male/Femal Black/White Other Age Rang (Mean)   |
|------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| 400-05-001 | S 5 18 UK, U 200                             | reatment , randomised Phase III, single blind, standard t controlled Control- Manual compression | ascular V                        | Evicel 1-4 mL                         | 147 75/72                           | 26/115/6 38-90 (66.0) 77/70                          |
| 400-05-006 | 15 2006 US                                   | ase III, single blind, Active control - Surgicel Ph controlled, randomised                       | al, ynaecol., general Urologic g | vicel Surgicel 1-300 cm 2 E 0.5-10 mL | 135 66/69                           | 17 0-84 (55.1) 57/78 18/100/                         |

ibrin sealants/haemostatics are metabolised in the same way as endogenous fibrin, by fibrinolysis and evaluate the absorption and elimination of thrombin alone when applied to the cut surface f  the  liver  resulting from partial hepatectomy revealed no evidence of enhanced thrombogenic risk d  toxicology  studies  have  also  been  conducted  on  the  main  impurities  coming  from  the olvert-detergent  based  viral  inactivation  step  of  Evicel  (TnBP  and  Triton  X-100)  and  raised  no spects oneal and intra-abdominal surgery was performed in study 400-05-006, where vicel  was  compared  to  the  active  comparator  Surgicel.  In  addition  eight  supportive  studies  were Pivo ted with Evicel Study ID F phagocitosis. The toxicity profile of fibrinogen, thrombin and the final formulation was not studied extensively in animals due to the fact that the components of the product are of human origin and stimulation of the immune  system  when  introducing  heterologous  proteins  into  animals  would  be  expected.  Such  an immune activation may confound interpretation of results of toxicology studies, therefore single and repeated  dose  toxicity,  carcinogenicity  and  reproduction  and  developmental  studies  were  neither undertaken  with  Evicel,  nor  separately  with  any  the  fibrinogen  or  thrombin  component.  However, effects of Evicel on local tolerance and neurotoxicity have been investigated by using a rabbit model and the findings do not provide evidence for a toxicological potential. Importantly, studies conducted in rabbits to o for Evicel. ADME an s concerns. 2.4 Clinical a Introduction Evicel was investigated in two randomized, controlled pivotal studies (see Table 5). In study 400-05001  Evicel  was  used  in  vascular  surgery  and  compared  to  the  standard  surgical  treatment  manual compression. Retroperit E conducted with Quixil. Table 5: tal Clinical Studies Conduc 400-05-001 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## GCP

he Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. T

<!-- image -->

ommunity were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. harmacokinetics o pharmacokinetic studies have been conducted in man. harmacodynamics o pharmacodynamic studies have been conducted in man. iscussion on pharmacology al  steps  of  the  coagulation  cascade  and  no  specific harmacodynamic studies were deemed needed. linical efficacy 001) and in soft tissue bleeding in retroperitoneal and intrabdominal surgery (study 400-05-006). Dose response studies be treated. Dosages of 0.5 to 10 mL of combined product were used in clinical ials with Evicel. Main studies tudy 400-05-001 tetrafluoroethylene  (PTFE)  grafts.  Control  patients  were  treated  with  manual mpression (MC). The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the c P N P N D Since Evicel is intended for epilesional use only and intravascular administration is contraindicated, no pharmacokinetic studies have been performed in man. In addition, the product's action is based upon the  well  known  physiological  process  of  the  fin p C Two pivotal Phase III studies have been performed with Evicel for demonstration of efficacy and safety in vascular surgery (study 400-05a · Evicel is applied by dripping or spraying directly onto the site at which haemostasis is required. Equal quantities of the two components (human fibrinogen and human thrombin) combine during application to form a thin haemostatic layer that adheres to the tissue. The dosage of Evicel is thus dependent on the area of tissue to tr · S This is a prospective, randomised controlled phase III study in patients undergoing vascular surgical procedures  on  an  end-to-side  femoral  or  upper  extremity  arterial  anastomosis  utilizing  uncoated  or heparin-coated  poly co METHODS Study Participants Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Study participants either  presented  with  peripheral vascular  disease  undergoing  vascular  grafting  or required surgery for vascular access for renal dialysis. Patients were randomised within their artery type, i.e. femoral or upper extremity. A total of 147 patients were randomised, 75 to Evicel and 72 to manual compression. Eligible  were  male  and  female  patients,  18  years  or  older,  requiring  elective, primary  or  repeat  vascular  procedures  with  at  least  one  end-to-side  femoral  or  upper  extremity vascular  access  arterial  anastomosis  (e.g.  femoral-femoral,  femoral-popliteal,  femoral-tibial,  iliofemoral,  aorto-bifemoral,  abdominal  aortic  aneurysm,  upper  extremity  vascular  access  for  dialysis) using uncoated or heparin-coated PTFE grafts and polypropylene sutures (size 5-0 or 6-0) with a 1:1

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

needle-to-thread ratio. Patients could be randomised, when following initial arterial clamp release the surgeon  determined  that  adjunctive  measures  were  needed  to  obtain  haemostasis  at  the  study nastomotic site (SAS). Patients had to provide written, informed consent before surgery. a

## Treatments

ediately released after randomisation and light manual pressure with sponges t the SAS was applied. d or heparin-coated polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts compared to anual compression (MC). t the SAS at 4 minutes following randomisation to treatment 7 and 10 minutes following randomisation omplications up to the end of the 5-week follow-up Adverse events up to 5-week follow-up nce. To account for possible drop-outs 150 patients (75 per arm) should be included into the ial. at  the  same time e stop-clock was started and the actual time and randomisation number recorded. or practical reason (different form of application of Evicel and comparator) blinding was not feasible. All  patients  received  heparin  before  arterial  clamping.  The  dosage  was  approximately  70  IU/kg  for femoral  procedures  and  35  IU/kg  for  upper  extremity  artery  procedures.  After  the  surgeon  had determined  that  adjunctive  haemostatic  measures  were  required,  the  randomisation  envelope  was broken and the patient randomised to receive either Evicel or MC. One kit of Evicel (2 ml each of the fibrinogen and of the thrombin component, total of 4 ml) was pre-prepared for each patient prior to randomisation. For patients randomised to Evicel, the required amount of product was administered by dripping onto the study anastomotic site. Arterial clamps remained in place during a further minute in order  to  allow  time  for  the  fibrin  sealant  to  'set'.  In  patients  randomised  to  manual  compression, arterial clamps were imm a Objectives The primary objective of the study was to evaluate whether the fibrin sealant Evicel reduces time to haemostasis during vascular surgical procedures on an end-to-side femoral or upper extremity arterial anastomosis utilising uncoate m Outcomes/endpoints Primary endpoint: - Absence of bleeding a Secondary endpoints: - Absence of bleeding at the SAS - Incidence of treatment failure - Incidence of potential bleeding-related c -Sample size The study was planned to show the superiority of Evicel over MC in stop of bleeding at 4 minutes. Based on the assumption that the proportion of patients in the Evicel group in whom bleeding was stopped at 4 minutes would be 0.63 vs. 0.35 in the MC group and a type I error of 0.05 (2-sided) it was calculated that a Chisquare test with 72 patients per group would have about 90% power to detect this differe tr Randomisation Treatment was assigned randomly to each subject on a 1:1 basis. Randomisation was stratified within each  participating  site  and  also  stratified  for  femoral  versus  upper  extremity  procedures.  Ethicon provided  computer-generated  randomisation  schedules  of  treatment  group  assignment  which  were placed  in  sealed  envelopes.  Each  site  was  provided  with  a  series  of  randomisation  envelopes,  each bearing the subject randomisation number and artery type (femoral or upper extremity) on the outside. The randomisation envelope was opened to determine the treatment allocation and th Blinding (masking) F Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Statistical methods

estimates  and  their  95%  confidence  intervals.  Two-sided  p-values ere reported for statistical tests. A logistic regression model (with treatment, centre and artery type in the model) was used to assess whether there was any difference in the frequencies of responder between both treatments. Treatment effects  were  described  by  point w

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For  the  primary  endpoint,  absence  of  bleeding  at  SAS  4  minutes  following  randomization,  a significant  treatment  p-value  (&lt;0.05)  would  allow  the  acceptance  of  the  alternative  hypothesis, indicating a statistically significant treatment difference.

Two effectiveness analysis sets were defined in the protocol:

<!-- image -->

-  Full Analysis Set (FAS) comprising all randomised patients (equivalent to the intent-to-treat (ITT) set). - Per Protocol (PP) Analysis Set comprising all patients in the FAS who had no protocol violations. Analysis using the FAS was considered primary. Analysis using the PP set was carried out for the primary variable only and was confirmatory. RESULTS Participant flow Enrolment Allocation Follow-up Recruitment The study  was  carried  out  at  5  centres  in  the  UK  and  13  centres  in  the  US.  The  study  population comprised  patients  undergoing  vascular  procedures  utilising  uncoated  or  heparin-coated  PTFE prosthetic  graft  material,  with  at  least  one  end-to-side  anastomosis  to  a  femoral  or  upper  extremity artery. All patients except one (heparin-coated) had an uncoated PTFE graft. Eligible patients who had given  written  consent  to  participate  in  the  study  were  randomised  when  suturing  at  the  SAS  was complete and the surgeon considered the suture line to be secure. If,  after  securing the  suture  line, there remained a presence of bleeding which the surgeon determined required adjunctive haemostatic measures, the arterial clamps were reapplied and the patient was considered eligible for randomisation. Following randomisation and consecutive application of Evicel or manual compression, patients were observed over a 10-minute period to determine when haemostasis was attained at the SAS. Patients were subsequently followed-up at approximately five weeks following the vascular procedure. Conduct of the study Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  majority  of  the  75  patients  randomised  to  Evicel  received  all  of  the  4  ml  of  study  treatment supplied. Seventeen (17) patients received less than 4 ml; the amount remaining unused ranged from 0.2 to 3.0 ml. The mean number of days to discharge was 5.1 (SD 8.1) in the Evicel group and 5.5 (SD 6.2) in the MC group. Two patients were not discharged from hospital following the procedure.

Baseline data

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The majority (63.3%) of patients were aged between 50 and 74 years. Overall 115 (78.2%) were of Caucasian race and 26 (17.7%) were Black of African descent; none was reported to be of mixed race and five (3.5%) were Hispanic/Latino. Approximately half of the patients were ex-smokers (50.3%). Following randomisation, the treatment groups were similar in demographic characteristics.

| Variable                                                    | Evicel (n=75)                          | MC (n=72)                             |   OR 1 | 95% CI    | P 2    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------|-----------|--------|
| Haemostasis at 4 minutes: Overall 3 Upper extremity Femoral | 64 (85.3%) 23/27 (85.2%) 41/48 (85.4%) | 28 (38.9%) 9/21 (42.9%) 19/51 (37.3%) |   11.3 | 4.7, 27.5 | <0.001 |

| Variable                 | Evicel (n=75)   | MC (n=72)   | OR 1          | 95% CI              | P 2           |
|--------------------------|-----------------|-------------|---------------|---------------------|---------------|
| Haemostasis ≤ 7 minutes  | 68 (90.7%)      | 43 (59.7%)  | 7.9 3 6.5 4   | 2.8, 21.9 2.6, 16.1 | <0.001 <0.001 |
| Haemostasis ≤ 10 minutes | 72 (96.0%)      | 50 (69.4%)  | 18.5 3 10.9 4 | 3.7, 91.8 3.1, 38.8 | <0.001 <0.001 |

2

4

In the Evicel group polypropylene sutures were used in all patients and these were mainly size 6-0 (55 [73.3%] patients). All patients except one (heparin coated PTFE) had an uncoated PTFE graft. In the MC group polypropylene sutures were used in all patients and these were mainly size 6-0 (47 [65.3%] patients). All patients in this group had an uncoated PTFE graft. Numbers analysed 147 patients were randomised. Two efficacy analyses sets were defined in the protocol: - Full Analysis Set (FAS): n=75 for Evicel and n=72 for MC. - Per Protocol (PP): n=73 for Evicel and n=69 for MC. Outcomes and estimation The  primary  efficacy  variable  was  the  absence  of  bleeding  at  the  SAS  at  4 minutes  following randomisation. Results for upper extremity and femoral procedures were similar (see Table 6). Table 6: Haemostasis at 4 minutes (Full Analysis Set) 1 Odds Ratio. Figures greater than 1 indicate an advantage for Evicel. 2 Probability. 3 The validity of the model fit is questionable due to imbalance between centre and artery type. A  highly  statistically  significant  difference  in  favour  of  Evicel  was  also  seen  for  the  secondary effectiveness  variables  of  absence  of  bleeding  at  the  SAS  7  minutes  and  10  minutes  following randomisation (see Table 7). Table 7: Secondary efficacy endpoints (Full Analysis Set) 1 Odds Ratio. Figures greater than 1 indicate an advantage for Evicel 3 Original model. The validity of the model fit is questionable. 5 Four patients were bleeding at 10 minutes and required additional haemostatic measures during 10-min observation period. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Probability

Revised model

Twelve (16.0%) patients in the Evicel group and 15 (20.8%) patients in the MC group were reported to  have  potential  bleeding  related  complications.  There  was  no  statistically  significant  difference between the groups (p=0.426). However more cases of anaemia were seen in the MC group than in the Evicel group (9 versus 5 cases).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Overall,  treatment  failure  (defined  as  the  presence  of  bleeding  at  the  SAS  10 minutes  following randomisation  or  the  need  to  administer  additional  haemostatic  measures  during  the  10-minute observation period), occurred more frequently in the MC group (23 [31.9%] versus 6 [8.0%] patients in  the  Evicel  group)  and  this  was  highly  statistically  significant  (OR  0.14;  95%  CI  0.05,  0.45; p=0.001). Treatment failure was mainly due to the continuation of bleeding at 10 minutes (3 [4.0%] Evicel patients versus 22 [30.6%] MC patients).

Study 400-05-006 This  is  a  phase  III,  prospective,  randomised  controlled  evaluation  of  Evicel  as  an  adjunct  to haemostasis for soft tissue bleeding during retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery. Efficacy  was  evaluated  by  the  assessment  of  whether  Evicel  was  non-inferior  to  Surgicel,  an absorbable  haemostatic  agent  made  from  oxidised  regenerated  cellulose,  in  achieving  haemostasis during  surgical  procedures  involving  soft  tissue  bleeding  in  retroperitoneal  and  intra-abdominal surgery. METHODS Study Participants The study population comprised patients undergoing non-emergent retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery  procedures,  wherein  a  soft  tissue  Target  Bleeding  Site  (TBS)  was  identified  for  which  an adjunctive  haemostat  was  indicated.  Patients  were  stratified  for  age  (16  years  or  less,  and  over  16 years) in order to collect data on use in paediatric patients. Procedures included, but were not restricted to the following: -Urology: Simple  or radical nephrectomy,  adrenalectomy  (open), radical prostatectomy and pyeloplasty. -  Gynaecology:  Radical  hysterectomy,  radical  cystectomy  (bladder  removal),  lymphadenectomy (lymph node dissection) and primary tumour reduction surgery ( i.e. ovarian cancer surgery). -General surgery: Colectomy with or without anal anastomoses, low anterior resections, abdominoperineal resections and retroperitoneal tumour resection surgery. The presence of an appropriate soft tissue TBS had to be identified intra-operatively by the surgeon. Patients had to be willing to participate in the study and must have provided written informed consent. Treatments Evicel  or  control  treatment  was  applied  to  the  TBS  immediately  after  opening  the  randomisation envelope.  Re-application  was  allowed  at  the  surgeon's  discretion  within  the  10-minute  observation period. Evicel could be administered either by dripping or spraying onto the TBS. The control  group  was  treated  with  Surgicel,  an  absorbable  haemostatic  agent  made  from  oxidised regenerated cellulose, indicated for use as an adjunct to haemostasis in surgery and used for several decades in the US. Commercially available Surgicel was provided for the clinical trial and was used within label. Both treatments were pre-prepared in total quantities of Evicel (2 x 5 mL) or Surgicel (4x8 inches [10.2 x 20.3 cm] per pack) and ready for administration for each patient. Objectives The study objectives were to evaluate whether the fibrin sealant Evicel was non-inferior to Surgicel in achieving haemostasis during surgical procedures involving soft tissue bleeding in retroperitoneal and intra-abdominal surgery. Outcomes/endpoints Medicinal product no longer authorised

Primary endpoint:

-  Absence of bleeding at the Target Bleeding Site (TBS) at 10 minutes following randomisation to treatment.

Secondary endpoints:

- Absence of bleeding at the soft tissue TBS at 4 and 7 minutes following randomisation.
- Absolute time to haemostasis (TTH).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Incidence of treatment failure.
- Incidence of potential bleeding-related complications to end of follow-up (&gt;7 to 14 days).
- Adverse events to end of follow-up (&gt;7 to 14 days after surgery, clinical or telephone follow-up).

## Sample size

Study  400-05-006  was  planned  to  show  non-inferiority  of  Evicel  when  compared  to  Surgicel  with respect  to  haemostatic  success  at  10  minutes.  Anticipating  a  success  rate  of  0.9  in  both  treatment groups and claiming non-inferiority if the lower limit of the 95% confidence interval for the ratio of success proportions (pFS / pSurgicel) is above 0.8 it was calculated, applying the method of Farrington &amp; Manning, that 63 patients per treatment group were needed to achieve 90% power. In order to account for possible drop outs 130 patients (65 per group) should be included into the study. Randomisation Each  site  was  provided  with  computer-generated  randomisation  envelopes  each  bearing  the  subject randomisation number and containing the treatment allocation. Treatment was assigned randomly to each subject on a 1:1 basis, and randomisation was stratified within each participating site. At sites capable of enrolling both adult and paediatric subjects, subjects were also stratified by age ( ≤ 16, &gt;16) and 2 sets of randomisation envelopes were provided to those sites. Blinding (masking) For practical reason (different form of application of Evicel and comparator) blinding was not feasible. Statistical methods The  primary  analysis  variable  was  the  haemostasis  outcome  at  10  minutes.  The  relative  risk (pEvicel /pSurgicel )  for  achieving  haemostatic  success  including  its  2-sided  95%  confidence  interval  was calculated using the method described by Koopman. In case the lower limit of this confidence interval was  above  0.8,  non-inferiority  of  Evicel  when  compared  to  Surgicel  with  respect  to  haemostatic outcome was assumed; in case the lower limit of this  confidence  interval  was  above  1,  superiority could be concluded. Subgroup analyses by age were performed in addition. For the primary analysis, missing values were considered as failure, for the secondary endpoints no substitution  of  missing  values  was  planned.  To  assess  the  impact  of  missing  values  on  the  primary analysis sensitivity analyses were planned considering missing data as successes, and also, worst-case (with  missing  data  for  the  Evicel  group  considered  failures  and  missing  data  for  the  control  group considered successes). The intent to treat analysis set (ITT set) contained all subjects who were randomised. This set was split into: - Adult analysis set (all subjects aged more than 16 years to less than 65 years) - Paediatric analysis set (all subjects aged 16 years or less) - Adult65+ analysis set (subjects aged 65 years or more) The  Per  Protocol  (PP)  analysis  set  contained  subjects  in  the  ITT  set  who  had  no  major  protocol violations.  The  safety  analysis  set  comprised  all  subjects  who  were  randomised  and  received treatment. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

Participant flow

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Recruitment

The study was carried out in 17 centres located in the US.

## Conduct of the study

Surgery was performed according to standard of care. The Target Bleeding Site (TBS) was identified during the retroperitoneal or soft tissue dissection as the first such site in the soft tissue presenting with mild to moderate bleeding, where conventional methods of control (i.e. suture, ligature, and cautery) were ineffective or impractical, and where an adjunct to achieve haemostasis was required.

<!-- image -->

Following identification of the TBS, the patient was randomised, the TBS was treated according to the randomisation schedule and TTH was observed. Haemostasis was defined as no detectable bleeding from the TBS at the specified time-points: 4, 7 and 10 minutes following randomisation. During the 10 minutes  observation  period  the  investigator  was  free  to  re-administer  the  allocated  treatment. Treatment  failures  were  defined  as  either  the  persistence  of  bleeding  at  10 minutes  following randomisation  or  the  occurrence  of  breakthrough  brisk  bleeding  that  required  administration  of additional haemostatic measures during the 10-minute observation period. In these cases, the surgeon could apply further haemostatic measures according to his/her preference, except for the use of any fibrin sealants. Baseline data The  median  age  of  Evicel  group  was  higher  in  comparison  with  the  control  group  (57.3  vs.  53.0 years). The duration of the surgical procedures was higher in the control (Surgicel) being 213 minutes in comparison with the Evicel group 195.1 minutes. Bleeding at the TBS was mild for 61.2% of Evicel subjects and for 52.9% of Surgicel subjects. In the remainder of cases it was moderate. Cautery was used  initially  to  achieve  haemostasis  at  the  TBS  in  most  cases  (50.7%  for  Evicel  and  72.1%  for Surgicel), with sutures and other methods (primarily clips, pressure or argon-beam coagulation) used in about 15% of cases and ligation in about 5% of cases. In 32.8% of Evicel subjects and 19.1% of Surgicel subjects none of these methods was used. The volume of the used Evicel sealant used ranged from 0.5 to 10 ml (median 5 ml). For Surgicel the quantity of product used ranged from 1 to 300 cm 2 (median 187.5 cm 2 ). Reapplication was similar in both groups. Numbers analysed 135 patients were randomised, 66 to Evicel and 69 to Surgicel. This included 11 paediatric patients aged  16  years  or  less  (4  Evicel,  7  Surgicel).  One  subject  was  randomised  to  Surgicel  but  received Evicel in error, and is therefore in the Surgicel group when considering the ITT set (as randomised) and in the Evicel group when considering the safety set (as treated). All patients were included in the intent to treat (ITT) analysis; 127 subjects were included in the per protocol (PP) analysis. Outcomes and estimation Results for the primary efficacy endpoint, absence of bleeding at the Target Bleeding Site (TBS) at 10 minutes are shown in Table 8. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 8: Haemostasis at 10 min

| Variable               | Evicel         | Surgicel      | RR 1   | 95% CI for RR   |
|------------------------|----------------|---------------|--------|-----------------|
| Haemostasis at 10 min: |                |               |        |                 |
| ITT set                | 63/66 (95.5%)  | 56/69 (81.2%) | 1.18   | 1.04,1.36       |
| PP set                 | 59/62 (95.2%)  | 52/65 (80.0%) | 1.19   | 1.05,1.39       |
| Adult set              | 32/32 (100.0%) | 32/40 (80.0%) | - 2    |                 |
| Adult65+ set           | 27/30 ( 90.0%) | 19/22 (86.4%) | - 2    |                 |
| Paediatric set         | 4/ 4 (100.0%)  | 5/ 7 (71.4%)  | - 2    |                 |

| Variable                | Evicel (n=66)   | Surgicel (n=69)   |   RR 1 | 95% CI for RR   |
|-------------------------|-----------------|-------------------|--------|-----------------|
| Haemostasis ≤ 4 minutes | 50 (75.8%)      | 37 (53.6%)        |   1.41 | 1.10, 1.86      |
| Haemostasis ≤ 7 minutes | 60 (90.9%)      | 53 (76.8%)        |   1.18 | 1.02, 1.40      |

•

1 Relative Risk. Figures greater than 1 indicate an advantage for Evicel 2 Calculation not planned In addition, the relative proportions of success of haemostasis at 4 and 7 minutes are consistent with the 10-minute findings (see Table 9). Table 9: Secondary Efficacy Variables (ITT set) 1 Relative Risk . Figures greater than 1 indicate an advantage for Evicel 2 Potential bleeding related complications were ascertained by medical review of adverse events. 3 RR calculated for no events, due to 0 Evicel bleeding events. 4 p value for l og rank test for comparison between treatments . Analyses  indicate  that  in  subjects  in  whom  TBS  severity  was  mild,  100.0%  (40/40)  of  the  Evicel treated  subjects  achieved  haemostasis  by  10  minutes  compared  to  89.2%  (33/37)  of  the  Surgicel treated  subjects.  For  the  subjects  with  moderate  bleeding,  88.5%  (23/26)  of  the  Evicel  subjects, compared to 71.9% (23/32) of the Surgicel subjects achieved haemostasis at the TBS by 10 minutes. Three  (3)  of  66  Evicel  subjects  and  thirteen  (13)  of  69  Surgicel  subjects  experienced  treatment failures. Four of these failures were due to brisk bleeding occurring at the TBS, all of which were in Surgicel treated subjects. · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) No analysis has been performed across trials. · Clinical studies in special populations No studies in special populations have been performed. Supportive studies Results  from  8  clinical  studies  with  Quixil  were  submitted  in  order  to  support  the  clinical  data  for Evicel (see Table 10). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 10: Supportive clinical studies conducted with Quixil

<!-- image -->

| Study ID                | No. study centres / locations/ Start year   | Design Control                                                                                                                                                   | Surgical procedure Start date                     | Study Posology                                   | Subjects Total By arm Qu/contr   | Male/Female Black/White/ Other Age Range (Mean)   |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Q-LIV- 008-US           | 15 US, UK 1999                              | Phase III, single blind, standard treatment controlled, randomised Active control - Avitene, Gelfoam, Oxycel, Surgicel and Surgicel NuKnit, Thrombinar, Actifoam | Liver resection                                   | Quixil up to 10 mL                               | 121 58/63                        | 69/52 0/104/17 19-79 (57.1)                       |
| OFI-LIV- 003-B          | 4 Belgium France 1996                       | Phase II, controlled, comparative, open Active control - Tissucol                                                                                                | Living related donor liver graft transplantati on | Quixil 1-2 mL per 100 cm² cut surface authorised | 34 17/17                         | 21/13 0/34/0 0-42 (17.5)                          |
| OFI-LIV- 002-UK         | 2 UK 1996                                   | Phase II, open, non- comparative No control                                                                                                                      | Liver surgery longer                              | Quixil 1-2 mL per 100 cm² cut surface            | 21                               | 12/9 0/20/1 2-80 (58.0)                           |
| Q- THR009- US           | US, UK 1999                                 | Phase III, single blind, standard treatment controlled, randomised Control- Cauterization with diathermy or suture ligation no                                   | Total hip replacement                             | Quixil Up to 10 mL                               | 97 38/43                         | 53/44 6/89/2 34-88 (66.3)                         |
| OFI- TKR001- IL         | 3 Israel 1996                               | Phase II, single blind, standard treatment controlled, randomised Control- Standard surgical procedures product                                                  | Total knee replacement                            | Quixil 10-20 mL                                  | 59 29/30                         | 13/46 0/39/20 47-83 (69.9)                        |
| OFI- TKR004- US         | US 1997                                     | Phase III, single blind, standard treatment controlled, randomised Control- Ligation &diathermy                                                                  | Total knee replacement                            | Quixil Up to 10 mL                               | 53 25/28                         | 24/29 7/45/1 41-86 (69.0)                         |
| OFI- THR005- UK         | 1 UK 1996                                   | Phase II, open, pilot study Historical controls                                                                                                                  | Total hip replacement                             | Quixil Up to 10 mL                               | 13                               | 5/8 0/13/0 50-83 (67.7)                           |
| Q- CVS015- UK Medicinal | 1 UK 2001                                   | Phase II, single blind, controlled, randomised Active control- Kaltostat dressing                                                                                | Carotid endarter- ectomy                          | Quixil 1-5 mL                                    | 20 10/10                         | 14/6 0/19/1 62-89 (71.7)                          |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on clinical efficacy

A clinical study demonstrating haemostasis and suture support was conducted in a total of 147 patients (75  with  Evicel,  72  with  control)  undergoing  vascular  surgery  with  PTFE  grafts  and  another  study demonstrating haemostasis in soft tissue bleedings in a total of 135 patients (66 with Evicel, 69 with control)  undergoing  retroperitoneal  or  intra-abdominal  surgery.  Efficacy  has  been  demonstrated  in both surgical settings showing superiority over comparator.

<!-- image -->

The  applicant  additionally  sought  marketing  authorisation  for  the  indication  'promotion  of  tissue sealing'. Since no clinical studies have been performed to justify this claim, this indication could not be granted and the applicant has withdrawn this indication. Due to the mechanism of action of a fibrin sealant, the dose solely depends on the size of the tissue to be treated and therefore dose-response studies are not applicable. Data  are  too  limited  to  support  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  Evicel  in  children.  Of  135  patients undergoing retroperitoneal and intra-abdominal surgery who were included in the controlled study of Evicel, 4 patients treated with Evicel were aged 16 years or younger. Of these, 2 were children aged 2 and 5 years and 2 were adolescents of 16 years. No data are currently available for ages younger than 2 years. Clinical safety Two Phase III clinical studies have been performed with Evicel, one in vascular surgery, the other in retroperitoneal  or  intra-abdominal  surgery.  In  both  studies,  safety  and  efficacy  of  Evicel  were compared to a control group: manual compression in vascular surgery and Surgicel in retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery. · Patient exposure A total of 282 subjects were included in the two clinical trials with Evicel, 141 of which were treated with a single dose of Evicel (between 0.5 and 10 mL of combined product) and 141 of which were included in the control groups. · Study 400-05-001 Adverse events The AEs reported are summarised in Tables 11 and 12: Table 11: Number of patients experiencing any AE Note: Safety analysis set Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| Variable                                                                    | Evicel (n=75)   | MC (n=72)   | Total (n=147)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|-------------|-----------------|
| Total number of AEs                                                         | 113             | 158         | 271             |
| Number of patients with at least one in the following categories: Medicinal |                 |             |                 |
| AE                                                                          | 48 (64.0%)      | 51 (70.8%)  | 99 (67.3%)      |
| SAE                                                                         | 23 (30.7%)      | 21 (29.2%)  | 44 (29.9%)      |
| Severe AE                                                                   | 13 (17.3%)      | 16 (22.2%)  | 29 (19.7%)      |
| AE requiring medical/surgical action                                        | 42 (56.0%)      | 45 (62.5%)  | 87 (59.2%)      |
| Related or possibly related AE                                              | 9 (12.0%)       | 0 (0.0%)    | 9 (6.1%)        |

Excludes pre-treatment events

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 12: Adverse events by MEDRA coded term where an event is experienced by ≥ 5% patients on any treatment.

|                                                   |                            | Number (%)    | Number (%)   | Number (%)         |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------|--------------|--------------------|
| System Organ Class                                | Preferred Term             | Evicel (n=75) | MC (n=72)    | Total (n=147)      |
| Blood &Lymphatic System Disorders                 | Anaemia                    | 0 (0.0)       | 5 (6.9)      | 5 (3.4) authorised |
| Cardiac Disorders                                 | Cardiac Failure Congestive | 0 (0.0)       | 5 (6.9)      | 5 (3.4)            |
| Gastrointestinal Disorders                        | Nausea                     | 2 (2.0)       | 6 (8.3)      | 8 (5.4)            |
| Gastrointestinal Disorders                        | Constipation               | 2 (2.7)       | 5 (6.9)      | 7 (4.8)            |
| General Disorders &Administration Site Conditions | Oedema Peripheral          | 5 (6.7)       | 2 (2.8)      | 7 (4.8)            |
| Infections &Infestations                          | Urinary Tract Infection    | 1 (1.3)       | 4 (5.6)      | 5 (3.4)            |
| Infections &Infestations                          | Graft Infection            | 4 (5.3)       | 5 (6.9)      | 9 (6.1)            |
| Injury, Poisoning &Procedural Complications       | Vascular Graft Occlusion 1 | 2 (2.7)       | 5 (6.9)      | 7 (4.8)            |
| Injury, Poisoning &Procedural Complications       | Graft Thrombosis 1         | 5 (6.7)       | 0 (0.0)      | 5 (3.4)            |
| Vascular Disorders                                | Hypotension                | 1 (1.3)       | 5 (6.9)      | 6 (4.1)            |

Safety Analysis Set 1 In addition 4 patients (3 MC, 1 Evicel) had graft occlusion/thrombosis coded to the following MedDRA preferred terms: Peripheral Vascular Disease (Evicel), AV Fistula Thrombosis, Graft Infection, and Graft Complication No  treatment  differences  were  found  when  assessing  measurements  of  vital  signs  (systolic  and diastolic BP and heart rate), requirements for blood products post-operatively or wound assessments. The  safety  parameters  assessed  in  this  study  were  coagulation  parameters,  full  blood  count  and adverse events. None of the clinically significant laboratory abnormalities reported was considered to have a causal relationship to the study medication. The adverse event profile was very much as expected in this patient population and only 9 (12.0%) patients in the Evicel group experienced adverse events that were considered to have a possible causal relationship to treatment. As the investigators considered MC to be a standard surgical technique to achieve haemostasis, rather than an investigational product, no adverse events were ascribed a causal relationship to MC. Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events A total of 31 SAEs were reported in 23 patients treated with Evicel and 29 SAEs in 21 patients in the MC group. This includes four events with an outcome of death, two in the Evicel group and two in the control group. The most frequent SAEs, in increasing order of frequency ranging from 2 to 4 patients reporting an occurrence, were graft thrombosis, incision site haemorrhage, respiratory failure and graft infection in the Evicel patients and vascular graft occlusion, respiratory failure, hypotension, peripheral ischaemia, congestive cardiac failure and graft infection in the control patients. Seven SAEs in the Evicel patients were considered  as possibly related to  study  treatment,  whereas none of the SAEs in the control group. The control treatment of manual compression was considered by the investigators to be a standard surgical technique and not to have a potential causal relationship to the adverse events. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Cardiovascular events

Some  preferred  terms  have  been  used  interchangeably  by  the  investigators,  but  should  be  taken together in order to come to a comparison between the two treatments groups. Table 13 summarizes different terms of 'complications', 'haemorrhage' and 'thrombosis/occlusion'.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 13: Interchangeably used terms of AE.

| Term                  | Preferred term                          | Evicel (n=75)   | MC (n=72)    |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|--------------|
| Complication          | Arteriovenous fistula site complication | 1               | 0            |
| Complication          | Graft complication                      | 0               | 1            |
| Complication          | Vascular graft complication             | 2               | 2 authorised |
| Complication          | Total                                   | 3 ( 4.0% )      | 3 ( 4.2% )   |
| Haemorrhage           | Anastomotic haemorrhage                 | 0               | 1            |
| Haemorrhage           | Arteriovenous fistula haemorrhage       | 1               | 0            |
| Haemorrhage           | Graft haemorrhage                       | 0               | 1            |
| Haemorrhage           | Total                                   | 1 ( 1.3% )      | 2 (2.8% )    |
| Thrombosis/ Occlusion | Arteriovenous fistula thrombosis        | 0               | 1            |
| Thrombosis/ Occlusion | Graft thrombosis                        | 5               | 0            |
| Thrombosis/ Occlusion | Vascular graft occlusion                | 2               | 5            |
| Thrombosis/ Occlusion | Total                                   | 7 ( 9.3% )      | 6 ( 8.3% )   |
| All                   |                                         | 11 ( 14.7% )    | 11 ( 15.3% ) |

| Variable                                                                    | Evicel (n=67)   | Control (n=68)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| Total number of AEs                                                         | 183             | 200              |
| Number of patients with at least one in the following categories: Medicinal |                 |                  |
| AE                                                                          | 46 (68.7%)      | 48 (70.6%)       |
| SAE                                                                         | 12 (17.9%)      | 15 (22.1%)       |
| Severe AE                                                                   | 6 (9.0%)        | 10 (14.7%)       |
| AE requiring medical/surgical action                                        | 42 (62.7%)      | 46 (67.6%)       |
| Related or possibly related AE/SAE†                                         | 1 (1.5%)        | 2 (2.9%)         |

As reported 6 out of 75 (8 %) patients in the Evicel group were found to have graft thrombosis/occlusion within the first 12 days after surgery, compared to only one patient out of 72 (1.4 %) in the MC group. Later, at 5-weeks follow-up, 2 patients in the Evicel group and 5 patients in the MC group were further diagnosed with graft thrombosis/occlusion. For resolution of this complication, 7  patients  (9.3%)  in  the  Evicel  group  and  3  patients  (4.2%)  in  the  MC  group  required  a  surgical intervention. The applicant provided a thorough evaluation of all cases of early graft thrombosis/occlusion adverse events (TOAE). More information on the clinical courses of the events, on the diagnostic procedures and on the surgical interventions performed was provided. After this review, four early TOAE have to be  taken  into  consideration  for  the  Evicel  group  and  two  patients  with  early  TOAE  in  the  control group. · Study 400-05-006 Adverse events The AEs reported are summarised in Tables 14 and 15: Table 14: Number of patients experiencing any AE Medicinal product no longer authorised

Note: Safety set

† Causality assessment by sponsor; investigators did not consider any AEs to have a potential causal relationship to study treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 15: Adverse events by MEDRA coded term where an event is experienced by ≥ 5% patients on any treatment.

None of the clinically significant laboratory abnormalities (adverse events) reported was considered to be  related  to  the  study  medication  and  there  were  no  apparent  differences  between  groups  in  the parameters assessed. The  safety  parameters  assessed  in  this  study  were  coagulation  parameters,  full  blood  count  and adverse events. No clinically relevant changes in clinical laboratory results were noted from the preoperative  to  post-operative  intervals  in  either  of  the  study  groups  and  there  were  no  apparent differences between groups. Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events A total of 34 SAEs were reported during study 400-05-006; 16 SAEs were reported in 12 patients in the Evicel group (including one event with an outcome of death) and 18 SAEs were reported in 15 patients in the Surgicel group. All were considered by the investigator to have no relationship to the study  treatment.  Three  events  were  ascribed  a  possible  relationship  to  the  study  treatment  by  the sponsor following medical review, one of which occurred in the Evicel group (abdominal abscess) and 2 in the Surgicel group (abdominal abscess and pelvic abscess). Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                                                   |                        | Number (%)    | Number (%)         | Number (%)    |
|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------|---------------|--------------------|---------------|
| System Organ Class                                | Preferred Term         | Evicel (n=67) | Surgicel (n=68)    | Total (n=135) |
| Blood &Lymphatic System Disorders                 | Anaemia                | 3 (4.5)       | 4 (5.9)            | 7 (5.2)       |
| Gastrointestinal Disorders                        | Nausea                 | 9 (13.4)      | 6 (8.8)            | 15 (11.1)     |
| Gastrointestinal Disorders                        | Vomiting               | 4 (5.0)       | 1 (1.5)            | 5 (3.7)       |
| General Disorders &Administration Site Conditions | Oedema peripheral      | 6 (9.0)       | 4 (5.9)            | 10 (7.4)      |
| General Disorders &Administration Site Conditions | Pyrexia                | 7 (10.4)      | 6 (8.8) authorised | 13 (9.6)      |
| Investigations                                    | Haematocrit decreased  | 3 (4.5)       | 4 (5.9)            | 7 (5.2)       |
| Investigations                                    | Haemoglobin decreased  | 4 (6.0)       | 4 (5.9)            | 8 (5.9)       |
| Investigations                                    | Urine output decreased | 3 (4.5)       | 5 (7.4)            | 8 (5.9)       |
| Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders                | Hyperglycaemia         | 2 (3.0)       | 5 (7.4)            | 7 (5.2)       |
| Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders                | Hypokalaemia           | 8 (11.9)      | 7 (10.3)           | 15 (11.1)     |
| Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders                | Hypomagnesaemia longer | 3 (4.5)       | 4 (5.9)            | 7 (5.2)       |
| Psychiatric Disorders                             | Anxiety                | 2 (3.0)       | 4 (5.9)            | 6 (4.4)       |
| Psychiatric Disorders                             | Insomnia               | 8 (11.9)      | 6 (8.8)            | 14 (10.4)     |
| Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders            | Pruritis no            | 5 (7.5)       | 5 (7.4)            | 10 (7.4)      |
| Vascular Disorders                                | Hypertension           | 2 (3.0)       | 5 (7.4)            | 7 (5.2)       |
| Vascular Disorders                                | Hypotension            | 5 (7.5)       | 9 (13.2)           | 14 (10.4)     |

The most common SAEs were urinary retention (1 Evicel, 1 Surgicel), abdominal abscess (1 Evicel, 1 Surgicel) and ileus paralytic (1 Evicel, 1 Surgicel). All other events were reported on a single occasion only.  The  System  Organ  Class  which  included  the  largest  number  of  SAEs  was  Infections  and Infestations with 8 events (3 Evicel, 5 Surgicel).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One death occurred during the study. Subject 22008 (Evicel) died due to hepatorenal syndrome. This event was not related to study treatment.

An internal  review  of  adverse  events  that  could  have  been  potential  bleeding  related  complications revealed that 18 patients were affected, with 7/66 (10.6%) in the Evicel group and 11/69 (15.9%) in the Surgicel group.

<!-- image -->

· Laboratory findings Abnormalities in haematology, coagulation and biochemical parameters (anaemia, low Hb values, low haematocrit, thrombocytopenia, increased PTT, electrolyte imbalances, hyperglycemia) were reported as  adverse  events.  The  events  were  not  considered  to  be  related  to  study  treatment  and  all  patients recovered. · Safety in special populations The applicant provided data on group differences in adverse event frequencies for men and women. Adverse events were listed, which showed a difference in frequency of at least 5% between the Evicel group and the control group in men and in women. Study 400-05-006 included a paediatric sub-group of 11 patients aged ≤ 16  years,  of  which  4  were treated  with  Evicel  and  7  with  the  control  product,  Surgicel.  The  majority  of  adverse  events  were observed in the Surgicel group (27 events affecting 6 out of 7 Surgicel patients [86%]) compared to the Evicel group which reported 2 events affecting 1 out of 4 patients [25%]. · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions Studies were not performed. · Discontinuation due to adverse events None reported. · Post marketing experience Safety  data  from  post-marketing  experience  with  Evicel  in  the  US  market  was  provided.  This  data incorporates the exposure and the reported adverse events since product launch (September 2006) and up to March 2008. For a total of 81,448 kits supplied, three serious adverse drug reactions were reported for Evicel: two cases  of  fluid  retention  and  one  cerebrovascular  accident.  The  latter  was  reported  as  hemiparesis during a carotid endarterectomy where Evicel was used as spray. Emergent angiography demonstrated patency  of  the  carotid  system  and  the  intracranial  circulation  without  evidence  for  thrombus  or embolism.  The  surgeon  felt  that  the  most  likely  cause  was  hypoperfusion  during  clamping  for  the endarterectomy It has to be noted, that the spray tip was held very close to the bleeding surface (about 5 cm instead of the recommended 10-15 cm, see SPC) during spraying. A contribution of Evicel to this ADR either by a thrombogenic effect or by a falsely used spray device cannot be excluded. The applicant will have to instruct the surgeons on the correct use and to report such events according to the RMP. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Discussion on clinical safety

Rarely antibodies occur after use of fibrin sealant products containing only human proteins. Due to the limited patient exposure to Evicel a possible risk for immunogenicity and for allergic reaction cannot be assessed. Data gained with the use of Quixil are of only limited value since the composition of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

products  is  different.  This  issue  will  be  subject  of  post-approval  surveillance  and  the  applicant  has committed to perform follow-up on immunogenicity events as a follow-up measure.

erform easurements  of  viscosity  of  the  fibrinogen  and  of  the  thrombin  component  (three  lots  each)  in No data have been provided to substantiate  the  recommendation  regarding  the  optimal  temperature range for the use of Evicel. Therefore, the applicant has committed to provide in vitro data covering physical  examinations  to  demonstrate  evidence  for  the  optimal  temperature  range.  Temperature  is supposed to have relevant impact especially on the viscosity of the components, mainly the fibrinogen component. A low viscosity is regarded a pre-condition for successful mixing of both components, and,  therefore,  the  correct  formation  and  quality  of  a  fibrin  clot.  The  applicant  will  p m relation to temperature. (e.g. at 20°C, 25°C, 30°C, 33°C, 35°C, 37°C) as a follow-up measure.

| Safety issue                                                       | activities Proposed pharmacovigilance   | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Immunogenicity, h r ypersensitivity, allergic eaction, anaphylaxis | Routine Pharmacovigilance               | • Contraindication in section 4.3 of SPC stating: Hypersensitivity to the active substances or to any of the excipients • Warning in section 4.4 of SPC stating: As with any protein product, allergic type hypersensitivity reactions are possible. Signs of hypersensitivity reactions include hives, generalised |

rveillance (PASS). This should be an observational, nonterventional study in vascular surgery, e.g. in 300 patients with submission of safety data every 100 een established in controlled clinical trials. Therefore, the product should be administered to pregnant ecommended as well that every time Evicel is administered to a patient, the ame and batch number of the product are recorded in order to maintain a link between the patient and e batch of the product. he CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described by the applicant fulfils the gislative requirements. Table Summary of the risk Complications related to  graft  occlusion  and/or  graft  infection  and/or  thromboembolic  events  could potentially  occur  in  vascular  surgery,  due  to  the  nature  of  the  product  and  warnings  have  been included in sections 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC. Since so far the number of patients treated in the critical indication of vascular surgery is quite small, the applicant has committed to gain further safety data in the context of a post-authorisation safety su in patients or half-yearly, whatever is sooner. The safety of fibrin sealants/haemostatics for use in human pregnancy or during breast-feeding has not b and lactating women only if clearly needed and a warning has been included in section 4.6 of the SPC. The product is intended for epilesional use only. Life threatening thromboembolic complications may occur  if  the  product  is  unintentionally  applied  intravascularly  and  warnings  have  been  included  in sections 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC. In addition, the applicant has committed to document difficulties with administration in a systematic way and to submit an evaluation of these data annually as a follow up measure.  It is strongly r n th 2.5 Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system T le Risk Management Plan The MAA submitted a risk management plan. management plan Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

|                                                             |                                      | urticaria, tightness of the chest, wheezing, hypotension and anaphylaxis. If these symptoms occur, the administration should be immediately discontinued. In case of e s shock, standard medical treatment for shock should be implemented. • Undesirable effects in section 4.8 of SPC listing potential hypersensitivity and allergic reactions as well as th possible development of antibodie against components of fibrin sealants.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Thromboembolic events ue to intravascular dministration d a | Routine Pharmacovigilance            | in section 4.3 of SPC stating: c ct ction 4.8 of • Contraindication stating: Evicel must not be applied intravascularly • Warning in section 4.4 of SPC Do not apply intravascularly. Life threatening thromboemboli complications may occur if the produ is applied intravascularly. • Undesirable effects in se SPC listing potential reaction due to longer authorised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Transmission of Infections Medicinal                        | Routine Pharmacovigilance product no | intravascular injection also applies to un ciency or increased • Warning in section 4.4 of SPC stating: Standard measures to prevent infections resulting from the use of medicinal products prepared from human blood or plasma include selection of donors, screening of individual donations and plasma pools for specific markers of infection and the inclusion of effective manufacturing steps for the inactivation/removal of viruses. Despite this, when medicinal products prepared from human blood or plasma are administered, the possibility of transmitting infections agents cannot be totally excluded. This known or emerging viruses and other pathogens. The measures taken are considered effective for enveloped viruses such as HIV, Hepatitis C Virus and Hepatitis B Virus and for the non-enveloped virus Hepatitis A Virus. The measures taken may be of limited value against non- enveloped viruses such as parvovirus B19. Parvovirus B19 infection may be serious for pregnant women (foetal infection) and for individuals with immunodefi |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

|                                                                                                           |                                                                                                | anaemia). It is strongly recommended that every time Evicel is administered to a patient, the name and batch number of the product are recorded in order to maintain a link between the patient and the batch of the product.                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Complications related to graft occlusion, infection or thromboembolism, particularly in vascular surgery. | outine Pharmacovigilance Post Authorization Surveillance gery R study (PASS) in vascular sur . | occlusion and graft infection as potential adverse events • Undesirable effects in section 4.8 of SPC list vascular graft authorised                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Incorrect Product Application                                                                             | Routine Pharmacovigilance                                                                      | PC rts protected (covered) to prevent tissue adhesion at undesired sites. • Warning in Section 4.4 of S stating: For epilesional use only. • Warning in Section 4.4 of SPC stating: Before administration of Evicel, care is to be taken that pa of the body outside the desired application area are sufficiently longer |

fter  local  application,  absorption  of  thrombin  into  the  plasma  is  slow  and  consists  principally  of A thrombin degradation products which are eliminated.

Post Authorization Surveillance gery study (PASS) in vascular sur . rts protected (covered) to prevent tissue adhesion at undesired sites. Warning in Section 4.4 of SPC stating: Before administration of Evicel, care is to be taken that pa of the body outside the desired application area are sufficiently The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the application, is of the opinion that no dditional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. all conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation a 2.6 Over Quality Information  on  development,  manufacture  and  control  of  the  drug  substances  and  drug  products  of both components of Evicel, Human Fibrinogen and Human Thrombin were presented in a satisfactory manner.  The  quality  data  submitted  indicate  satisfactory  consistency  and  uniformity  of  important product quality characteristics, and these in turn lead to the conclusion that the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. Safety with regard to transmissible agents, such as human TSE and enveloped and non-enveloped viruses has been demonstrated in compliance with the relevant CHMP guidelines. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Studies performed in bacteria to determine mutagenicity were negative for Thrombin alone, Biological Active Component (containing fibrinogen, citrate, glycine, tranexamic acid, and arginine hydrochloride), TnBP alone, and Triton X-100 alone at all concentrations tested. All concentrations of s and micronuclei induction. the  combination  of  TnBP  and  Triton  X-100  also  tested  negative  in  assays  performed  to  determine mammalian cell mutagenicity, chromosomal aberration Medicinal product no longer authorised

No toxicological effects due to the solvent detergent reagents (TnBP and Triton X-100) used in the virus inactivation procedure are expected since the residual levels are less than 5 µg/ml.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Neurotoxicity studies performed with Evicel confirmed that subdural administration in the rabbit was not  associated  with  any  evidence  of  neurotoxicity.  Neurobehavioral  observations  for  14±1  days howed no abnormal findings. No major macroscopic signs of local intolerance and no treatment croscopic findings were observed. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid did not reveal major signs f inflammation. s related ma o leedings  in  a  total  of  135  patients  (66  with  Evicel,  69  with  control) ndergoing  retroperitoneal  or  intra-abdominal  surgery.  In  both  studies,  efficacy  of  Evicel  was (retroperitoneal or traabdominal surgery) on soft tissue bleedings with a success rate of 95.5% haemostasis at the target he applicant additionally sought marketing authorisation for the indication 'promotion of sealing', indication could not e granted and the applicant withdrew this indication. mited to support the safety and effectiveness of Evicel in children. total of 282 subjects were included in two clinical trials with Evicel, 141 of which were treated with s)  no  adverse  events  were e  reported  in  rare  cases  in  association  with  fibrin  sealants  are ypersensitivity  or  allergic  reactions.  Section  4.8  of  the  SPC  gives  general  information.  However, Efficacy Efficacy has been demonstrated showing superiority in two Phase III randomised, controlled clinical studies  with  Evicel.  One  study  in  haemostasis  and  suture  support  was  conducted  in  a  total  of  147 patients  (75  with  Evicel,  72  with  control)  undergoing  vascular  surgery  and  another  study  in haemostasis  of  soft  tissue  b u compared to a control group: manual compression in vascular surgery and Surgicel in retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery. In  study  400-05-001  (vascular  surgery)  85.3  %  of  patients  treated  with  Evicel  had  ceased  suture bleedings  four  minutes  after  randomisation,  improving  up  to  96.0%  at  the  end  of  the  observation period at 10 minutes after randomisation. For comparison, manual compression was effective in 38.9% after 4 minutes and finally in 69.4% of patients. Treatment failures occurred in 8.0% (Evicel) versus 31.9% (MC) of subjects. Similar efficacy results were found in study 400-05-006 in time  point  of  10  minutes  after  randomisation  compared  to  81.2%  in  the  active  control  group. Treatment failures occurred in 4.5% (Evicel) versus 18.8% (Surgicel) of subjects. T however, since no clinical studies have been performed to justify this claim, this b Data are too li Safety A a single dose of Evicel (between 0.5 and 10 mL of combined product) and 141 of which were included in the control groups. In the study in retroperitoneal and intra-abdominal surgery (study 400-05-006) involving 135 patients (67  patients  were  treated  with  Evicel  and  68  were  control  group  patient considered to be causally related to the study treatment according to the investigator assessments. The sponsor  considered  three  serious  adverse  events  (SAE)  (abdominal  abscess  [2],  pelvic  abscess)  as being possibly related to study treatment, one of them in the Evicel group. Adverse  reactions  which  may  b h since no such reactions have been reported during clinical trials with Evicel, the frequency of these events with Evicel is not known. Medicinal product no longer authorised

t  12  postperative days in the Evicel group with an increased need for surgical intervention compared to the two cases in the control group. In  study  400-05-001 in patients undergoing vascular grafting procedures involving 147 patients (75 with Evicel, 72 with control), a total of 16 subjects were reported to have had a graft thrombosis/occlusion  adverse  event  during  the  study  period  (5-week  observation  period)  being  the events  evenly  distributed  across  treatment  arms.  However,  the  risk  was  higher  in  the  firs o control group. Review of all cases of thrombosis/occlusion adverse events (TOAE) at this time point identified four cases of early TOAE in the Evicel group and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials and post-marketing have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

safety  concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the roposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. Having considered the p

<!-- image -->

r a waiver is not granted. Therefore, the applicant committed to perform a ser testing post-authorisation. cel in the critical dication of vascular surgery is quite small and in order to gain better understanding on the safety of surveillance (PASS) in vascular surgery as a follow-up measure. g considered the data submitted, was of the ance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns. l risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information. t the risk-benefit balance of Evicel in upportive treatment in surgery where standard surgical techniques are insufficient, for improvement f haemostasis and as suture support for haemostasis in vascular surgery was favourable and therefore commended the granting of the marketing authorisation. · User consultation The applicant's request fo u Risk-benefit assessment The benefit/risk assessment regarding quality, non-clinical and clinical aspects of Evicel is considered to be positive in 'supportive treatment in surgery where standard surgical techniques are insufficient, for improvement of haemostasis and as suture support for haemostasis in vascular surgery' when used by experienced surgeons. The manufacturing process of Evicel has been optimized and validated to ensure  consistent  quality  and  safety  of  Evicel's  Human  Fibrinogen  as  well  as  Human  Thrombin component.  The  non-clinical  testing  program  for  Evicel  revealed  no  evidence  for  a  particular toxicological  risk  for  the  intended  clinical  use.  The  clinical  development  program  comprised  two randomized  clinical  trials,  one  in  retroperitoneal  and  intra-abdominal  surgery,  and  one  in  vascular surgery. Efficacy results of both studies indicated superiority of Evicel over the control treatment. No safety  concerns  derived  from  the  study  in  retroperitoneal  and  intra-abdominal  surgery.  However, thrombotic events or occlusion of the graft (four cases of early TOAE in the Evicel group and two cases in the control group), became an issue of concern from the study in vascular surgery. Although these findings were not statistically significant, it has to be noted that complications related to graft occlusion and/or graft infection and/or thromboembolic events could potentially occur in this kind of surgery and due to the nature of the product. The CHMP considers that at this point the risk does not overcome the benefits of Evicel. Since so far the number of patients treated with Evi in the  product,  the  applicant  has  committed  to  perform  an  observational,  non-interventional  postauthorisation safety A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, havin opinion that:  pharmacovigil  no additiona Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology, and clinical safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered by consensus tha s o re Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->