---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:55:14
document_pages: 44
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/fablyn-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
document_name: fablyn-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 26.4505067
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 17:47:13.921227
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

Doc.Ref.: EMEA/14045/2009

ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR FABLYN International Nonproprietary Name: lasofoxifene Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/000977 Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

|   1. | BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE........................................... 3                                                         |
|------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  1.1 | Submission of the dossier ........................................................................................................ 3         |
|  1.2 | Steps taken for the assessment of the product.......................................................................... 3                    |
|  2   | SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 4                     |
|  2.1 | Introduction.............................................................................................................................. 4 |
|  2.2 | Quality aspects......................................................................................................................... 5   |
|  2.3 | Non-clinical aspects................................................................................................................. 8      |
|  2.4 | Clinical aspects ...................................................................................................................... 17   |
|  2.5 | Pharmacovigilance................................................................................................................. 38        |
|  2.6 | Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation ...................................... 40                                    |

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE

## 1.1 Submission of the dossier

The applicant Pfizer Limited submitted on 10 January 2008 an application for Marketing Authorisation  to  the  European  Medicines  Agency  (EMEA)  for  FABLYN,  through  the  centralised procedure under Article 3 (2) (a) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. The eligibility to the centralised procedure was agreed upon by the EMEA/CHMP on 24 May 2007.

- The Rapporteurs circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the list of outstanding issues to all CHMP members on 6 November 2008.

The  legal  basis  for  this  application  refers  to  Article  8.3  of  Directive  2001/83/EC,  as  amended  complete and independent application. Scientific Advice: The applicant did not seek scientific advice at the CHMP. Licensing status: A new application was filed in the USA. The product was not licensed in any country at the time of submission of the application. The Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur appointed by the CHMP were: Rapporteur: Steffen Thirstrup Co-Rapporteur: Pieter de Graeff 1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product · The application was received by the EMEA on 10 January 2008. · The procedure started on 30 January 2008. · The Rapporteur's  first  Assessment  Report  was  circulated  to  all  CHMP  members  on  21  April 2008. The Co-Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all CHMP members on 23 April 2008. · During  the  meeting  on  27-30  May  2008,  the  CHMP  agreed  on  the  consolidated  List  of Questions to be sent to the applicant. The final consolidated List of Questions was sent to the applicant on 30 May 2008. · The  applicant  submitted  the  responses  to  the  CHMP  consolidated  List  of  Questions  on 22 July 2008. · A GCP inspection related to clinical trial protocol A2181002 was requested by the CHMP and was carried out at one site in Argentina and one site in Romania. The final integrated Inspection Report was issued on 25 July 2008. · The Rapporteurs circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the List of Questions to all CHMP members on 10 September 2008. · During the CHMP meeting on 22-25 September 2008, the CHMP agreed on a list of outstanding issues to be addressed in writing and/or in an oral explanation by the applicant. · The applicant submitted the responses to the CHMP list of outstanding issues on 20 October 2008. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- During the CHMP meeting on 17-20 November 2008, outstanding issues were addressed by the applicant during an oral explanation before the CHMP on 19 November 2008.
- During the CHMP meeting on 17-20 November 2008, the CHMP agreed on a second list of outstanding issues to be addressed in writing by the applicant.
- The  applicant  submitted  the  responses  to  the  second  CHMP  list  of  outstanding  issues  on 26 November 2008.
- The  Rapporteurs  circulated  the  Joint  Assessment  Report  on  the  applicant's  responses  to  the second list of outstanding issues to all CHMP members on 4 December 2008.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- During  the  meeting  on  15-18  December  2008,  the  CHMP,  in  the  light  of  the  overall  data submitted  and  the  scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued  a  positive  opinion  for granting a Marketing Authorisation to FABLYN on 18 December 2008. The applicant provided the  letter  of  undertaking  on  the  follow-up  measures  to  be  fulfilled  post-authorisation  on 12 December 2008.

## 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 2.1 Introduction

The application for marketing authorization is a so called 'full application' meaning that a complete dossier composed of administrative information, complete quality data, non-clinical and clinical data based  on  applicants'  own  tests  and  studies  and/or  bibliographic  literature  substituting/supporting certain tests or studies has been submitted.

Osteoporosis is a systematic skeletal disorder characterised by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. Osteoporotic fractures cause substantial clinical and economic burden for society. Vertebral and hip fractures have been, for many years, associated with increased morbidity and mortality. More recently, an  association  has  been  shown  between  increased  mortality  and  a  collective  group  of  other  major nonvertebral fractures (i.e. pelvis, distal femur, proximal tibia, multiple ribs and proximal humerus). Hip, vertebral, forearm and humeral fractures also reduce, to various extents, health-related quality of life with deleterious effects lasting up to several years after the fracture event. Primary or involutional osteoporosis develops as a result of excessive age-related bone loss. Age and menopause  are  the  two  main  determinants  of  osteoporosis.  The  cessation  of  ovarian  production  of oestrogen, at the time of the menopause, results in an accelerated rate of bone loss in women. The  aim  of  the  pharmacological  intervention  is  to  decrease  the  incidence  of  fractures.  Several compounds with original modes of action have been approved for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis after demonstration of an anti-fracture efficacy at the level of the axial skeleton (spine) or appendicular  skeleton  (all  non-vertebral,  major  non-vertebral,  or  hip).  These  products  include bisphosphonates with daily or intermittent dosing formulations, selective oestrogen receptor modulators,  calcitonin,  active  vitamin  D  metabolites,  teriparatide,  and  strontium  ranelate.  Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has been shown to reduce the risk of fracture, but increases the risk of breast cancer and cardiovascular diseases. Lasofoxifene belongs to the class of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). SERMs exert selective agonist and antagonist effects on different estrogen target tissues and are chemically diverse and act by binding to the α and β isoforms of the estrogen receptor (ER α or ER β ), which have distinct functions in cells. The resultant conformational change and receptor dimerization allows interaction with coregulators and promoter regions on DNA. The EMEA/CHMP Guideline on the Evaluation of Medicinal products in the Treatment of Primary Osteoporosis  (CPMP/EWP/552/95),  in  its  current  version  (Revision  2),  is  applicable  for  this application.  EMEA/CHMP  scientific  advice  has  not  been  obtained  by  the  applicant for the development programme. Medicinal product no longer authorised

FABLYN  is available in film-coated tablets containing lasofoxifene tartrate, equivalent to 500 micrograms lasofoxifene. The recommended dose is one 500 microgram tablet daily taken any time  of  day  without  regard  to  food  and  beverage  intake.  Supplemental  calcium  and/or  vitamin  D should be added to the diet if daily intake is inadequate.

The claimed indication at time of application read as follows: 'FABLYN is indicated for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at increased risk of fracture. A significant reduction in the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

incidence  of  vertebral  and  non-vertebral  fractures  but  not  hip  fractures  has  been  demonstrated  (see section 5.1).'

## The approved indication is:

'FABLYN  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  osteoporosis  in  postmenopausal  women  at increased  risk  of  fracture.  A  significant  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  vertebral  and  nonvertebral fractures but not hip fractures has been demonstrated (see section 5.1).

When  determining  the  choice  of  FABLYN  or  other  therapies,  including  estrogens,  for  a postmenopausal woman, consideration should be given to menopausal symptoms, effects on uterine and breast tissues, and cardiovascular risks and benefits (see section 5.1).'

<!-- image -->

2.2 Quality aspects Introduction FABLYN  is  presented  as  film-coated  tablets  containing  lasofoxifene  tartrate,  equivalent  to  500 micrograms  lasofoxifene.  Other  ingredients  are  cellulose  microcrystalline,  lactose  anhydrous,  silica (colloidal  anhydrous),  croscarmellose  sodium,  magnesium  stearate.  The  film  tablet  coat  contains hypromellose, titanium dioxide, lactose monohydrate and glycerol triacetate and sunset yellow FCF aluminium lake (E110). The tablets are packed in PVC blisters sealed with aluminium foil or HDPE bottles. Active Substance Lasofoxifene  has  the  chemical  name  6S-Phenyl-5R-[4-(2-pyrrolidin-1-yl-ethoxy)-phenyl]-5,6,7,8tetrahydro-naphthalen-2-ol, 2S,3S-Dihydroxy-succinic acid, and the structural formula is the following: Lasofoxifene tartrate  is  a  nonhygroscopic,  white  to  off-white  solid  and  its  aqueous  solubility  is  pH dependant.  The  polymorphic  form  is  form  A,  no  other  forms  have  been  discovered  during development. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Manufacture

The synthesis of lasofoxifene tartrate drug substance consists of five steps.

Adequate information  on  the  starting  materials  and  reagents  and  solvents  were  provided,  including specifications,  methods  and  where  relevant  also  validations.  Specifications  have  been  set  for  the intermediates,  starting  materials  and  reagents.  The  impurities  are  discussed.  Methods  and  where relevant validations have been provided

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Batch  analysis  data  produced  with  the  proposed  synthetic  route  provided  show  that  the  active substance can be manufactured reproducibly.

## · Specification

The active  substance  specifications  include  tests  for  appearance,  identification  (HPLC,  IR  or  NIR), assay (HPLC), tartaric acid content (HPLC), water content, heavy metals, residue on ignition (Ph Eur), residual solvents (GC), purity (HPLC), chiral purity (HPLC), particle size.

The specifications reflect all relevant quality attributes of the active substance. The analytical methods used in the routine controls are suitability described. The validation studies are in accordance with the ICH Guidelines. Impurity limits in the specification are justified by toxicology studies.

All  excipients  chosen  are  well-known  and  comply  with  the  Ph  Eur,  except  for  sunset  yellow  FCF aluminium lake. The choice and function of the excipients in the formulation were described.

Batch analysis data of a number of batches of active substance were provided. The results are within the specifications and consistent from batch to batch. · Stability Three batches were packed in the double LDPE anti-static liners in stainless steel drums and stored according  to  ICH  guidelines  for  up  to  60  months  at  5  °C/60%  RH  and  25  °C/60%  RH,  up  to    12 months at 30 °C/60% RH and up to 6 months at 40 °C/75% RH. Site specific stability studies were also performed, with data available up to 48 months for three batches at 5 °C/60% RH, 25 °C/60% RH and 30 °C/60% RH, and up to 6 months at 40 °C/75% RH. The  stability  parameters  investigated  were  appearance,  water  content,  assay,  achiral  purity,  chiral purity and particle size. In addition photostability and degradation studies were performed. The results justify a retest period proposed by the company in the intended packaging. Medicinal Product · Pharmaceutical Development During  development,  several  immediate  release  oral  forms  were  developed  and  for  tablets  several strengths were formulated. The active substance is compatible with the excipients which were shown by  compatibility  studies  and  finished  product  stability.  A  bioequivalence  study  was  performed showing bioequivalence between the clinical formulation and the proposed commercial formulation. The manufacturing process was justified and no critical process steps were identified. The  excipients  used  in  the  tablet  core  are  cellulose  microcrystalline,  lactose  anhydrous,  silica (colloidal anhydrous), croscarmellose sodium, magnesium stearate, and the film tablet coat contains hypromellose, titanium dioxide, lactose monohydrate and glycerol triacetate and sunset yellow FCF aluminium lake (E110). Medicinal product no longer authorised

FABLYN is  packaged  in  HDPE  bottles  or  in  PVC  /  Aluminium  blisters.  The  packaging  material components have been sufficiently described and the specifications established are in compliance with EU Guideline on plastic immediate packaging materials where relevant.

## · Adventitious agents

Except for lactose anhydrous and lactose monohydrate no excipients are of animal or human origin. It is  confirmed  that  the  lactose  is  produced  from  milk  from  healthy  animals  in  the  same  condition  as

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

those used to collect milk for human consumption and that the lactose has been prepared without the use of ruminant material other than calf rennet according to the Note for Guidance on Minimising the Risk  of  Transmitting  Animal  Spongiform  Encephalopathy  Agents  Via  Human  and  veterinary medicinal products'.

## · Manufacture of the Product

The proposed commercial manufacturing process is considered as conventional but it is regarded as a non-standard process as the active substance is present in a low amount. Sufficient experience from manufacture of low dose products has however been demonstrated.

The  manufacturing  process  was  validated  by  a  number  of  studies  for  the  major  steps  of  the manufacturing process. The manufacturing process has adequately been validated and is satisfactory. The in process controls are adequate for this pharmaceutical form. The batch analysis  data  show  that  the  product  can  be  manufactured  reproducibly  according  to  the agreed finished product specification, which is suitable for control of this oral preparation. · Product Specification The product specifications include tests by validated methods for description, identification (HPLC, TLC),  assay  (HPLC),  uniformity  of  dosage  units  (Ph  Eur),  water  content,  dissolution,  individual degradation products (HPLC), total degradations products (HPLC), and microbial purity (Ph Eur). The tests and limits of the specifications for the finished product are appropriate to control the quality of the finished product for the intended purpose. Batch analysis data on several commercial scale batches confirm satisfactory uniformity of the product at release. · Stability of the Product Three production scale batches were stored at 30 ° C/65% RH for 36 months and at 40ºC/75% RH for 6 months in the proposed market packaging materials. Five bottle/fill configurations were tested at the 30 ° C/65%RH condition. Parameters investigated were appearance, assay, chiral purity, degradation products, water content and dissolution. Microbial purity has been tested for in one batch (both packagings) at the 12 month and 36 month time point. In addition, one production batch was stored for photostability and under stress conditions. Based on available stability data, the proposed shelf life and storage conditions as stated in the SPC are acceptable. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

Information  on  development,  manufacture  and  control  of  the  drug  substance  and  drug  product  has been  presented  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  results  of  tests  carried  out  indicate  satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important product quality characteristics, and these in turn lead to the conclusion that the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic.

At the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a number of minor unresolved quality issues having no impact  on  the  Benefit/Risk  ratio  of  the  product.  The  applicant  gave  a  Letter  of  Undertaking  and committed to resolve these as Follow Up Measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.3 Non-clinical aspects

## Introduction

A comprehensive nonclinical toxicity study programme was conducted prior to and in parallel with the clinical  program.  These  studies  included  a  battery  of  both in  vitro and in  vivo genotoxicity  studies, safety pharmacology studies, acute and repeated dose oral studies, rodent carcinogenicity studies, and developmental and reproductive toxicity studies.

All  the  pivotal  toxicity  studies  were  conducted  in  compliance  with  GLP  regulations.  The  safety pharmacology  studies  were  not  conducted  in  compliance  with  GLP  in  accordance  with  the  current guideline. Nevertheless, the GLP-compliant repeat-dose toxicity studies are regarded as sufficient for the safety assessment due to the lack of treatment-related effects in the CNS and respiratory functions together with the low cardiotoxic potential of lasofoxifene.

Lasofoxifene is not expected to interact with several different types of receptor systems at therapeutic plasma  concentrations  since  1)  the  selectivity  towards  the  ERs  as  compared  to  a  number  of  other receptors is more than 20-fold, 2) the plasma protein binding of lasofoxifene is high (&gt;99%), and 3) the  mean  peak  concentration  observed  in  humans  treated  with  the  proposed  clinical  dose  of lasofoxifene are at least 16-fold lower than the IC50 values determined for these receptor systems.

Pharmacology · Primary pharmacodynamics Lasofoxifene has high affinity for both ERα (IC50  = 1.08 nM) and ERβ (IC50  = 4.41 nM), whereas the metabolites of lasofoxifene showed a significantly reduced affinity to the estrogen receptors (IC50 of  minimal  33.7  nM  and  79.9  nM,  respectively).  Although  limited,  the in  vitro data  suggest  that lasofoxifene has mixed agonistic and antagonistic actions. Crystallographic evidence indicates that the tissue selective actions of lasofoxifene can be explained by the conformational changes induced in the estrogen receptor. In vitro , lasofoxifene inhibited osteoclastogenesis by inducing apoptosis of osteoclast precursors in a dose-dependent manner. The pharmacological effect of lasofoxifene has been studied in three prevention studies in the OVX rats:  4-week,  8-week  and  12-month.  In  general,  OVX  induced  elevation  of  the  bone  biomarkers (osteocalcin  and  deoxypyridinoline),  reduction  of  trabecular  bone  content/density  (as  measured  by pQCT and  histomophometry)  and  reduction  of  bone  strength.  Lasofoxifene  partially  prevented  the OVX-induced  changes.  Generally,  effects  were  without  apparent  dose-response  relationship  as  all dosages gave similar effects. The effect of lasofoxifene was also investigated in a 24-month prevention study in OVX monkeys. Lasofoxifene partially inhibited OVX-induced increase in bone turnover and bone loss (spine BMD and hip BMD). The effect of lasofoxifene on bone strength and bone structure (histomorphometry) was less obvious. Most effects of lasofoxifene on bone parameters were observed in cancellous bone while little effect was observed on endocortical bone. · Secondary pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

The in  vivo effect  of  lasofoxifene  on  reproductive  tissues,  mammary  tissues,  serum  cholesterol  and body weight gain is described in the following:

## Effect of lasofoxifene on reproductive tissues

In immature rats treated with lasofoxifene, uterine weights did not differ from vehicle-treated controls with  the  exception  of  lasofoxifene  at  the  10 μ g/kg/day  dose.  In  contrast  to  lasofoxifene,  ethynyl estradiol (EE) significantly increased uterine wet and dry weight in immature rats by over 200% and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

57%,  respectively.  In  OVX  immature  rats,  short-term  treatment  with  lasofoxifene  (0.01  and  0.1 μ g/kg/day PO) significantly increased uterine and vaginal wet weights, uterine and vaginal epithelial thickness  and  cell  proliferation  in  both  uterus  and  vagina  over  the  vehicle-treated  control,  but  to  a much lower extent than the significant increases seen with estradiol. Treatment with the lowest dose of lasofoxifene only significantly increased vaginal thickness and cell proliferation in both epithelial cells and  stromal  cells  of  the  uterus.  Results  obtained  following  treatment  with  lasofoxifene  are  almost similar to those found after treatment with raloxifene. In contrast to OVX controls and estradiol and other  SERM-treated  rats,  lasofoxifene  (0.1 μ g/kg/day)  significantly  increased  mucopolysaccharide production  from  the  epithelial  cells  of  the  vagina  which  may  explain  the  increase  in  vaginal  wet weight. The applicant claims that this lasofoxifene-induced increase in mucopolysaccharide production  is  one  of  the  unique  beneficial  effects  that  differentiate  lasofoxifene  from  estrogen  and other  SERMS.  Mucopolysaccharide  is  a  protein-polysaccharide  complex  containing  up  to  95%  of polysaccharide,  which  is  composed  of  mucin  and  glycogen.  Treatment  with  lasofoxifene  enhances vaginal  epithelial  cell  differentiation,  resulting  in  increased  mucus  and  glycogen  synthesis.  This  is known to contribute to the reduction in vaginal pH as glycogen is broken down by lactobacilli to form lactic acid in the vaginal cavity. This pH change provides a protective environment against pathogenic microorganisms and may contribute to the improvement in vaginal health. However, the applicant has not provided evidence supporting this claim.

In adult rats, short-term treatment (8 weeks) with lasofoxifene slightly but significantly increased both uterine and vaginal weights in OVX rats when compared with OVX controls, but was significantly less  than  in  sham  controls.  When  lasofoxifene  and  estradiol  were  co-administered  to  OVX  rats, lasofoxifene inhibited the hypertrophic effects of EE in the uterus, indicating that lasofoxifene is an ER antagonist in the uterus, and does not stimulate uterine epithelial cell proliferation, as do estrogens and tamoxifen. Following long-term treatment, uterine and vaginal wet weights in OVX rats did not significantly differ from OVX controls, but were significantly less than in sham controls. Histological examination of the uteri revealed that lasofoxifene prevented OVX-induced uterine epithelial atrophy, whereas other results were more identical to OVX controls. Four-week treatment of aged intact female rats with lasofoxifene at doses as high as 73.3 μ g/kg/day had no significant effects on uterine weight and uterine histology. Long-term  treatment  of  OVX  monkeys  with  lasofoxifene  (1  and  5  mg/kg/day  PO)  produced  only minor  uterine  changes,  such  as  simple  endometrial  hyperplasia,  endometrial  cystic  changes  and endometrial stromal fibrosis. Lasofoxifene had no effect on the vagina of OVX monkeys following 2 years of treatment. Effect of lasofoxifene on mammary tissue Lasofoxifene at the highest dose (10 mg/kg PO or SC) significantly inhibited growth of the human MCF-7 breast tumor grown as a xenograft in athymic mice and with comparable efficacy and potency as tamoxifen. In the N-methylnitrosourea (NMU)-induced rat mammary carcinoma model, lasofoxifene significantly reduced tumor incidence, tumor multiplicity and tumor volume compared to vehicle-treated  rats.  Similar  to  tamoxifen,  lasofoxifene  is  effective  in  both  preventing  and  treating mammary carcinoma in rats. In OVX primates, long-term treatment with lasofoxifene did not induce any proliferative changes in mammary glands. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Effect of lasofoxifene on total serum cholesterol

In  rats,  short-term  treatment  (28  days)  with  lasofoxifene  significantly  reduced  the  OVX-induced increase in total serum cholesterol in a dose dependent manner, whereas in monkeys, only minimal differences between the OVX and lasofoxifene groups were found following 12, 18 and 24 months of treatment.  The  lack  of  significance  in  this  latter  study  is  most  likely  related  to  the  initial  high cholesterol diet and the change in diet at only 40 weeks.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Effect of lasofoxifene on body weight gain

Lasofoxifene inhibited OVX-induced body weight gain in both rats and monkeys.

- Safety pharmacology programme

An overview of the safety pharmacology studies conducted with lasofoxifene is given in Table 1.

Table 1 Results from the safety pharmacology studies

| Organ System Evaluated (Study Report No.) GLP-status                                                                                  | Species/ Number/ Group                           | Method of Administration / Dose                  | Results                                                                                                                              | NOAEL                                                                          |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM authorised                                                                                                     | CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM authorised                | CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM authorised                | CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM authorised                                                                                                    | CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM authorised                                              |
| Irwin's test incl. locomotor activity, reflexes, muscle tone, autonomic system function. (General pharmacology evaluation)            | CD-1 mice/ 3 ♂ /group                            | 0.01, 0.032, 0.32, 1, 3.2, 10 mg/kg PO           | 0.1, No treatment-related effects                                                                                                    | 10 mg/kg PO                                                                    |
| Non-GLP Proconvulsant/anti- convulsant effects following pentylenetetrazol (PTZ)- injection (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP | CD-1 mice/24- 26/group                           | 20, 200, 2000 µg/kg PO                           | No treatment-related effects                                                                                                         | 2000 µg/kg PO (corresponding to a plasma concentration of 23 ng/mL)            |
| CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM longer                                                                                      | CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM longer | CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM longer | CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM longer                                                                                     | CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM, RESPIRATORY SYSTEM longer                               |
| Vascular smooth muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                                      | Isolated aorta from guinea pigs/2                | In vitro / 1 nM-10 µM no                         | No treatment-related effects on basal tension or on norepinephrine- stimulated contraction                                           | 10 µM                                                                          |
| Heart muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                                                | Isolated atria from guinea pigs/2 product        | In vitro/ 1 nM-10 µM                             | 1 µM: 5% inhibition of the basal heart rate 10 µM: 25% inhibition of the basal heart rate                                            | 100 nM                                                                         |
| Heart muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                                                | Isolated left atria from Hartley guinea pigs/2   | In vitro/ 1, 3, 6, 10 µM                         | Up to approximately 35% inhibition of the maximal response at all concentration with no apparent concentration-response relationship | ND                                                                             |
| Cardiovascular functions (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP Medicinal                                                          | M. fascicularis primates/ 3/sex/group            | 1 mg/kg PO                                       | No treatment-related effects                                                                                                         | 1 mg/kg PO (corresponding to a plasma concentration of approximately 24 ng/ml) |
| Cardiovascular and respiratory functions (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                    | SD rats/ 6 ♂ /group                              | 2 mg/kg PO                                       | No treatment-related effects                                                                                                         | 2 mg/kg PO                                                                     |
| RENAL SYSTEM, GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM                                                                                                 | RENAL SYSTEM, GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM            | RENAL SYSTEM, GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM            | RENAL SYSTEM, GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM                                                                                                | RENAL SYSTEM, GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM                                          |
| Renal function (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                                              | SD rats/ 12 ♂ /group                             | 20, 200, 2000 µg/kg PO                           | No treatment-related effects                                                                                                         | 2000 µg/kg PO                                                                  |
| Intestinal smooth muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP                                                                    | Isolated ileum from guinea pigs/2                | In vitro/ 1 nM-10 µM                             | 10 µM: 94% inhibition of histamine- stimulated tension                                                                               | 1 µM                                                                           |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Organ System Evaluated (Study Report No.) GLP-status               | Species/ Number/ Group                         | Method of Administration / Dose   | Results                                                | NOAEL              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Intestinal smooth muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP | Isolated longitudinal ileum from guinea pigs/3 | In vitro/ 1, 10 µM                | 10 µM: 58% inhibition of Ca 2+ - induced contraction   | 1 µM               |
| Gastrointestinal transit (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP | SD rats/ 5 ♂ /group                            | 20, 200, 2000 µg/kg PO            | No treatment-related effects                           | 2000 µg/kg PO      |
| OTHERORGAN SYSTEMS                                                 | OTHERORGAN SYSTEMS                             | OTHERORGAN SYSTEMS                | OTHERORGAN SYSTEMS                                     | OTHERORGAN SYSTEMS |
| Smooth muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP            | Isolated uterus from rats/2                    | In vitro/ 1 nM- 10 µM             | 10 µM: 28% inhibition of oxytocin- induced contraction | 1 µM               |

Following oral administration, the bioavailability of lasofoxifene was moderate in rats (33-42%) and monkeys (25-55%). In monkeys, a high inter-animal variability was observed in the oral bioavailability. Intravenous studies have not been conducted in humans.  Thus, the absolute bioavailability and the apparent volume of distribution cannot be estimated for humans. The half-life was relatively short in rats (~3-5 h) and monkeys (~7-11 h) as compared to humans (116-150 h). The total blood clearance of lasofoxifene was around 50-80% of the hepatic blood flow in the respective species (rat and monkey). The apparent volume of distribution of lasofoxifene after IV administration was 6 L/kg in rats and 18 L/kg in cynomolgus monkeys. These values are up to approximately 25-fold the  volume of the total body water in the respective species indicating extravascular distribution of lasofoxifene. This is supported by the findings of the whole body autoradioluminography studies in rats. Following IV administration, the decline of drug plasma concentrations was biphasic in rats while

OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS Smooth muscle (General pharmacology evaluation) Non-GLP Effects on the cardiovascular system were apparent in cynomolgus monkeys in both the 3-month and 1-year studies.  These  consisted  of  lower  heart  rates  ( ≥ 5  mg/kg, both sexes) and blood pressure (15 mg/kg, males only), and increased (~ 10%-50% increase over controls) QT intervals on ECG tracings ( ≥ 5 mg/kg,  both  sexes). Using  the NOAEL  of  1  mg/kg/day  obtained  in  these  studies,  the animal:human  safety  margins  were  approximately  3-8  at  the  maximal  recommended  human  dose (MRHD). The applicant re-examined the studies and found the increases in the QT interval was likely due to decreased heart rate. Taking all data into account the safety margins were considered adequate and the potential for cardiac toxicity was considered low. No other relevant treatment-related effects were observed during the safety pharmacology studies at therapeutic relevant concentrations/dosages. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions Pharmacodynamic drug interactions were not investigated. Two pharmacology studies were performed to assess if efficacy could be enhanced by combination therapy using lasofoxifene with estradiol or parathyroid hormone 1-34 (PTH). Lasofoxifene showed addition/synergic effect in combination with PTH  but  not  with  EE.  Combination  treatment  with  bisphosphonates  has  not  been  investigated. Nevertheless, further studies were not considered necessary. Pharmacokinetics Analytical methods A LC-API/MS/MS method, which was validated for the  pivotal pharmacokinetic  and  toxicokinetic studies, was used. Absorption Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  decline  seemed  to  be  monophasic  in  monkeys.  No  apparent  gender-related  differences  or accumulation were observed during the repeat-dose toxicity studies.

## Distribution

Tissue  distribution  was  studied  in  rats.  Radioactivity  was  widely  distributed  to  tissues,  which  is consistent with the high apparent volume of distribution. In pigmented rats, lasofoxifene distributed well to the eye, e.g., the highest amount of radioactivity and the longest half-life were observed in the uvea. Radioactivity was not observed in the uvea of albino rats indicating the uveal binding observed in this study is associated with binding to melanin present in the eye of pigmented rats. Other tissues with radioactivity were various glands (adrenal, lacrimal, salivary), well-perfused tissues (lung, spleen, pancreas)  and  those  associated  with  metabolism  and  excretion  (liver,  kidney  and  GI  tract).  In pigmented rats but not in albino rats, radioactivity was detected in the brain, bone and bone marrow suggesting strain differences in distribution. No apparent gender differences were observed.

Lasofoxifene-related  radioactivity  was  observed  in  liver,  lung,  intestinal  tissue  and  whole  body  of foetuses indicating placental transfer. Exposures were similar to that of the dams, at least for the tissue investigated (intestinal tissue and lung). In  the  mouse,  rat,  monkey  and  human,  lasofoxifene  had  no  preferential  binding  to  whole  blood constituents indicating that plasma can be used for monitoring of lasofoxifene. Lasofoxifene  is  highly  bound  (&gt;99.8%)  to  plasma  proteins  in  all  species  (mouse,  rat,  monkey  and human). Lasofoxifene binding to HSA (~97%) is slightly more extensive than to AGP (~84%). Metabolism Lasofoxifene  was  readily  metabolized  in  humans.  In  addition  to  unchanged  drug,  a  total  of  3 metabolites in plasma (M7, M9, M17), 5 metabolites in urine (M7, M9/M21, M17, M23/24), and 6 metabolites in faeces (M9/M21, M10-12, M15, M17) were detected by LC/MS. The major pathways were  due  to  conjugation  with  glucuronic  acid  or  sulfuric  acid.  The  other  pathways  were  due  to oxidations on the phenyl tetraline moiety and the pyrrolidine ring. The human metabolites were all identified in the rat and/or the monkey. Using the percentages of the dose for each metabolite in humans at the clinical dose (0.5 mg once a day) and extrapolating to the NOAEL for the mouse, rat and monkey, the applicant has estimated the relative body burden of each metabolite. The results of this exercise show that at dosages causing no adverse toxicological effect, animals are exposed to a significantly greater amount of each lasofoxifene metabolite than is present in humans at the clinical dose. There were no apparent sex-related qualitative differences in the profile of metabolites in mice, rats and monkeys. One  metabolite  is  a  catechol.  Some  catechols  are  known  to  be  carcinogenic.  However,  this  is  an intermediate that, according to the applicant, is quickly conjugated with glucuronic or sulphuric acid or methylated by catechol-O-methyl transferase. It can be assumed that the catechol intermediate may be primarily formed in the liver, as it is formed after oxidative metabolism by CYP enzymes, which are mainly present in the liver. As there appears to be no indication for liver toxicity this agrees with the  explanation  of  the  applicant  that  M21  is  probably  quickly  conjugated,  i.e.  before  it  can  exert toxicity. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Excretion

The excretion of [ 14 C]-lasofoxifene was investigated in the animal species used in toxicology studies and in healthy male human volunteers following oral administration. The major route of excretion in all  species  including humans was the faeces (&gt;66%) presumably via the bile. The urinary excretion was  less  than  11%  in  all  species.  Lasofoxifene  is  excreted  in  milk;  the  concentration  in  milk  was similar to that observed in maternal plasma.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetic Drug Interactions

Potential  interactions  of  lasofoxifene  with  other  drugs  have  been  investigated  in  several  studies, though the following observations are made:

- It  is  acknowledged that it is unlikely that lasofoxifene inhibits the metabolism of other drugs via inhibition of CYP enzymes. The lowest IC50 value (0.21 µM for CYP2E1) is considerably higher than the Cmax value anticipated during normal drug use (3.6 ng/ml or 0.009 μ M). No studies have been performed to investigate whether lasofoxifene induces the metabolism of other drugs, or that other drugs induce the metabolism of lasofoxifene. However, based on the metabolism pathways for  lasofoxifene,  it  can  be  predicted  that  inducers  will  have  some  effect  on  the  exposure  to lasofoxifene.

In the 2-week and 3-month studies, lasofoxifene produced changes at all doses ≥ 1 mg/kg/day that were consistent  with  the  pharmacologic  activity  of  SERMs,  including  a  decrease  in  body  weight  gain, prostate  and  pituitary  weights,  along  with  enlarged  ovaries  secondary  to  cysts  and  granulosa hyperplasia, uterine atrophy, and vaginal mucification. Clinical pathology changes in male and female rats  included  effects  on  hematology  (decreases  in  erythroid  and  white  cell  indices)  and  serum chemistry  (decreased  serum  cholesterol,  total  protein,  albumin,  globulin).  The  increased  levels  of alkaline phosphatase (at ≥ 1 mg/kg/day) and alanine aminotransferase (at 100  mg/kg/day)  and decreased levels of 5`nucleotidase (at ≥ 1 mg/kg/day) could not be related to changes in liver weight or to microscopic liver damage.  Changes  considered  related to treatment but inconsistent with pharmacologic activity included salivation ( ≥ 10 mg/kg/day), and specific serum chemistry parameters (creatinine,  glucose)  in  males  and  females.  In  the  2-week  studies,  additional  microscopic  changes noted  at  200  and  500  mg/kg  consisted  of  slight  dermatosis,  thymic  atrophy,  splenic  lymphoid depletion, and bone marrow depletion. In the 3-month study in monkeys, thymic atrophy was observed in males at ≥ 1 mg/kg/day and a decrease in circulating eosinophils at 15 mg/kg/day. In view of these findings, it is not clear whether lasofoxifene could interact with the immune system. Studies on the immunotoxicity of lasofoxifene have not been performed.

- It  is  also  acknowledged  that  it  is  unlikely  that  lasofoxifene  affects  the  free  concentration  of warfarin (on average bound for 99.26% in study DM1997-336156-027) or propranolol (on average bound for 76.5% in study DM1997-336156-027). · The in vitro binding of lasofoxifene to cholestyramine has been investigated to evaluate potential drug  interactions.  The  binding  to  lasofoxifene  was  about  34%,  and  to  lasofoxifene  glucuronide about 59-66%. The applicant considers this to be low to moderate binding suggesting that an in vivo drug interaction is unlikely.  However,  lasofoxifene probably  undergoes  enterohepatic circulation (excreted in the gastrointestinal tract as glucuronide in the bile, and subsequently partly reabsorbed  in  the  small  intestine).  Especially  during  enterohepatic  circulation,  the  drug  will probably be absorbed as glucuronide, which has a higher binding to cholestyramine than the parent drug. Therefore, interactions cannot be excluded with the presently described in  vitro binding of lasofoxifene  and  lasofoxifene  glucuronide  to  cholestyramine. In  vivo data  on  the  interaction between lasofoxifene and cholestyramine are discussed in the section Clinical aspects / Pharmacokinetics. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity The minimal lethal dose of lasofoxifene was 1000 mg/kg in mice and &gt;2000 mg/kg in rats following single oral administration. Following single IV administration, the minimal lethal dose was 300 mg/kg in mice and &gt;100 mg/kg in rats. Convulsions were noted in IV-dosed mice (300 mg/kg), and tremors were apparent in orally dosed mice (1000 and 2000 mg/kg) and rats (2000 mg/kg). · Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) Repeated-dose toxicity studies consisted of a 2-week, 3-month and 1-year oral dose studies in rats and monkeys. In addition, 10-day range-finding, oral dose study was performed in monkeys. Rats Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the 1-year rat study, similar pharmacological effects and effects on liver enzymes were observed. Microscopically,  liver  damage  has  not  been  observed.  In  two  females  (one  each  in  the  1  and  100 mg/kg/day dose), the hyperplastic change of the ovarian granulosa cells had progressed to a benign granulosa cell tumour. In addition, ovarian amyloidosis was present in 13/15 and 8/15 females at 20 and 100 mg/kg/day, respectively. These ovarian findings might be related to a lasofoxifene-mediated, estrogenic  effect  on  the  mitogenic  activity  of  granulosa  cells.  Splenic  hematopoiesis  in  males  at ≥ 20 mg/kg/day  was  considered  to  be  a  compensatory  response  to  the  slight  decreases  in  erythroid parameters (red blood cell count, hemoglobin and hematocrit), consistent with the estrogenic effect of the  compound. A slightly higher level of fibrinogen in serum was noted in both sexes at all doses. Eosinophil  counts  were  reduced  in  animals  at  the  high  dose.  The  slightly  higher  white  cell  indices (white blood cell counts, neutrophils, lymphocytes) in the high-dosed females at 100 mg/kg/day did not correspond to any microscopic evidence of inflammation in the tissues examined.

Treatment related findings that were inconsistent with pharmacology were effects on the cardiovascular  system  and  neuromuscular  system  in  the  3-month  and  1-year  study.  These  effects consisted of lower heart rates with corresponding longer RR and QT intervals at ≥ 5 mg/kg/day and lower blood pressure, and tremors at 15 mg/kg/day. The cardiovascular changes were not progressive, and were not associated with any other evidence of cardiovascular effects. The significance of these ECG effects was, however, not clear. Whilst studies to assess the potential of lasofoxifene to delay cardiac repolarization (QT prolongation) were missing, the applicant re-examined the in vivo studies and found the increases in the QT interval correlated with decreased heart rate.

In rats, the NOAEL values were 10 mg/kg/day and 1 mg/kg/day in the 3-month and 1-year studies, respectively,  with  AUC(0-24)  unbound  values  of  15.7  and  2.7x  the  AUC(0-24)  unbound  at  the  MRHD, respectively.  The  NOAELs  in  both  studies  were  based  primarily  on  increased  hepatic  serum transaminases. However, NOAEL values are not relevant here, since pharmacological effects noted on the ovary, pituitary and prostate organ weights, lowering of cholesterol, uterine atrophy, and vaginal mucification are considered to be adverse. Monkeys In 10-day non-pivotal and the 2-week pivotal study, the dose-limiting toxicity was apparent at doses of ≥ 25 mg/kg/day as evidenced by emesis and/or inappetence. These changes essentially subsided upon lowering the high dose to 15 mg/kg/day. In  the  3-month  and  1-year  pivotal  studies,  pharmacologically-related  effects  on  the  reproductive system were observed in females at all dose levels ≥ 1 mg/kg/day (abnormal menstruation, decreased uterine weight, increased ovarian weight, ovarian cysts) and in males at 15 mg/kg/day (testis atrophy with tubular giant cells, atrophy accessory glands). Effects were also noticed on hormonal/endocrinedependent  organs  in  males  at ≥ 1  mg/kg/day  (mastopathy  and  ectasia  of  the  mammary  gland, decreased adrenal weight) and females at 15 mg/kg/day (decreased pituitary weight). The incidence and severity of these effects did not progress with increased duration of dosing. In the 1-year study, increased serum estradiol and testosterone levels were observed in males at all doses ≥ 1 mg/kg/day. The increased creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels in males at 1 µg/kg/day were not associated with changes in kidney weight or renal pathologic findings. In the 3-month study in monkeys, uterine adenomysosis was observed in one of the three females at 15 mg/kg/day. This finding was ascribed to pharmacologic activity of the compound, but the CHMP considers  it  as  an  adverse  effect.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  two  uterine  sarcomas  were  observed  in clinical trials, information should be provided on the underlying mechanism and the clinical relevance of this finding. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Effects on the hematopoietic system consisted of thymic atrophy in males at ≥ 1 mg/kg/day (3-month, and 1-year study), slightly lower red cell parameters (red blood cell count, hemoglobin, hematocrit) in females at ≥ 1 mg/kg/day (2-week study) and at ≥ 5 mg/kg/day (1-year study). Increased reticulocyte counts  at  5 mg/kg/day  and  decreased  eosinophil  counts  and  increased  APTT  times  (1.14-1.32X)  at 15 mg/kg/day in the 1-year study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In cynomolgus monkeys, the NOAEL was 1 mg/kg/day in both the 3-month and 1-year studies with AUC(0-24) unbound  values of 5.5-12 and 9.5-12.2x the AUC(0-24) unbound at the MRHD, respectively. This NOAEL is based on the decreased heart rates and tremors observed at the intermediate and high dose groups. However, NOAEL values are not relevant here, since the CHMP considers pharmacological effects of the compound as adverse.

## · Genotoxicity

The mutagenicity studies demonstrate that lasofoxifene does not induce microbial or mammalian cell gene  mutations in  vitro .  An  increase  in  chromosomal  abnormalities  was  produced in  vitro in  a lymphoblastoid  cell  line,  but  not  with  cultures  of  human  lymphocytes.  No  chromosomal  damage occurred following in vivo treatment of mice with lasofoxifene. No DNA adducts were detected in the livers of rats following in vivo treatment.

The  impurities  CP-335,992  and  CP-324,098  presumably  have  a  low  genotoxic  potential,  which  is addressed with the limits in the specification. · Carcinogenicity Two-year  carcinogenicity  studies  were  performed  in  rats  and  mice.  In  mice,  increases  in  adrenal cortical tumours, ovarian tumours, and epithelial polyps in the uterus were observed. In theory, these tumours could all arise through a rodent specific mechanism in which LH levels are increased due to a pharmacological effect of lasofoxifene. The increases in LH however, have not been observed at doses which induced tumour formation. The applicant has addressed this issue and it has been assessed that increased LH levels were plausible mainly based on the evidence of LH/FSH secreting gonadotrophs in the pituitary gland. In  rats,  increases  in  ovarian  and  renal  tumours  (in  males  only)  were  observed.  The  mechanism responsible for the induction of ovarian tumours might also be an increase in LH levels. However, increases  in  LH  levels  were  observed  at  higher  doses  than  those  that  caused  induction  of  these tumours. Therefore, the same applies to rats as it does to mice, ovarian tumour incidence is increased before increases in LH levels are measured. An increase  in  renal  tumours  in  the  male  rats  has  been  observed.  The  applicant  proposed  that  this could be due to a male rat specific expression of ER α versus  ER β .  The  applicant  suggests  that  the kidney of the male rate mainly express the ER α and to a lesser extent ER β . This would result in cell proliferation and tumour induction. The applicant submitted a summary of expression data in different species; the full report will be provided as follow-up measure including raw data and a re-evaluation of the ERα /ERβ ratios on an individual basis rather than on mean values. Furthermore, the proposed mechanism  behind  the  tumours  implies  that  tissues  which  lack  ER β might  be  prone  to  disturbed proliferation and ultimately tumour formation when exposed to lasofoxifene. Thus the applicant will elaborate in a follow-up measure on the ER α /ER β ratio in human tissues other than the kidney and the implication  hereof  in  relation  to  the  risk  of  developing  cancer.  Furthermore,  the  monitoring  for  the carcinogenic potential of lasofoxifene is included in the Risk Management Plan. · Reproduction Toxicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

Following  PO  administration,  lasofoxifene  showed  adverse  effects  on  fertility  and  early  embryonic development at low doses (0.001 mg/kg/day) in rats. It was not possible to establish NOAELs neither on male and female fertility. Lasofoxifene is only for use in post-menopausal women.

Following PO administration, lasofoxifene showed adverse effects on embryo-fœtal development at low doses in two species. Lasofoxifene showed slight increase in malformations (imperforate anus and shortened tail) in addition to flexions of hind limbs and paws, decreased implantations and increased resorptions.  All  together,  lasofoxifene  showed  reproductive  and  developmental  toxicity  presumably associated with the pharmacodynamic activity, which is addressed in the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Local tolerance

The local tolerance studies performed with lasofoxifene are summarised in Table 2.

Table 2 Results from the local tolerance studies

| Species/test system Number/Group                                           | Method of Administration/ Dose                                                                                                                                                 | Results                                                                                                                                | Conclusions                                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| SENSITIZATION: MAGNUSSON AND KLIGMAN MAXIMAMIZATION TEST (98-1186-35, GLP) | SENSITIZATION: MAGNUSSON AND KLIGMAN MAXIMAMIZATION TEST (98-1186-35, GLP)                                                                                                     | SENSITIZATION: MAGNUSSON AND KLIGMAN MAXIMAMIZATION TEST (98-1186-35, GLP)                                                             | SENSITIZATION: MAGNUSSON AND KLIGMAN MAXIMAMIZATION TEST (98-1186-35, GLP) |
| Guinea pigs: 10 ♀                                                          | Induction: 0.1 mL intradermal injection 1%w/v in propylene glycol (max. dose - not irritating) followed by 0.8 g topical induction (a week later). Challenge: 0.4 g topically. | No toxicity. No signs of sensitization potential. Positive control DNBC gave skin reaction in 7/10 animals after challenge. authorised | Not sensitizing                                                            |
| DERMALTOXICITY (98-1186-37, GLP)                                           | DERMALTOXICITY (98-1186-37, GLP)                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                        |                                                                            |
| NZ white rabbits/3 ♂ and ♀                                                 | 2000 mg/kg under occlusive dressing for 24 hr.                                                                                                                                 | After 24 hours: erythema (score 1) in 2/6 animals and score 2 in 1/6 animals. Absent after 1-2 days                                    | No dermal irritation as far as tested.                                     |
| EYE IRRITATION (98-1186-37, GLP)                                           | EYE IRRITATION (98-1186-37, GLP)                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                        |                                                                            |
| NZ white rabbits/1 ♂ and 2 ♀                                               | 0.1 mL of lasofoxifene powder in the conjunctival sac.                                                                                                                         | Severe conjunctival reddening, chemosis, iritis and corneal opacity. Reverisible.                                                      | Eye irritating                                                             |

NZ - New Zealand DNBC - 1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene Lasofoxifene was not sensitizing when tested in the M&amp;K maximization test. A dermal toxicity test was performed, but not a dermal irritation test. Lasofoxifene was not toxic after dermal application and no severe effects were observed at the application site. An eye irritation test with powder resulted in  severe  eye  irritation.    Since  lasofoxifene  is  intended  to  be  administered  orally  no  further  dermal studies are required · Other toxicity studies Immunotoxicity Non-clinical studies to predict the immunotoxicity have not been conducted. Some signals of effects on  the  immune  system  were  detected  in  the  3-month  repeat-dose  toxicity  studies  in  rats  and  in  the 3-month  monkey  study.  These  have  been  assessed  as  coincidental  and  not  relevant  for  humans. Furthermore, clinical data do not indicate any immunotoxicity of lasofoxifene. Impurities The  proposed  specification  concerning  the  impurities  CP-324,098  and  CP-335,992  has  not  been qualified  with  the  present  data.  It  is  acknowledged  that  the  genotoxic  potential  of  the  impurities CP-324,098 and CP-335,992 is low. This issue has been satisfactorily addressed with the limits in the specification. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment

Based  on  the  provided  information  a  risk  for  the  aquatic  compartment  was  determined.  Risk  for groundwater and sewage treatment plants are acceptable. The risk assessment for soil is not needed. However, the risk assessment for the sediment compartment could not be completed. The applicant committed to submit study reports on determination of bioconcentration factor and a sediment toxicity study with Hyalella sp., Lumbriculus sp. or Chironomus sp as a follow-up measure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Deviations  from  guidelines  in  the  adsorption/desorption  have  been  identified  and  the  applicant  was asked to clarify this, together with re-formation of the active ingredient form the human metabolite in the PEC surface water refinement. The applicant was also requested to reanalyse the submitted fulllife cycle test in fish. Finally, a further Tier B risk characterization or risk mitigation measures might be  warranted  pending  the  results  of  the  reanalysed  full-life  cycle  test.  The  applicant  provided  a commitment to address these issues as follow-up measures within defined timelines.

## 2.4 Clinical aspects

## Introduction

| Objective                  | Study                                                |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Phase 2 Studies            |                                                      |
| Treatment of osteoporosis  | A2181037 (JADE)                                      |
| Prevention of osteoporosis | 218-101, 218-101E, 218-102, 218-103, A2181042 (LACE) |
| Vulvar and vaginal atrophy | A2181012                                             |
| Female sexual dysfunction  | A2181014, A2181015, A2181016 and A2181021 longer     |
| Phase 3 Studies            |                                                      |
| Treatment of osteoporosis  | A2181002 (PEARL)                                     |
| Prevention of osteoporosis | A2181003 and A2181004 (OPAL) A2181030 (CORAL) no     |
| Vulvar and vaginal atrophy | A2181031, A2181032                                   |

| Study            | Length and Design Features                                       | Patient population                                                                                                           | Treatment* (daily dose)                      | Location                                                                              |    N |
|------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|
| A2181002 (PEARL) | 5 years with a 3 year interim; double-blind, placebo- controlled | Postmenopausal ( ≥ 5 years) women aged 60-80 years, with screening T-score ≥ - 4.5 and ≤ -2.5 (lumbar spine or femoral neck) | Lasofoxifene 0.25 mg 0.5 mg placebo          | 32 countries in Africa, Asia, North, Central and South America, Australia, and Europe | 8556 |
| A2181037 (JADE)  | 1 year; double-blind, placebo- controlled                        | Postmenopausal ( ≥ 3 years) women aged ≤ 80 years, with screening T-score ≥ - 4.5 and ≤ -2.5 (lumbar spine)                  | Lasofoxifene 0.025 mg 0.25 mg 0.5 mg placebo | Japan, Korea, Taiwan                                                                  |  497 |

Lasofoxifene  has  been  studied  for  the  treatment  of  osteoporosis  in  postmenopausal  women  at increased risk of fracture in six phase 2 studies and four phase 3 studies. The applicant provided data concerning osteoporosis, including clinical dose-response studies. In addition data were provided concerning breast cancer risk and breast density. Furthermore, phase 2 and phase 3 studies are reported on vulvar and vaginal atrophy endpoints. The overall clinical study programme is summarized in table 3; the phase 2/3 program comprised over 20,000 subject-years of exposure to lasofoxifene. Table 3 Phase 2/3 Studies by Study Objective The  main  study  for  the  osteoporosis  indication  is  study  A2181002  (PEARL).  Furthermore,  study A2181037 (JADE) provides supportive evidence. The key features of these studies are summarized in table 4. Table 4 Studies Included in the Summary of Clinical Efficacy Medicinal product no longer authorised

N = number of subjects treated.

* All subjects received supplements of calcium and vitamin D.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## GCP

The clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The applicant has provided a statement to the effect that clinical trials conducted outside the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC.

A routine GCP inspection at two sites of the pivotal study A2181002 (PEARL) was performed and major GCP non-compliance with regard to safety data generation was identified. Overall conclusions from the inspected sites were that safety data were not systematically verifiable and the assessments of the causality were questionable. Since these findings did cast doubts on the reliability of the safety data provided with the application, the applicant was asked to explain and justify the approach for the generation  of  safety  data  in  the  study,  and  to  discuss  the  impact  on  the  overall  safety  database  of FABLYN.  Based  on  the  information  provided  by  the  applicant,  the  CHMP  concluded  that  the inspection  findings  have  neither  resulted  in  underreporting  of  (serious)  adverse  events,  nor  in  a limitation to the detection of safety signals.

A long terminal elimination half-life (6 days) was observed in both single and multiple-dose studies, and is consistent with the low clearance (~ 105 mL/min) of lasofoxifene. Conventional studies and popPK analysis indicate a moderate intra- and inter-subject variability of lasofoxifene. Clearance of lasofoxifene occurs predominantly by metabolism. Metabolites have been identified in plasma, urine and faeces. Lasofoxifene can be metabolised by multiple pathways: conjugation with glucuronic acid and  sulfuric acid, hydroxylation at the phenyl  tetraline moiety, methylation of the catechol intermediates by catechol-O-methyl transferase, and oxidation at the pyrrolidine ring. It is not likely that any of the circulating metabolites contribute to the pharmacologic activity of lasofoxifene.

Pharmacokinetics The phase 1 programme consisted of 23 studies to evaluate the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of lasofoxifene in healthy volunteers, bioequivalence of the commercial formulation and relative bioavailability of  earlier  formulations,  routes  of  metabolism  and  excretion, drug  interactions, the effects of  food  and  hepatic  impairment  on  pharmacokinetics,  and  the pharmacokinetics in Japanese versus Caucasian women. The studies were conducted predominantly in postmenopausal women. Bioequivalence with respect to rate and extent of absorption of lasofoxifene between the uncoated and film-coated commercial 0.25 mg and 0.5 mg lasofoxifene tablets used in the clinical phase 3 studies has been demonstrated. · Absorption Absorption  of  lasofoxifene  appeared  to  be  slow  with  tmax  values  of  6-12  hours.  Exposure  of lasofoxifene at steady-state following 0.5 mg administration was 3.6 ng/ml for Cmax and 79 ng.h/ml for AUC τ .  Based on the mass balance data it can be estimated that at least 50% of the lasofoxifene dose is absorbed. Food does not affect the bioavailability of lasofoxifene. Thus, lasofoxifene can be dosed without regard to the timing of meals as stated in the SPC. · Distribution Lasofoxifene is highly bound to plasma proteins &gt;99% but binding is independent of the dose (0.25 20 mg). No effect of lasofoxifene on the protein binding of propranolol and warfarin was observed in vitro . However, the effect of warfarin and propranolol on the protein binding of lasofoxifene was not determined.  Volume  of  distribution  was  estimated  to  1235  L  in  a  phase  1  study  and  confirmed  by Population PK analysis. · Elimination Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  vitro studies  have  identified  that  CYP3A4/5  and  CYP2D6  were  the  primary  CYP450  isoforms involved in the oxidative metabolism of lasofoxifene. It is estimated that direct conjugation accounts

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

for  49%  of  the  pathways  of  metabolism  for  lasofoxifene,  the  transferases  involved  have  not  been identified. The major circulating metabolites M7 (+M9) is formed by direct glucuronidation.

Lasofoxifene  was  predominantly  excreted  as metabolites in the faeces and  only  6%  of  the administered  dose  is  excreted  in  the  urine.  Excretion  of  unchanged  lasofoxifene  was  22%  (of  66% recovered)  in  the  faeces  and  &lt;2%  (of  6%  recovered)  in  the  urine,  respectively.  The  excretion  of radioactivity occurred over a prolonged period of time with approximately 20% excreted from days 11 to 24 post dose. Furthermore, the mass balance study indicated a substantial first pass metabolism and an extensive enterohepatic circulation of lasofoxifene because Cmax of total radioactivity was reached at  4  hours,  while  tmax  for  lasofoxifene  was  12  hours,  and  secondary  peak  concentrations  of lasofoxifene were observed. The enterohepatic circulation may explain the apparent slow absorption of lasofoxifene and the long elimination half-life.

· Dose proportionality and time dependencies Lasofoxifene exhibits linear pharmacokinetics with respect to dose and time. The pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene are dose proportional over the dose range of 0.01 to 100 mg indicating that metabolism of lasofoxifene  is  not  saturated.  Steady-state  pharmacokinetics  of  lasofoxifene  are  consistent  with expectations from single dose pharmacokinetics indicating that lasofoxifene does not inhibit or induce its own metabolism. · Special populations Population pharmacokinetic analysis predicted age, weight and creatinine clearance as covariates of lasofoxifene clearance. The effects on the pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene were &lt; 35% difference in AUC by any of these variables. These effects are not considered to be clinically meaningful. Race and gender had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene. The pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene have not been studied in children, which is acceptable given the proposed indication. Lasofoxifene  is  predominantly  cleared  by  metabolism.  Lasofoxifene  and  metabolites  are  mostly excreted in the faeces. Therefore, renal impairment is not expected to affect the pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene to a great extent. This was supported by the population pharmacokinetic analysis which estimated  a  20%  increase  in  AUC  in  patients  with  mild  and  moderate  renal  impairment  as  low  as 32 mL/min. The effect of severe renal impairment on lasofoxifene exposure has not been determined. This has been addressed in the SPC adequately. Information  on  the  effects  of  hepatic  impairment  was  derived  from  a  phase  1  study  in  6  healthy subjects, in 6 subjects with mild and 6 subjects with moderate hepatic impaired function. The effect of severe  hepatic  impairment  on  lasofoxifene  exposure  was  not  determined.  The  effect  of  liver impairment appears to be low because AUC of lasofoxifene was increased by only 38% in subjects with  moderate  hepatic  impairment.  No  effect  on  the  plasma  protein  binding  of  lasofoxifene  was apparent.  Lasofoxifene  is  predominantly  cleared  by  metabolism  and  is  likely  to  undergo  extensive enterohepatic circulation. An increased incidence of treatment-related cholelithiasis was observed in the lasofoxifene treated population. Therefore, especially bilirubin concentrations may  affect pharmacokinetics and safety of lasofoxifene. The subject with the highest serum bilirubin levels had the highest AUC value approximately 80% higher than the mean AUC of healthy subjects but there are  not  enough  data  to  correlate  bilirubin  with  pharmacokinetics  of  lasofoxifene.  The  subjects  with Child-Pugh B grade hepatic impairment were too heterogeneous to draw conclusions. In the phase 3 studies,  patients  with  liver  function  test  &gt;1.5  ULN  were  excluded.    Therefore,  safety  has  not  been evaluated in patients with moderate and severe impaired liver function. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies

Clinical  interaction  studies  with  the  CYP  inhibitors  ketoconazole,  paroxetine  and  fluconazole increased the total exposure of lasofoxifene with 20%, 35% and 1%, respectively. These results are consistent with the in vitro data indicating that CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, but not CYP2C9, play a role in lasofoxifene metabolism. Considering the relatively small magnitude of these interactions, no dosage adjustment  is  necessary  for  co-administration  of  CYP3A4  or  CYP2D6  inhibitors.  The  effect  of CYP3A4 inhibitors in poor metabolisers of CYP2D6 was not studied. However, the potential effect of CYP3A4 inhibitors in poor CYP2D6 metabolisers was assessed using an acknowledged

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pharmacokinetic model. Considering the safety profile of the compound the expected rise in AUC is not considered clinically relevant.

Lasofoxifene at steady-state had no effect on the PK parameters of methylprednisone (CYP3A4), Rwarfarin (CYP3A4), S-warfarin (CYP2C9), chlorzoxazone (CYP2E1), dextromethorphan (CYP2D6) and digoxin (MDR1 P-glycoprotein). Although the pharmacokinetics of warfarin were not altered by lasofoxifene,  mean  PT  AUC  and  PTmax  for  warfarin  during  administration  of  lasofoxifene  were approximately 8% and 16% (3.4 sec) lower, respectively, than for warfarin alone. The 90% confidence intervals for the mean PTmax and PT AUC ratios were both within the 80% to 125% range but did not include  100%.  Overall  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  potential  of  lasofoxifene  to  inhibit  or  induce cytochrome P450 enzymes is low.

SERMs  mediate  their  biologic  activity  through  the  ER  whereby  binding  results  in  differential activation  of  estrogenic  pathways  in  some  tissues  and  blockade  of  others.  In  competitive  binding assays, lasofoxifene demonstrated high affinity binding to both the ER α (IC50 = 1.08 nM) and ER β (IC50 = 4.41 nM). Lasofoxifene is thought to exhibit tissue-selective agonist activity on the skeleton and could also exhibit activity on serum cholesterol, coagulation factors, the breast, the endometrium, the vulva and vagina.

The effect of concomitant CYP inducing agents on the pharmacokinetics of lasofoxifene has not been investigated.  As  the  cytochrome  P450  system  is  involved  in  metabolism  of  lasofoxifene,  CYP inducing agents may  potentially increase lasofoxifene metabolism and significantly decrease lasofoxifene  plasma  concentrations  and  consequently  may  reduce  efficacy,  this  is  addressed  in  the SPC. Direct  conjugation  accounts  for  ~50%  of  metabolism  of  lasofoxifene  and  the  major  circulating metabolites  M7  (+M9)  is  formed  by  direct  glucuronidation.  Lasofoxifene  could  be  metabolised  by several UGT isoforms including UGT1A1 and 1A4 as well as 1A3, 1A6, 1A8, 1A9 and 1A10. Thus UGT polymorphism status is not considered likely to influence safety or efficacy. Aqueous  solubility  of  lasofoxifene  is  pH  dependent  with  a  drop  in  solubility  between  pH  5.4 (146µg/ml)  and  pH  6.5  (0.6  µg/ml).  Concomitant  administration  of  lasofoxifene  with  proton  pump inhibitors, H2 antagonists or antacids may therefore alter solubility and bioavailability of lasofoxifene and may lead to reduced efficacy. The applicant was requested to evaluate whether PPIs affect the pharmacokinetics  of  lasofoxifene.  This  will  be  done  with  a  population  PK  analysis  using  available data from the completed phase 2/3 studies and will be provided as a follow-up measure. · Pharmacokinetics using human biomaterials In  vitro studies  have  identified  that  CYP3A4/5  and  CYP2D6  were  the  primary  CYP450  isoforms involved in the oxidative metabolism of lasofoxifene. In vitro studies with human recombinant UGT isoforms indicate UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A4, 1A6, 1A8, 1A9 and 1A10 can catalyze the direct conjugation of lasofoxifene. In  vitro inhibition  studies  showed  that  CYP  2E1  (IC50  0.21  µM)  and  2D6  (IC50  4.2µM)  isoforms were the most sensitive to inhibition by lasofoxifene (Cmax steady-state ~9 nM). Therefore, in vitro data  indicated  that  lasofoxifene  is  unlikely  to  inhibit  drug-metabolizing  CYP  enzymes  at  clinically relevant concentrations. Pharmacodynamics · Mechanism of action Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Primary and secondary pharmacology

The effects of lasofoxifene treatment on exploratory pharmacodynamic biomarker endpoints (LDL-C, HDL-C,  LH,  FSH,  urinary  NTX,  etc.)  were  assessed  in  5  studies:  218-001,  218-002,  218-004, A2181011, A2181025. A principal objective of these studies was to select target doses for the Phase 3

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

osteoporosis  program  with  a  final  goal  of  identifying  the  lowest  dose  that  produced  the  optimum efficacy on multiple surrogate endpoints (e.g., bone and lipid), while maintaining an acceptable safety profile.  Pharmacodynamic  responses  were  generally  characterized  by  high  variability  precluding definitive conclusions regarding the magnitudes of these effects as a function of dose. Based on the observed  trends  for  treatment  effects  across  studies,  it  can  be  inferred  that  multiple  dosing  of lasofoxifene decreased LDL-C, LH, and FSH concentrations and NTX excretion.

The pharmacodynamic endpoints (LDL-C, HDL-C, LH, FSH, BSAP, and urinary NTX) measured in the  multiple-dose  Phase  1  trials  in  healthy  menopausal  women  (218-001,  218-002,  218-004,  and A2181011) were evaluated as biomarkers to assess the pharmacologic activity of lasofoxifene during short-duration therapy (14 days) in early development. These data should be considered preliminary and were not used for selection of doses for the Phase 3 trials.

Doses ranging from 0.017 mg to 10 mg were studied in Phase 2 osteoporosis prevention trials. The Month 6 lumbar spine BMD, Month 12 total hip BMD and Month 6 LDL-C results in these studies were analyzed to determine the lasofoxifene dose response curves. The surrogate  endpoints  for  assessing  phamacodynamics  and  thus  dose-response  relationships  were well chosen and acknowledged. The results obtained from phase II studies have been applied for an Emax model commonly employed for describing dose-response relationships. The resulting model fits the  clinical  observations.  Thus  a  sigmoidal  relationship  between  dose  and  response  has  been demonstrated. Data for bone markers as osteocalcin and free deoxypyridinoline are not provided. This is an omission, but more data are obtained from the PEARL study. Data on coagulation factors (fibrinogen, protein S, thrombin and antithrombin complex, prothrombin time, prothrombin fragments 1 and 2, plasminogen, D-dimer quantitative and activated partial thromboplastin time) are also missing. This is an important point  as  coagulation  factors  might  play  an  important  role  in  DVT,  a  safety  issue.  Finally  in pharmacodynamics the influence of lasofoxifene on hot flushes, the breast and on the endometrium should have been considered in detail. The effect of lasofoxifene on cardiac  repolarisation was not assessed. The majority of the remaining deficiencies are solved in the Phase 3 clinical trials described below. Clinical efficacy · Dose response study(ies) The  applicant  provided  arguments  for  a  minimal  effective  dose  based  on  the  pharmacodynamic parameters. These data were not considered sufficient by the CHMP to conclude a minimally effective dose. However, clinical arguments for a minimal effective dose based on dose-response studies were provided. Doses from 0.017 mg to 10 mg were studied in Phase 2 trials in the osteoporosis prevention population; 2 dose levels were chosen for the pivotal osteoporosis treatment study A2181002 (0.25 mg and  0.5  mg),  and  3  dose  levels  were  chosen  for  the  pivotal  Phase  3  osteoporosis  prevention  trials A2181003 (0.025 mg, 0.25 mg and 0.5 mg) and A2181004 (0.025 mg, 0.25 mg and 0.5 mg). The basis was dose response modelling of percent change from baseline in lumbar spine BMD at month 6, total hip BMD at month 12, and LDL-C at month 6. Month 12 rather than month 6 hip BMD data were used because the hip responds more slowly than the spine to anti-resorptive therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

During  the  assessment  the  applicant  was  requested  to  conduct  analyses  of  the  principal  fracture endpoints that included only PEARL subjects who were deemed to be at high risk for fracture, based upon FRAX probabilities. These new analyses showed comparable results in subjects with a 10 year probability of &gt; 10 % in the full data set, in the 5-year data set as well as in the 3-year data set.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Main study

The main study of this application is study A2181002 (PEARL). This was a prospective, randomized, double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  multinational  study  in  postmenopausal  women  with  osteoporosis (defined by low bone mineral density of the femoral neck or lumbar spine).  The study was initially designed as a 3-year study, but in a subsequent protocol amendment, it was extended to 5 years with a prospectively defined 3-year interim analysis.

## METHODS

## Study Participants

Women had to be within 60-80 years of age, at least 5 years postmenopausal, with osteoporosis based on screening BMD T-score of ≥ -4.5 and ≤ -2.5 in the lumbar spine or femoral neck. Women with &gt;3 vertebral fractures on X-ray by site read or new vertebral fracture within the past year, medical disease that  might  be  associated  with  metabolic  bone  diseases,  venous  thromboembolic  disease  (deep  vein thrombosis  [DVT],  pulmonary  embolism  [PE]  or  retinal  vein  thrombosis  [RVT]),  or  breast  cancer (except  lobular  carcinoma  in  situ  treated  by  local  excision)  were  excluded  from  participation.  It  is noted  that  subjects  below  the  age  of  60  were  not  included  despite  they  were  more  than  5  year postmenopausal. Treatments Following a 6- to 8-week single-blind placebo and calcium/vitamin D screening/run-in period, eligible subjects were randomized to receive lasofoxifene 0.25 mg, 0.50 mg or placebo. All subjects were to take a daily supplement of calcium 1000 mg and vitamin D 400-800 IU. Objectives The  primary  objective  was  to  compare  the  risk  of  new/worsening  radiographic  vertebral  fractures between each dose of lasofoxifene and placebo. The principle secondary objectives were to compare the incidence of multiple radiographic vertebral fractures at 3 years and to compare the risk of clinical vertebral  fractures  between  each  dose  of  lasofoxifene  and  placebo.  According  to  the  current  EU guideline (CPMP/EWP/552/95 rev. 2), the primary endpoint should be the incidence of new vertebral fractures, and not worsening of previous radiographic vertebral fractures. Therefore, the applicant has also analysed time to first new radiographic vertebral fracture. Outcomes/endpoints The primary endpoint was the occurrence of a new/worsening vertebral fracture over the first 3 years of  the  study  regardless  of  trauma.  Vertebral  fractures  were  determined  from  X-rays  of  the  lateral thoracic  and  lumbar  spine  (T4-L4)  obtained  at  screening  and  at  1,  2,  and  3  years  in  asymptomatic subjects.  Additionally,  in  subjects  whose  symptoms  were  suggestive  of  fracture,  spine  X-rays  were taken at the time they presented with symptoms to aid in diagnosis. The  definition  of  the  primary  endpoint  included  both  new  and  worsening  fractures.  A  worsening fracture  was  defined  as  significant  additional  compression  in  a  vertebra  with  a  prevalent  baseline fracture. A new fracture was defined as significant compression in a vertebra with no evidence of a fracture  at  baseline.  The  primary  endpoint,  which  includes  worsening  fractures,  is  referred  to  as new/worsening fractures. To comply with current European guidelines, a second analysis defining the endpoint as only new fractures was conducted and referred to as the analysis of new fractures. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Secondary  endpoints  included  the  incidence  of  multiple  (0,  1,  more  than  1)  radiographic  vertebral fractures at 3 years and time to the first clinical vertebral fracture through 3 years where the censoring time was the date of last study visit. Furthermore, BMD of the hip and lumbar spine (L1-L4) were measured in all subjects pre-treatment and at baseline and at 1, 2, and 3 years by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry  (DXA)  using  a  Hologic  or  Lunar  densitometer.  Additional  BMD  measurements  at 3 months  and  measurements  of  whole  body  bone  mineral  content  (BMC)  and  forearm  BMD  at baseline and at 1, 2 and 3 years were undertaken in a subset of subjects. Also the risk for breast cancer (confirmed by histology) was included as a secondary endpoint.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Sample size

A sample size of 5000 subjects on lasofoxifene and 2500 subjects on placebo had approximately 90% power to detect a 40% reduction in the risk of subjects for a new/worsening vertebral fracture after 3 years by means of a two-sided α = 0.05 log rank test. In addition, the study had approximately 87% power to detect a 40% reduction in the risk for an individual active dose versus placebo (2500 subjects on  lasofoxifene,  2500  subjects  on  placebo).  The  sample  size  calculation  was  based  on  a  baseline annual vertebral fracture incidence of 1.5%, a cumulative lost to follow-up rate of 10% at 1 year, 20% at 2 years, and 30% at 3 years, and a drop-in and dropout rate of 1% per year.

## Randomisation

Subjects  were  allocated  to  treatment  groups  in  a  1:1:1  ratio  of  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg,  lasofoxifene 0.5 mg, and placebo. Blinding (masking) Subject eligibility for participation in the active treatment phase of the study was determined after the 6- to 8-week single-blind placebo and calcium/vitamin D run-in period. The active treatment part of the study is double-blind. Statistical methods The analyses of primary and secondary endpoints were performed on the Full Analysis Set (FAS). The FAS includes all randomized subjects (if applicable) with at least one non-missing post-baseline observation for the measurement of interest. For  the  primary  endpoint,  radiographic  vertebral  fractures,  each  lasofoxifene  treatment  group  was tested against placebo using a log-rank test stratified for geographic region and vertebral fracture at baseline  in  the  FAS.  Censoring  time  was  defined  as  the  date  of  the  last  X-ray.  The  Hochberg procedure was used to control Type I error in the comparison of each lasofoxifene treatment group to placebo. The hazard ratio and 95% confidence interval (CI) for each lasofoxifene dose versus placebo were calculated using a Cox proportional hazards regression model with treatment group as a covariate and  stratified  by  vertebral  fracture  at  baseline  and  geographic  region.  Cumulative  and  annual incidences were calculated using Kaplan-Meier methods. RESULTS Participant flow The patient flow at the 5 year time period of the study is presented in table 5. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5 Patient flow in study A2181002 (5-year)

|                                 | Lasofoxifene 0.25 mg   | Lasofoxifene 0.5 mg   | Placebo      |
|---------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|--------------|
| Number (%) of Subjects          |                        |                       |              |
| Randomized                      | 2852                   | 2852                  | 2852         |
| Treated                         | 2849                   | 2852                  | 2851         |
| Discontinued                    | 657 (23.0)             | 639 (22.4)            | 646 (22.7)   |
| Completed Month 60              | 2195 (77.0)            | 2213 (77.6)           | 2206 (77.3)  |
| On treatment                    | 1753 (61.5)            | 1777 (62.3)           | 1820 (63.8)  |
| Off treatment                   | 442 (15.5)             | 436 (15.3)            | 386 (13.5)   |
| Analyzed for Primary Efficacy:  |                        |                       |              |
| Radiographic vertebral fracture | 2734 (95.9)            | 2748 (96.4)           | 2744 (96.2)  |
| Non-Vertebral Fracture          | 2852 (100.0)           | 2852 (100.0)          | 2852 (100.0) |
| Breast Cancer                   | 2730 (95.7)            | 2746 (96.3)           | 2741 (96.1)  |
| Analyzed for Safety:            |                        |                       |              |
| Adverse events                  | 2852 (100.0)           | 2852 (100.0)          | 2852 (100.0) |
| Laboratory                      | 2670 (93.6)            | 2660 (93.3)           | 2673 (93.7)  |

| Treatment (mg)   | Mean Age (Range) (yrs)   | Race W/B/A/H/O (# Subject)   | Mean Weight (Range) (Kg)   | Mean Height (Range) (cm)   | Mean BMI (Range)   |
|------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|
| Laso 0.25        | 67.5 (60-80)             | 2111/26/530/138/47           | 61.0 (27-120)              | 155.5 (131-177)            | 25.2 (13.3-47.0)   |
| Laso 0.5         | 67.3 (60-80)             | 2108/29/519/144/52           | 61.2 (30-111)              | 155.3 (134-182)            | 25.4 (12.2-42.4)   |
| Placebo          | 67.5 (59-80)             | 2118/27/521/141/45           | 61.6 (25-132)              | 155.6 (132-178)            | 25.4 (13.7-55.4)   |

| Treatment (mg/day)   | Years post menopause Mean (Range)   | Hysterectomy N (%)   | LS-BMD T- Score Mean (SD)   | FN BMDT- Score Mean (SD)   | Pre-existing Vertebral Fx Number (%)   |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Laso 0.25            | 19.5 (2.0-52.0)                     | 554 (19.4)           | -3.024 (0.735)              | -2.289 (0.698)             | 804 (28.2)                             |
| Laso 0.5             | 19.4 (2.0-57.0)                     | 550 (19.3)           | -3.020 (0.715)              | -2.229 (0.693)             | 808 (28.4)                             |
| Placebo              | 19.5 (5.0-55.0)                     | 543 (19.0)           | -3.007 (0.736)              | -2.248(0.714)              | 804 (28.2)                             |

Discontinuation rates were low to moderate (around 8%) and similar over treatment arms. The number of major protocol violations (violations assumed to affect the outcomes) was low. Conduct of the study There were three global protocol amendments with one introducing the option for patients to continue in the study for an additional 2 years beyond month 36. Baseline data Baseline demographics and characteristics are shown in table 6 and table 7, respectively. Table 6 Baseline demographics, study A2181002 (PEARL) Table 7 Baseline characteristics, study A2181002 (PEARL) Medicinal product no longer authorised

Baseline  demographics  were  similar  across  treatment  groups.  According  to  the  current  CHMP guideline on the evaluation of medicinal products in the treatment of primary  osteoporosis (CPMP/EWP/552/95  rev.  2),  risk  for  fracture  should  be  expressed  as  the  ten-year  probability  of fracture. It is recommended that 10 years probabilities of 15-20% for spine fracture, 5-7.5% for hip fracture  and  10-15%  for  major  non-vertebral  fractures  should  be  reflected  in  the  inclusion  criteria. Based on the Fracture Risk algorithm (FRAX) model the applicant has analysed baseline data in the PEARL study and found mean probability of a major osteoporotic fracture of 43.5% and of 34.7% for a  hip  fracture  at  baseline.  Excluding  BMD,  these  probabilities  were  markedly  decreased.  The proportions of patients with probabilities that equalled or exceeded the lower thresholds proposed by

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the CHMP were 91% in the case of a major osteoporotic fracture and 93% for hip fracture. Hence, the PEARL study enrolled high risk patients.

## Numbers analysed

A total of 8556 female subjects was randomized with 2852 subjects in each treatment group. All of the randomized and treated subjects were analyzed for adverse events and ~ 94% of subjects had clinical laboratory data.

## Outcomes and estimation

Bone  fracture  results  are  presented  in  the  following  tables.  5-year  data  were  provided  during  the assessment  in  a  preliminary  report  in  addition  to  the  3-year  data,  and  the  data  from  this  report  are presented in the below tables.

Time to new/worsening radiographic vertebral fracture, the primary outcome of the study, is shown in table  8.  A  statistically  significant  reduction  was  reached  in  risk  of  new/worsening  radiographic vertebral fractures through 3 years and through 5 years in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. The risk  for  a  new/worsening  radiographic  vertebral  fracture  was  reduced  by  31%  and  42%  in  the lasofoxifene 0.25 mg and 0.5 mg groups, respectively, compared with placebo through 36 months and through 5 years.  This effect was observed from 1 year onwards for both the doses of lasofoxifene. Similar  results  are  reported  in  women  with  or  without  prevalent  fracture  at  baseline.  Lasofoxifene 0.5 mg,  but  not  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg,  significantly  reduced  the  risk  in  subjects  (N=1,316)  with baseline  lumbar  spine  BMD  T-score  &gt;  -2.5,  who  were  eligible  for  the  study  on  the  basis  of  their baseline femoral neck BMD T-score &lt; -2.5. Data from the analysis of the time to first new radiographic vertebral fracture (table 9) are consistent with those of time to new/worsening radiographic vertebral fracture (table 8). Lasofoxifene 0.5 mg and 0.25 mg were associated with statistically significantly reduced risks of 42% and 32%, respectively, and 41% and 32% through 5 years, respectively, pointing to 0.5 mg as the most effective dose. Analysis of the time to first nonvertebral fracture (hip, pelvis, femur, knee, lower leg, ankle, calcaneus, foot, shoulder, humerus, elbow, forearm, wrist, scapula, clavicle, rib, sternum, nonthoracic/nonlumbar spine) revealed a significant effect compared to placebo for the 0.5 mg dose, but not for the 0.25 mg dose both through 3 years and through 5 years (table 10). Regarding hip fractures: at 3 years there were 20 (HR=0.87: 95% CI: 0.48, 158) and 18 (HR=0.78: 95% CI: 0.42, 1.44) in the 0.25 and 0.5 mg groups respectively, and 23 in the placebo group. Through 5 years, there were 31 (HR=0.88: 95% CI: 0.54, 1.42) and 27 (HR=0.77: 95% CI: 0.46, 1.27) in the 0.25 and 0.5 mg groups respectively, and 35 in the placebo group. Therefore, the effect on hip fractures is considered modest at best and the SPC contains a statement in the indication section that an effect on hip fractures has not been demonstrated. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 8 Analysis of Time  to First New/Worsening  Radiographic Vertebral -Study A2181002 - Full Analysis Set through 5 Years

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Lasofoxifene                                                        | Lasofoxifene                                                                | Placebo         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.25 mg                                                             | 0.5 mg                                                                      |                 |
| 1 Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                     |                                                                             |                 |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value                                                                                                                               | 2,734 29 (1.1) 0.47 (0.30, 0.73) 0.0007*                            | 2,748 28 (1.0) 0.45 (0.29, 0.70) 0.0003*                                    | 2,744 61 (2.2)  |
| 2 Years                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                     |                                                                             |                 |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value                                                                                                                               | 2,734 73 (2.7) 0.56 (0.42, 0.74) 0.0001*                            | 2,748 60 (2.2) 0.46 (0.34, 0.62) <0.0001*                                   | 2,744 128 (4.7) |
| 3 Years                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                     |                                                                             |                 |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI)                                                                                                                                       | 2,734 129 (4.7) 0.69 (0.55, 0.87)                                   | 2,748 106 (3.9) 0.57 (0.45, 0.73) authorised                                | 2,744           |
| P-value 4 Years Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture                                                                                                                                                         | 0.0014* 2734 135 (4.9)                                              | <0.0001*                                                                    | 180 (6.6)       |
| P-value Overall (through 5 years)                                                                                                                                                                                           | 0.0007*                                                             | 2748 114 (4.1) <0.0001*                                                     | 2744 191 (7.0)  |
| Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture                                                                                                                                       | 0.68 (0.55, 0.85) 2734 189 (6.9)                                    | 0.58 (0.46, 0.73) 2748 156 (5.7) longer                                     | 2744 262 (9.5)  |
| Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI)                                                                                                                                                                                           | 0.69                                                                | 0.58                                                                        |                 |
| P-value With prevalent vertebral fracture baseline                                                                                                                                                                          | 0.0001* - 5 years no                                                | <0.0001*                                                                    |                 |
| at Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture                                                                                                                                                                      | 775 90 (11.6) 0.70 (0.53, 0.92)                                     | 778                                                                         | 774 117 (15.1)  |
| Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value Without prevalent vertebral fracture at Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value *P-value significant versus placebo product | 0.0132* baseline - 5 years 1,959 99 (5.1) 0.67 (0.52, 0.87) 0.0027* | 69 (8.9) 0.56 (0.41, 0.75) 0.0001* 1,970 87 (4.4) 0.59 (0.45, 0.77) 0.0002* | 1,970 145 (7.4) |

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 9 Analysis of Time to First New Radiographic Vertebral Fracture - Study A2181002 Full Analysis Set through 5 Years

|                                                                                                                                  | Lasofoxifene 0.25 mg                      | 0.5 mg                                            | Placebo         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| 1 Year                                                                                                                           |                                           |                                                   |                 |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI)                                            | 2,734 29 (1.1) 0.50 (0.32, 0.78)          | 2,748 27 (1.0) 0.45 (0.29, 0.72)                  | 2,744 58 (2.1)  |
| 2 Years                                                                                                                          |                                           |                                                   |                 |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value 3 Years Number of subjects at risk | 2,734 72 (2.6) 0.57 (0.42, 0.76)          | 2,748 59 (2.1) 0.46 (0.34, 0.63) <0.0001*         | 2,744 124       |
|                                                                                                                                  | 0.0002*                                   |                                                   | (4.5)           |
| Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value                                                               | 2,734 124 (4.5) 0.68 (0.54, 0.86) 0.0011* | 2,748 105 (3.8) 0.58 (0.46, 0.74) <0.0001*        | 2,744 176 (6.4) |
| 4 Years Number of subjects at risk                                                                                               |                                           |                                                   |                 |
| Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI)                                                                       | 2,734 130 (4.8) 0.67 (0.54, 0.84) 0.0005* | 2,748 113 (4.1) 0.59 (0.47, 0.74) <0.0001* longer | 2,744 187 (6.8) |
| P-value 5 Years                                                                                                                  | 2,734                                     | 2,748                                             | 2,744           |
| Number of subjects at risk Number (%) with fracture Hazard ratio vs. placebo (95% CI) P-value                                    | 183 (6.7) 0.68 (0.56, 0.83) 0.0002* no    | 155 (5.6) 0.59 (0.48, 0.72) <0.0001*              | 255 (9.3)       |

| Medicinal                  | Lasofoxifene      |                   |            |
|----------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|------------|
|                            | 0.25 mg           | 0.5 mg            | Placebo    |
| 3-Years                    |                   |                   |            |
| Number of subjects at risk | 2,852             | 2,852             | 2,852      |
| Number (%) with fracture   | 189 (6.6)         | 169 (5.9)         | 212 (7.4)  |
| Hazard ratio (95% CI)      | 0.88 (0.73, 1.07) | 0.79 (0.64, 0.96) |            |
| P-value                    | 0.2122            | 0.0195*           |            |
| 5-Years                    |                   |                   |            |
| Number of subjects at risk | 2,852             | 2,852             | 2,852      |
| Number (%) with fracture   | 269 (9.4)         | 230 (8.1)         | 296 (10.4) |
| Hazard ratio (95% CI)      | 0.90 (0.76, 1.06) | 0.76 (0.64, 0.91) |            |
| P-value                    | 0.1885            | 0.0020*           |            |

*P-value significant versus placebo Table 10 Analysis of Time to First Nonvertebral Fracture - Study A2181002 - Full Analysis Set through 3 Years and through 5 Years Medicinal product no longer authorised

CI=confidence interval

*P-value significant versus placebo, Hochberg procedure with overall alpha = 0.05

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Measurements of BMD were performed in a 3-year substudy of PEARL, including 1,126 subjects. Time points of measurement were baseline, 3 months and 1, 2, and 3 years. BMD at the lumbar spine, hip  and  hip  components,  and  forearm  was  significantly  increased  (evident  at  3  months,  sustained through  3  years)  in  osteoporotic  women  treated  with  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg  or  0.5  mg  compared  to placebo (Table 11). Greater increases at all sites were observed with 0.5 mg as compared to 0.25 mg. Whole Body BMC was increased at 3 years as compared to placebo.

Table 11 Analysis of BMD by Site and Whole Body BMC: Percent Change from Baseline at Month 36 - Study A2181002 - BMD Subgroup Non-Japanese Subjects

|                                                                    | Lasofoxifene 0.25 mg                        | Lasofoxifene 0.5 mg                             | Placebo      |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| Lumbar spineBMD                                                    | N= 254                                      | N=253                                           | N=253        |
| LS Mean                                                            | 4.623                                       | 4.677                                           | 1.331        |
| LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI) P-value                           | 3.293 (2.489, 4.096) <0.001*                | 3.346 (2.542, 4.151) <0.001*                    |              |
| Total hipBMD                                                       | N= 254                                      | N=252                                           | N=253        |
| LS Mean LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI)                           | 1.742 2.258 (1.620, 2.896)                  | 2.527 3.043 (2.403, 3.683) authorised           | -0.516       |
| P-value Femoral neckBMD                                            | <0.001* N= 254                              | <0.001* N=252                                   | N=253        |
| LS Mean LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI)                           | 1.871 2.696 (1.900, 3.492)                  | 2.465 3.291 (2.493, 4.089)                      | -0.826       |
| P-value                                                            | <0.001*                                     | <0.001*                                         | N=253        |
| Greater trochanterBMD LS Mean                                      | N= 254 2.184                                | N=252 3.469 3.591 (2.756, 4.426) <0.001* longer | -0.122       |
| LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI) P-value Intertrochanteric areaBMD | 2.306 (1.473, 3.139) <0.001*                | 2.059 2.637, (1.943, 3.330) <0.001*             | N=           |
| LS Mean LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI) P-value                   | N= 254 1.439 2.016 (1.326, 2.707) 0.001* no | N= 252                                          | 253 -0.578   |
| Ward's triangleBMD                                                 | N= 254 1.416                                | N= 252                                          | N= 253       |
| LS Mean LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI) P-value                   | 4.374 (2.665, 6.082) 0.001* product         | 2.894 5.851 (4.138, 7.565) <0.001*              | -2.957       |
| ForearmBMD LS Mean                                                 | N=215 -0.445                                | N=210 0.085                                     | N=216 -1.713 |
| LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI)                                   | 1.268 (0.647, 1.888)                        | 1.798 (1.173, 2.423)                            |              |
| P-value                                                            | 0.001*                                      | 0.001*                                          | 242          |
| Whole BodyBMC LS Mean                                              | 239 1.877                                   | 233 2.054                                       |              |
|                                                                    |                                             |                                                 | -0.729       |
| LS mean diff vs placebo (95% CI) P-value                           | 2.606 (1.839, 3.373) <0.001*                | 2.783 (2.010, 3.555) <0.001*                    |              |

Markers  of  bone  turnover  were  assessed  in  the  same  subjects  as  BMD  measurements  were  done. Samples were collected at baseline, 1, 3, and 6 months and at 1, 2, and 3 years. Lasofoxifene-treated subjects  had  significantly  decreased  levels  of  markers  of  bone  turnover  compared  to  placebo  from Month 1 through 3 years (with the exception of P1NP at Month 1).

Bone quality was assessed by evaluating tetracycline-labelled transiliac biopsies in a subset of subjects (N=71)  who  participated  in  Studies  A2181003/A2181004  (OPAL). Lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  treated subjects had significantly reduced bone formation rate as compared with placebo at 24 months. Bone quality in lasofoxifene treated subjects was normal and no pathologic or woven bone was noted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Ancillary analyses

In  A2181002  (PEARL)  mammograms  were  performed  annually.  At  36  months  as  compared  with placebo, lasofoxifene 0.5 mg reduced the risk of all breast cancers by 65%, the risk of ER+ breast cancer  by  67%,  invasive,  and  ER+  invasive  breast  cancer  by  75%.    Through  5  years,  lasofoxifene 0.5 mg reduced the risk of all breast cancers by 79%, the risk of ER+ breast cancer by 81%, invasive breast cancer by 85%, and ER+ invasive breast cancer by 83%.

There  were  3  Phase  2/3  Studies  with  lasofoxifene  for  the  treatment  of  vulvar  and  vaginal  atrophy. Lasofoxifene 0.5 mg decreased vaginal pH and improved vaginal cell maturation index.

· Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) Due to differences in demographic and baseline characteristics the CHMP considered that pooling of the data from the PEARL study and from the JADE study was not appropriate. · Clinical studies in special populations Studies in special populations have not been conducted. · Supportive study(ies) Supportive studies were the osteoporosis prevention trials (see table 3), and the osteoporosis treatment trial performed in 497 Asian women (JADE). In the JADE study, subjects were randomized to receive lasofoxifene  0.025  mg,  0.25  mg,  0.5  mg  daily  or  placebo.  All  three  lasofoxifene  doses  were significantly superior to placebo in increasing lumbar spine BMD at month 12. Percentages changes from baseline were 2.3, 2.8, 3.0 and -0.9 for lasofoxifene 0.025 mg, 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg daily and placebo respectively. Also changes at total hip were in favour of lasofoxifene compared to placebo. Study 218-102 and Study A2181030 (CORAL) were 2-year studies versus raloxifene and placebo. In both studies, subjects were randomized to receive lasofoxifene 0.25 mg, raloxifene 60 mg, or placebo. In addition, study 218-102 included a lasofoxifene 1 mg dose. At month 24, lasofoxifene 0.25 and 1 mg, significantly increased lumbar spine BMD (about 3.3 and 3.9%) compared to placebo. For lumbar spine  BMD  lasofoxifene  effects  were  superior  to  those  of  raloxifene.  For  other  BMD  parameters, performance of lasofoxifene and raloxifene were approximately equal. Clinical safety A routine GCP inspection at two sites (Romania and Argentina), which recruited approximately 10% of  the  study  population,  has  detected  major  GCP  non-compliance with regard to safety assessment. Two major  issues  were  of  particular  importance  for  the  assessment  of  the  marketing  authorisation application:  (1)  assessment  of  baseline  medical  history  and  (2)  assessment  of  causality  of  reported AE's and SAE's by the investigators. The procedures may have resulted in an underreporting of new or suspected (serious) adverse drug reactions. The applicant was asked to discuss the impact of these procedures on the overall safety assessment and to address concerns about its reliability. Medicinal product no longer authorised

With regard to retrospective revision and update of medical histories the applicant provided reassuring data  that  this  have  no  or  very  limited  impact  on  the  overall  assessment  of  safety.  Geographical differences in the frequencies for update of baseline medical history are explained by the organisation of the health care system in the countries involved in the study and, for example lack of nationwide update  personal  medical  files  -  especially  for  middle-aged  women  without  healthcare  insurance. Although the frequency of updates of medical history was high at the Argentinean site only 7-8% of these updates were linked to report of AE's and there was no indication of a disproportionate number of updates among the different treatment groups including placebo. All in all it is the CHMP's view that these retrospective updates have not seriously affected the safety assessment for FABLYN.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Moreover, the applicant has provided a comprehensive review of the actual methods used for causality assessment at the two sites and supporting examples further indicating that a trustworthy assessment of causality has been carried out by the investigators.

Looking at these two concerns - update of medical history and causality assessment of AE's - there is no clear sign that these procedures have been carried out routinely at the two sites inspected. Update of medical history was far more frequently undertaken in Argentina as compared to Romania whereas causality assessment resulting in ascribing causality to the event itself was more frequently seen at the Romanian  site  as  compared  to  Argentina.  Therefore,  these  observations  seem  to  be  a  random phenomenon with limited if any impact on the overall (safety) data of the PEARL trial.

· Patient exposure The  clinical  safety  database  consisted  of  15,404  subjects  representing  42,143  subject-years  of exposure, of who 10,257 received lasofoxifene (representing 27,910 subject-years of exposure).  The 5-year  PEARL  study  has  been  completed  (database  locked  April  2008)  and  there  are  presently  no ongoing  studies  in  the  lasofoxifene  clinical  program.  Subsequent  to  22/5/2007,  the  Phase  2  LACE study (A2181042) also completed. Updated analyses including 5-year Phase 2/3 Clinical Program data (that includes final 5-year data from the PEARL study and the LACE study), and final 5-year PEARL data alone, are presented below. · Adverse events The most common all causality AEs associated with lasofoxifene based on a cross-program analysis through 3 years were hot flush, muscle spasms, and vaginal discharge, most events mild or moderate in severity (Table 12). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 12 All  Causality  Adverse  Events  Reported  in ≥ 5%  of  Subjects  in  Any  Treatment Group: Phase 2/3 Clinical Program

| authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   |
|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       |

Among less  common  (&lt;5%  incidence)  AEs,  are  reproductive  tract  disorders:  endometrial  disorder, endometrial hypertrophy (sonographic endometrial thickness findings) and uterine polyp (Table 13). Other important disorders are vascular, inter alia deep vein thrombosis. After 3 years lasofoxifene was associated with a 2-fold greater incidence of venous thromboembolic events compared with placebo. In this respect the new 5-year data are comparable to the 3 year data and importantly, the incidences are not further increased after 5 years. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 13 Selected  All  Causality  Adverse  Events  with  &lt;5%  Incidence  in  All  Treatment Groups: Phase 2/3 Clinical Program

| authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   |
|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       | longer       |
|              | no           |              |              |              |              |

All causality serious adverse events that appeared to be associated with lasofoxifene generally were gynaecological in nature, including uterine polyps and endometrial hypertrophy  (sonographic endometrial thickness findings), and uterine prolapse.

· Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events The  incidence  of  serious  adverse  events  was  similar  for  lasofoxifene-treated  subjects  (14.7%)  and placebo-treated subjects (14.1%) in Phase 2/3 studies through 3 years. The most common all causality serious  adverse  events  among  lasofoxifene-  and  placebo-treated  subjects  were  cholelithiasis,  fall, cataract  and  osteoarthritis.  These  events  occurred  at  comparable  incidence  rates  between  the lasofoxifene and placebo treatment group and at a rate of less than 1 event per 100 subjects. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Death

Initially, there were 138 deaths reported across the lasofoxifene clinical development program through 3 years (i.e., including 3-year interim data from the PEARL study) in the initial file. The incidence of deaths was 48/4,523 (1.1%) for lasofoxifene 0.25 mg, 50/4,308 (1.2%) for lasofoxifene 0.5 mg, and 38/4,676 (0.8%) for placebo, i.e. risk of death did not significantly differ between lasofoxifene and placebo  treated  subjects.  However  one  death  due  to  leiomyosarcoma  uteri  was  reported  during lasofoxifene. After 3 years there were 3 deaths related to pulmonary embolism among lasofoxifene-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treated subjects, and none in the placebo-treated group. Two of the 3 deaths occurred in the setting of recent surgery. Accordingly in the SPC it is stated that FABLYN should be discontinued at least 3 weeks prior to and during prolonged immobilization (e.g. post-surgical recovery, prolonged bed rest), and FABLYN therapy should be resumed only after the patient is fully ambulatory.

PEARL, the study with the largest population, highest mean age of participants, and longest duration, accounted for the majority of deaths in the lasofoxifene clinical development program. An analysis of mortality through 5 years in PEARL is shown in table 14.

Table 14 Analysis of Time to All Cause Mortality - Full analysis Set

Borderline significance is noted for the lower dose of 0.25 mg lasofoxifene in comparison to placebo, while this is  not  the  case  for  the  0.5  mg  to  be  marketed.  The  difference  is  explained  by  more  fatal cases of cancer and stroke. Further analysis showed the following: -No specific pattern in causes of death can be found, i.e. causes do not appear to focus on any one organ system; -There is no dose-effect relationship; -There is no signal that hormone-related tumours are involved; -There  is  a  higher  number  of  lasofoxifene-treated  subjects  who  died  from  stroke,  but  a  lower number of subjects with non-fatal stroke in comparison to placebo, i.e. an inverse effect to what would be expected. In view of these observations, it is concluded that a causal relationship with the use of lasoxifene is unlikely  and  that  the  findings  do  not  reflect  a  true  increase  in  mortality  in  lasofoxifene-treated subjects. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 15 Death Causality as Determined by External Endpoint Adjudication Committee

| authorised   |
|--------------|

Including  the  5-year  data  of  the  Pearl  study,  7  PE-associated  deaths  have  been  reported  across  the Phase  2/3  Clinical  Program;  3  occurred  in  the  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg  group,  3  occurred  in  the lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  group  and  one  occurred  in  a  placebo-treated  subject.  All  deaths  occurred  in PEARL, the study with the largest population, highest mean age and longest duration of treatment. Three of these events were reported in the initial submission; the subsequent 4 cases were reported after the 22/5/2007 cut-off date. Incidence rates were low: 0.02, 0.02 and 0.01 events per 100 subject years at risk for lasofoxifene 0.25 mg, lasofoxifene 0.5 mg and placebo, respectively (NS). Further, all but two cases were associated with coexistent risk factors for VTE and one had discontinued study drug for &gt;60 days at the time. In four cases, the PE event was not confirmed by imaging or autopsy. Thus lasofoxifene treatment does not seem to increase the risk of death from PE. Gynaecological adverse events The results for gynaecological safety are presented for the Full Analysis Set, excluding women with a pre-treatment  hysterectomy.  Gynaecological  safety  surveillance  was  extensive  and  driven  by  the possible association with uterine cancer. Central review of endometrial biopsies was done as a key to obtain  accurate  assessment  of  endometrial  histology.  Further  in  a  number  of  studies  transvaginal ultrasounds (TVUs) were done. In  addition  in  Study  A2181002  (PEARL)  [N=8,556]  an  independent  committee  of  external  experts was involved in the assessment of endometrial cancer, endometrial hyperplasia, endometrial polyps, endometrial  thickness  and  cystic  changes,  vaginal  bleeding,  ovarian  cancer,  cervical  cancer  and surgery for prolapse or urinary incontinence. In PEARL patients had TVUs because of participation in a substudy or if required by a local authority. In other subjects with a uterus [N=4,054], TVUs were performed as required for follow-up of e.g. vaginal bleeding. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Endometrial thickness

The change in sonographic endometrial thickness was assessed in a sub-study of 326 subjects with an intact uterus at baseline. Mean thickness increased with 0.5 mg lasofoxifene, ranged from 0.61-1.44 mm and was significantly different from placebo. Lasofoxifene is also associated with an increased incidence  of  subjects  with  an  endometrial  thickness  &gt;=  8  mm  (endometrial  thickness  outliers),  as shown in Table 16.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 16 Incidence of Endometrial Thickness Outliers- Lasofoxifene Phase 2/3 Osteoporosis Prevention/Treatment Studies

| authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   |
|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|

Endometrial histology Endometrial histology data indicated the endometrial pattern to change into 'benign cystic atrophy' in a number of women. The pattern of 'benign cystic atrophy' is said to be due to accumulation of fluid in  both  the  stroma  and  glands  of  the  endometrium  and  has  been  confirmed  by  external  experts  as benign in nature. Interpretation of endometrial safety data is further complicated by the noted increase in endometrial thickness, with outliers up to &gt;8 mm, although reversible in some patients under treatment (table 16). This  endometrial  pattern  is  not  noted  during  use  of  raloxifene  and  other  SERMs.  This  endometrial pattern  led  to  discrepancy  in  locally-read  and  centrally-read  biopsy  findings:  through  5  years  of follow-up  in  the  PEARL  study,  in  41  cases  local  pathologists  diagnosed  endometrial  hyperplasia (without atypia) of which after central reading the number was reduced to only 5 confirmed cases, i.e. in  36  women  endometrial  hyperplasia  was  not  confirmed.  The  discrepancy  is  said  to  be  due  to  the unfamiliarity of local pathologists with 'benign cystic atrophy', a pattern that can be confused with simple  endometrial  hyperplasia.  However,  extensive  follow-up  information  on  these  36  subjects sufficiently demonstrated that these cases should be considered benign and as such, will not be taken into account in the assessment of the risk of endometrial cancer or hyperplasia. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Based on 3- and 5-year treatment data, the incidence of endometrial hyperplasia/endometrial cancer during treatment with lasofoxifene was not higher than noted for placebo. Four cases of endometrial cancers  were  observed  in  the  lasofoxifene-treated  patients  versus  3  in  the  placebo-treated  patients [incidence  rate/100  treatment  years  is  0.019  vs  0.029,  HR  0.67).  For  endometrial  hyperplasia  these numbers were 5 versus 0 cases, respectively (incidence rate/100 treatment years is 0.024 versus 0.0).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

But it appears that only a limited number of women had scheduled end-of-study endometrial biopsies taken in the PEARL study. Therefore the diagnosis of endometrial hyperplasia and endometrial cancer relies very much on reporting of symptoms, which may be indicative of the presence of endometrial hyperplasia/cancer.  The  most  important  symptom  for  evaluation  of  the  endometrium  is  unexpected vaginal bleeding.

The  incidence  of  endometrial  hyperplasia  or  cancer  in  lasofoxifene-treated  subjects  had  not  been evaluated systematically by comparing biopsies taken at baseline and after 12 months of treatment in at  least  300  women,  a  design  that  is  recommended  for  combined  HRT  in  the  CHMP  guideline  on HRT. Therefore, the conclusion of the applicant that the reported incidence rate of 0.02 (95% CI: 0.01, 0.05) per 100 subject-years does not suggest an increased risk for endometrial cancer as it falls within the upper limit of the 95% CI of 2% as defined by this guidance (the upper limit of a two-sided 95% confidence interval of the observed frequency of endometrial events should not exceed 2%), cannot be supported.

| no   |
|------|

Reliable conclusions on endometrial safety can only be drawn when a sufficient number of women had at least 1 year of exposure to FABLYN before a biopsy was taken. Therefore, additional endometrial biopsy data were submitted for 321 women who have been treated for more than one year. Table 17 Incidence  of  Endometrial  Hyperplasia  or  Cancer  among  Subjects  with  Adequate Histology and ≥ 1 Year of Confirmed Study Drug Treatment Based on total exposure in these women, the applicant presents incidence rate per 100 treatment years of 0.6% with an upper limit of 95% CI of 1.59%. However, as it is likely that the risk of hyperplasia is not  constant  over  time,  calculation  of  the  incidence  rate  expressed  per  proportion  of  subjects  is considered less unbiased and therefore preferable. This is also the primary calculation requested for HRT, as the risk of HRT is definitely not constant over time, but increasing with longer duration of use. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The incidence rate expressed per proportion of subjects is 1.2% (4/321) with an upper limit of 3.2%, (95% CI). It is noted that the incidence rate of 1.2% with an upper limit of 3.2% expressed in terms of proportion  of  subjects  with  hyperplasia  differs  substantially  from  the  incidence  rate  of  0.6  /  100 treatment years with an upper limit of 1.59%.

The upper limit of 95% CI of 3.2% is higher than the maximum of 2% considered acceptable in the HRT guideline. However, the recommendations in the HRT guideline refer to an incidence rate in all users i.e. in an unselected population with non-abnormal endometrium, verified by endometrial biopsy

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

at  baseline.  The  FABLYN  population  evaluated  is  a  selected  population  i.e.  only  subjects  with  an indication for an endometrium biopsy (vaginal bleeding or increased endometrial thickness) have been included. Additionally, no baseline biopsies were taken to rule out any endometrial malignancy prior to  study entry. Hence, the incidence figures given are the incidences of hyperplasia in women with complaints/signs. Therefore, the incidence rate of 1.2 with an upper limit of the 95% CI of 3.2% is considered acceptable.

In conclusion, additional analyses of endometrial biopsies were taken 'for cause' in women who had used  FABLYN  for  at  least  1  year  did  not  demonstrate  an  increase  in  the  risk  of  pre-malignant  or malignant changes in the endometrium.

Nevertheless, there remain concerns about the benign endometrial changes induced by lasofoxifene and  the  resulting  invasive  'minor'  uterine  procedures.  Lasofoxifene  is  associated  with  endometrial changes  that  apparently  prompt  gynaecologists  to  carry  out  invasive  'minor'  uterine  diagnostic procedures, especially endometrial biopsy-taking and hysteroscopy. Despite the educational programme it  is  most  likely  going  to  be  very  difficult  to  avoid  all  such  'unnecessary'  procedures, because the endometrial thickening and cystic changes induced by lasofoxifene in many women have a 'dramatic' appearance on ultrasonographic examination. Ultrasound examination is widely performed in connection with a gynaecological examination, and it is not easy to see how the use of this informative, fast and safe modality should be avoided in lasofoxifene treated women. Two  cases  of  uterine  sarcoma  were  reported  in  all  lasofoxifene  studies.  No  new  cases  have  been detected in the 5-year PEARL study. In both cases the sarcoma was detected within 6 months after randomization. A causal relationship with lasofoxifene is therefore considered unlikely. It is planned to  monitor  the  occurrence  of  uterine  sarcomas  post-marketing  because  there  is  a  known  small association between such sarcomas and tamoxifene treatment. In  conclusion  on  gynaecological  adverse  events,  gynaecological  safety  is  still  a  cause  of  concern. Based  on  the  available  data  the  risk  of  endometrial  cancer  was  not  increased  by  lasofoxifene  use. However, it remains a cause of concern that lasofoxifene use was associated with a significant increase in minor uterine procedures. Also there was a trend towards an increase in risk of undergoing surgery for  Pelvic  Organ  Prolapse  and  Urinary  Incontinence  in  lasofoxifene  treated  women.  All  in  all,  the CHMP considers that the implications of these observations for daily practice are difficult to assess and based on assumptions. On the one hand incidence of minor uterine procedures may increase as trans-vaginal  ultrasound  will  be  used  less  discriminative  than  current  guidelines  which  recommend screening  transvaginal  ultrasound  only  in  patients  with  vaginal  bleeding;  on  the  other  hand  the company  has  proposed  a  very  extensive  educational  plan  to  bring  this  histological  pattern  to  the attention of the health professionals which would be expected to have some effect. In the absence of an increased risk of endometrial malignancy, the demonstrated absolute difference of 4.2% in uterine procedures is considered adequately addressed with the measures in the risk management plan. · Laboratory findings Medicinal product no longer authorised

The incidences of laboratory test abnormalities were comparable between the lasofoxifene and placebo treatment groups. Apparent exceptions included platelet count, alkaline phosphatase, total cholesterol and LDL-C, which decreased on lasofoxifene compared with placebo, and triglyceride levels, which increased  on  lasofoxifene  compared  with  placebo.  There  was  a  lower  incidence  of  elevated  total cholesterol and elevated LDL-C and a greater incidence of elevated triglycerides in the lasofoxifene 0.5  mg  group  than  in  the  placebo  group.  Lipids  were  not  collected  after  3  years  for  the  Phase  2/3 Clinical program for lipids (including triglycerides). Although a decrease in median triglycerides from baseline was observed with lasofoxifene treatment the decrease seen in the placebo treated groups for the  same studies was greater. However, in the total phase 2/3 Clinical Program, 5-year data do not indicate an increased risk of pancreatitis or stroke or coronary events.

Fibrinogen was reduced as well as platelet count. In view of established DVT the question arises what the data are of other coagulation factors: protein S, thrombin and antithrombin complex, prothrombin time,  prothrombin  fragments  1  and  2,  plasminogen,  D-dimer  quantitative  and  activated  partial

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

thromboplastin time. This is an important issue as coagulation factors might play an important role in DVT,  a  safety  issue.  Laboratory  assessments  were  not  conducted  beyond  3  years  in  PEARL. Lasofoxifene was associated with a median decrease in the platelet count compared to placebo. This change was not associated with an excess of very low platelet counts and not associated with bleeding episodes and the incidence of low (less than 50x103/mm3) platelet counts was similar across treatment groups in the 3-year Phase 2/3 Clinical Program. There were three subjects with a platelet count of &lt;20x103/mm3, two on placebo and one on lasofoxifene 0.25 mg. It seems that this sign is consistent with what has been observed with other SERMs, including raloxifene.

In all lasofoxifene treatment groups, high sensitivity C-Reactive Protein decreased from baseline by a median  of  0.10-  0.20  mg/L  within  one  month  of  treatment  initiation  and  remained  stable  through 36 months of treatment. Data indicate that there is a rapid and sustained decrease of this inflammatory marker upon lasofoxifene treatment.

The effect of lasofoxifene on cardiac repolarisation was assessed. In the studies presented there was no evidence of an effect on QTc. · Discontinuation due to adverse events In the Phase 2/3 Clinical Program that includes 3-year interim data from the PEARL study, there was no  difference  in  percentage  of  discontinuations  in  lasofoxifene  treated  patients  or  placebo  treated patients.  In  all  groups  the  percentage  was  20%.  Among  all  causality  adverse  events  resulting  in discontinuation  from  treatment,  there  was  an  apparent  imbalance  within  the  following  SOCs: Musculoskeletal  and  Connective  Tissue  Disorders,  with  discontinuations  occurring  in  1.3%,  1.3%, 1.3%, and 0.9% of subjects and Vascular Disorders, with discontinuations occurring in 2.5%, 2.7%, 2.7%,  and  1.1%  of  subjects  in  the  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg,  0.5  mg,  pooled,  and  placebo  groups, respectively. The incidence of discontinuation due to events in the Reproductive System and Breast Disorders SOC was comparable among treatment groups. Hot flush was the all causality adverse event most commonly resulting in lasofoxifene discontinuation, and  discontinuation  due  to  this  event  was  more  common  among  lasofoxifene-  than  placebo-treated subjects.  Discontinuations  due  to  all  causality  muscle  spasms  ( ≤ 0.8%  of  subjects)  and  deep  vein thrombosis  ( ≤ 0.5%  of  subjects)  were  less  common  though  occurred  at  greater  incidence  among subjects receiving lasofoxifene compared with placebo. · Post marketing experience There is no post-marketing experience as the product is not licensed yet. 2.5 Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance  system  as  described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Risk Management Plan

The MAA submitted a risk management plan, which included a risk minimisation plan.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 18 Summary of the risk management plan

| Safety issue                                        | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Important identified risks                          | Important identified risks                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Increase in VTEs                                    | Multi-tiered pharmacovigilance system Prospective cohort study to determine the incidence of gynecological and non-gynecological outcomes in women treated with lasofoxifene, raloxifene, or no SERM in a community setting            | SPC: 4.3 Contraindications: Patients with an active or past history of VTEs should not take FABLYN. 4.4 Special Warnings and Precautions: Patients should discontinue FABLYN three weeks prior to and during prolonged immobilization. 4.8, Venous Thromboembolic Events PL: Section 2, Before you take FABLYN: Do not take FABLYN if you currently have or previously had blood clots, for example in your veins, lungs or eyes (deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism or retinal vein thrombosis). Take special care with FABLYN: … Your doctor may recommend that you stop treatment at least 3 weeks prior to this time. …if you are taking FABLYN, you should walk around or exercise your legs and feet at regular intervals when traveling long distances. authorised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Increase in diagnostic uterine procedures Medicinal | Multi-tiered pharmacovigilance system Prospective cohort study to determine the incidence of gynecological and non-gynecological outcomes in women treated with lasofoxifene, raloxifene, or no SERM in a community setting product no | Educational programme SPC 4.3 Contraindications: - Unexplained uterine bleeding. SPC; 4.4 Special Warnings and Precautions: Lasofoxifene has been associated with benign endometrial effects. These included, in some subjects, a small excess in the incidence of vaginal bleeding as well as endometrial cystic change viewed on ultrasound and histological benign cystic atrophy (a variant of atrophic endometrium). These cystic findings contributed to an approximate 1.5mm increase in mean endometrial thickness. As a consequence of these benign effects, more FABLYN-treated patients had a diagnostic uterine procedure compared to placebo-treated patients in the PEARL trial (see section 5.1). However, in clinical practice, these benign findings do not warrant further evaluation in women with no vaginal bleeding (in accordance with guidelines for postmenopausal women), as the risks of diagnostic uterine procedures in asymptomatic women outweigh any benefits. Pathologists should be made aware of a history of lasofoxifene use when assessing endometrial histology, to ensure an accurate diagnosis of benign cystic atrophy when present SPC 5.1 Pharmacodynamic Properties, Effects on the endometrium: diagnositic uterine procedures were performed in greater number of FABLYN-treated women… PL: Section 2, Before you take FABLYN, Do not take FABLYN… if you have any longer |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | vaginal bleeding. This must be investigated by your doctor before starting treatment. Take special care with FABLYN… any vaginal bleeding while you take FABLYN is unexpected. You should have this investigated by your doctor… Educational programme Peer-review publication on the morphologic changes in the uterus of postmenopausal women   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Important potential risks                                                                                                                                        | Important potential risks                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Safety events associated with other SERMs and Hormone Therapy, including: endometrial cancer, pelvic organ prolapse/urinary incontinence and gallbladder events. | Multi-tiered pharmacovigilance system Prospective cohort study to determine the incidence of gynecological and non-gynecological outcomes in women treated with lasofoxifene, raloxifene, or no SERM in a community setting | No additional risk minimization activities are planned for potential risks. authorised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Important missing information                                                                                                                                    | Important missing information                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Effect of long term treatment (>5 years) in the normal practice setting                                                                                          | Prospective cohort study to determine the incidence of gynecological and non-gynecological outcomes in women treated with lasofoxifene, raloxifene, or no SERM in a community setting longer                                | None planned                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

The pharmacological effects of lasofoxifene were investigated in up to 12-months in OVX rats and 24month  in  OVX  monkeys.  In  general,  lasofoxifene  partially  inhibited  the  OVX-induced  changes  in bone  parameters  but  not  always  with  obvious  dose-response  relationship.  The  toxicity  study programme is considered sufficient for safety assessment except for the assessment of carcinogenicity. The  applicant  has  agreed  to  provide  further  information  regarding  the  relevance  of  the  tumours observed in animal carcinogenicity studies for humans. The applicant has committed to resolve these as follow-up measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe.

The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the MA application is of the opinion that the following  risk  minimisation  activities  are  necessary  for  the  safe  and  effective  use  of  the  medicinal product: see as detailed in the Annex \"Conditions or Restrictions with regard to the Safe and Effective Use of the Medicinal Product to be implemented by the Member States\". 2.6 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory  way.  At  the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a number of minor unresolved quality issues having no impact on the Benefit/Risk ratio of the product. The applicant gave a Letter of Undertaking and committed to resolve these as follow-up measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy

The main study for the establishment of efficacy of lasofoxifene for the treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women was a single randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial (study A2181002, PEARL) with an overall duration of 5 years and a pre-planned interim analysis at 3 years. Two doses of lasofoxifene (0.25 mg and 0.5 mg) were compared against placebo. 8556 patients were randomised. Participants were between 60 and 80 years of age, and had at screening a BMD T-score of ≥ -4.5 and ≤ -2.5 in the lumbar spine or femoral neck. The risk for a new/worsening radiographic vertebral  fracture  was  reduced  by  31%  and  42%  in  the  lasofoxifene  0.25 mg  and  0.5  mg  groups, respectively,  compared  with  placebo  through  36  months.  Preliminary  data  through  5  years  were consistent with these findings. Regarding the time to first new radiographic vertebral fracture, which is the appropriate endpoint in accordance with European guidelines, lasofoxifene 0.5 mg and 0.25 mg were associated with statistically significantly reduced risks of 42% and 32%, respectively. These data were confirmed with preliminary data through 5 years (41% and 32%, respectively).

The effects were observed from 1 year onwards for both the doses of lasofoxifene. Similar results are reported  in  women  with  or  without  prevalent  fracture  at  baseline.  Lasofoxifene  0.5  mg,  but  not lasofoxifene 0.25 mg, significantly reduced the risk in subjects with baseline LS BMD T-score &gt; -2.5, who were eligible for the study on the basis of their baseline femoral neck BMD T-score &lt; -2.5. A significant effect on the time to first nonvertebral fracture compared to placebo was observed only for the 0.5 mg dose and not for the 0.25 mg dose. A clinically relevant effect on hip fractures has not been  demonstrated  (at  5  years:  31,  27  and  35  in  the  0.25  mg,  0.5  mg,  and  placebo  groups, respectively). BMD measurements over 3 years demonstrated a greater increase at all sites with the 0.5 mg dose compared to the 0.25 mg dose; this effect was not found in those with a lumbar spine BMD T-score &gt; -2.5.  A  decrease  of  the  level  of  markers  of  bone  turnover  was  observed  for  lasofoxifene-treated patients  compared  to  placebo-treated  patients.  In  a  separate  study  in  Asian  women,  an  effect  of lasofoxifene on lumbar spine was also demonstrated at month 12. The  available  data  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  lasofoxifene  for  the  treatment  of  postmenopausal osteoporosis in terms of significant reduction of both vertebral and non-vertebral fractures but not hip fractures in osteoporotic patients (BMD T-score [lumbar spine or femoral neck] &lt; 2.5). Furthermore, it supports the selection of 0.5 mg daily as the most effective dose. Safety The most common all causality AEs associated with lasofoxifene were hot flush, muscle spasms, and vaginal discharge. Most adverse events were mild or moderate in severity. The incidence of serious adverse  events  was  similar  for  lasofoxifene-treated  subjects  (14.7%)  and  placebo-treated  subjects (14.1%)  in  Phase  2/3  studies.  The  most  common  all  causality  serious  adverse  events  among lasofoxifene- and placebo-treated subjects were cholelithiasis, fall, cataract and osteoarthritis. Risk of death did not significantly differ between lasofoxifene and placebo treated subjects. After three years there appeared to be three deaths related to pulmonary embolism among lasofoxifene treated subjects and  none  in  the  placebo  treated  group.  However  two  of  the  three  deaths  occurred  in  the  setting  of recent surgery. After five years, seven PE associated deaths were reported across the Phase 2/3 clinical programme:  three  in  the  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg  group,  3  in  the  lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  and  one  in  a placebo- treated subject. Medicinal product no longer authorised

An increased risk for gynaecological AEs has been demonstrated. The observed significant increase in minor uterine procedures remains a cause of concern. Based on the available data however, the risk of endometrial cancer was not increased with the use of lasofoxifene.

Two cases of uterine carcinosarcoma tumor are reported with lasofoxifene (0.025 mg and 0.25 mg). Additionally, 1 woman died of leiomyosarcoma.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The use of lasofoxifene was associated with a considerably and clinical significant higher incidence of VTE (hazard ratio of 2.13 (95% CI 1.34, 3.39; p=0.0010). This association mostly was driven by a higher incidence of DVT in the lasofoxifene group compared with placebo. Also a higher incidence of pulmonary embolism was noted among lasofoxifene treated subjects. There were 6 deaths related to pulmonary embolism among lasofoxifene-treated subjects and 1 in the placebo-treated group. All but 2 cases were associated with coexistent risk factors for VTE. This thrombogenic potential has also been observed with other SERMs.

Elevations of ALT and AST were more common among lasofoxifene- than placebo-treated subjects and  the incidence  of hepatic  steatosis  was  higher  among  lasofoxifene  treated  subjects.  Also cholelithiasis as a treatment-related SAE was more common among lasofoxifene- than placebo-treated subjects. Although these events were rare and no indication of severe liver injury associated with the use of lasofoxifene were observed, an impact of lasofoxifene cannot be excluded.

Significant  decreases  in  levels  of  bone  markers  indicating  a  reduction  in  bone  turnover  were demonstrated with all active treatments at all time points. Significant benefits in the risks of breast cancer events were demonstrated through 3 years and through 5 years. After 36 month the risks of ER+ breast  cancer  as  well  as  ER+  invasive  breast  cancer  were  significantly  reduced  in  the  active treatment groups compared to placebo and  a composite endpoint consisting of adjudicated ER+, ER-, invasive, and DCIS breast cancer, as well as invasive breast cancer showed a risk reduction with the 0.5 mg treatment group.  Through 5 years, lasofoxifene 0.5 mg significantly reduced the risk of all breast  cancer,  invasive  breast  cancer,  and  ER+  invasive  breast  cancer  lasofoxifene  0.25  mg  did  not significantly reduce these three endpoints. No treatment differences were observed for DCIS through 5 years. Lasofoxifene has favourable effects on endpoints associated with vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal  women  with  osteoporosis.  Lasofoxifene  significantly  reduced  vaginal  pH  and demonstrated favourable effects on vaginal maturation index. Lasofoxifene decreases total and LDL cholesterol and increases serum triglycerides whereas no effect on HDL-cholesterol was obtained.

A decrease in platelet count associated with lasofoxifene treatment was observed and the rationale for this remains to be elucidated. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. · User consultation A  user  consultation  for  the  proposed  package  leaflet  has  been  performed.  Overall,  the  test  was considered acceptable. Risk-benefit assessment Benefits Lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  was  associated  with  a  significant  reduction  in  the  risks  of  new  vertebral fractures- an effect that was evident after 12 months and in subgroups of subjects, including women with  or  without  prevalent  fractures  at  baseline.  In  terms  of  non-vertebral  fractures,  including  hip fractures,  treatment  with  0.5  mg  lasofoxifene  results  in  a  significant  reduction  in  the  fracture  rate compared to placebo. Stratified on baseline BMD, lasofoxifene 0.5 mg as well as 0.25 mg reduced the risk  of  these  fractures  in  subjects  with  baseline  BMD  T-score ≤ -2.5,  whereas  no  effect  was demonstrated  in  subjects  with  LS  BMD  T-score  &gt;  -2.5.  Treatment  with  lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  was associated  with  significant  risk  reductions  in  multiple  vertebral  fractures  and  clinical  fractures. Overall, significant and clinically relevant increases in BMD were demonstrated for the spine, hip and components of hip (femoral neck, greater trochanter, intertrochanteric area, and Ward's triangle), for the lasofoxifene 0.25mg and 0.5 mg treatment groups compared to placebo and it appeared from the pivotal study that this effect was sustained from month 3 throughout the study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Risks

Lasofoxifene  treatment  was  associated  with  an  increased  risk  for  gynecological  AEs  which  is considered a potential serious health concern. The main concerns relate to endometrial changes with increased thickness, to a significant increase in minor invasive procedures and to a tendency towards increased incidence of pelvic organ prolapse associated with lasofoxifene treatment. However, this is satisfactorily addressed in the risk management plan.

The  unfamiliar  endometrial  pattern  observed,  the  increased  endometrial  thickness,  in  addition  to increased  vaginal  bleeding  incidences,  all  increase  the  number  of  unnecessary  uterine  diagnostic procedures and cause unnecessary emotional stress in the patients involved. It has not been specified how this increased number of minor uterine procedures could be avoided, and an insufficient amount of data is available regarding uterine and vaginal prolapse. It is however unlikely that the significant increase  in  uterine  procedures  associated  with  lasofoxifene  can  be  fully  avoided.  Endometrial thickening, cystic appearance, polyps, bleeding etc. remain important issues associated with lasofoxifene to a significantly higher degree than with for example raloxifene. In the absence of an increased risk  of  endometrial  malignancy,  the  demonstrated  absolute  difference  of  4.2  %  in  uterine procedures is considered adequately addressed with the measures in the risk management plan. No  increase  in  endometrial  carcinoma  was  seen:  7/7,247  cases  of  endometrial  carcinoma  were reported  during  lasofoxifene  versus  4/3,399  in  the  placebo  group.  However,  as  no  routine  biopsies were  taken,  the  diagnosis  of  endometrial  hyperplasia  and  endometrial  cancer  relies  very  much  on reporting  of  symptoms  which  may  be  indicative  of  the  presence  of  endometrial  hyperplasia/cancer. According to protocol, biopsies were taken for 'cause' i.e. in case of vaginal bleeding or increased endometrial thickness. Upon request from the CHMP additional data on endometrial biopsies taken for 'cause' were provided for 321 women treated for more than one year. The data fulfils the demands specified in the EMEA guideline for investigation of medicinal products for HRT. As it is likely that the risk of endometrial hyperplasia is not constant over time, an incidence expressed per proportion of women  is  the  preferred  analysis,  as  is  also  recommended  in  the  HRT  guideline.  Based  on  the proportion of women, the incidence rate is 1.2% with an upper limit of 95% CI of 3.2%. The upper limit  of  95%  CI  of  3.2%  is  higher  than  the  maximum  of  2%  considered  acceptable  in  the  HRT guideline. However, as this is an analysis in a selected population, i.e. only subjects with an indication for an endometrium biopsy (vaginal bleeding or increased endometrial thickness) were included, the 3.2% is considered an overestimation. Additionally, no baseline biopsies were taken to rule out any endometrial malignancy prior to study entry. Hence, the incidence figures given are the incidences of hyperplasia  in  women  with  complaints/signs.  Therefore,  an  upper  limit  of  95%  CI  of  3.2%  is acceptable.  In  conclusion,  additional  analyses  of  endometrial  biopsies  taken  'for  cause'  in  women who had used FABLYN for at least 1 year did not demonstrate an increase in the risk of pre-malignant or malignant changes in the endometrium. The noted increased risk of venous thromboembolism has been translated into a contraindication in subjects with a history of thromboembolic events and a special warning in the SPC, and is addressed in the risk management plan. Balance Medicinal product no longer authorised

The present efficacy data support the osteoporosis treatment indication in high risk postmenopausal subjects in the age-group 60 -80 years, with the 0.5 mg dose, i.e. lasofoxifene treatment of this dose was associated with a reduction in the incidence of new vertebral fractures and non-vertebral fractures but not hip fractures as well as increases in BMD at all important sites and reduction in the risk of breast  cancer.  Lasofoxifene  0.5  mg  treated  subjects  had  a  reduced  risk  of  all  breast  cancer  (a composite endpoint consisting of ER+, ER-, invasive, and DCIS). Further analyses were performed for breast cancer categories ER+, ER+ invasive, invasive and DCIS.

Concern has been raised regarding the clinically significant higher incidence of VTE associated with lasofoxifene  treatment  as  well  as  the  impact  of  lasofoxifene  on  liver  function  including  the  risk  of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

steatosis, cholecystolitiasis and serum triglycerides. All these issues have been adequately addressed in the SPC and/or RMP. An increased risk of endometrial cancer has been sufficiently excluded based on calculations  in  accordance  with  current  guidance  for  HRT-products  based  on  biopsies  taken  for 'cause' in women treated with lasofoxifene for at least 1 year. There is a noted increase in endometrial thickness, with outliers up to &gt;8mm. Endometrial histology data indicated the endometrial pattern to change into 'benign cystic atrophy' in a number of women. Locally-read and centrally-read biopsy findings show a discrepancy in simple endometrial hyperplasia that might be confused with 'benign cystic  atrophy'.  This  endometrial  pattern  is  not  noted  during  use  of  raloxifene  and  other  SERMs. Consequently, the number of unnecessary uterine procedures is increased. This is still a concern, but in the view of the CHMP this issue could be handled through the risk management plan. The applicant has  provided  a  detailed  description  of  a  web-based  educational  material  targeted  at  the  prescribing physicians using CME. The system has not yet been developed or tested. The applicant has selected appropriate organizations and websites to reach the target population and provided a detailed plan. The conditions of the Marketing Authorisation will ensure that these activities are developed and in place before  marketing.  CME  accreditation  is  important  to  ensure  that  the  activities  will  reach  the  target population.  Therefore,  the  applicant  has  committed  to  obtain  CME  accreditation  for  the  web-based educational materials before marketing.

Taking all this into consideration the benefit-risk balance is positive. A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion  that  pharmacovigilance  activities  in  addition  to  the  use  of  routine  pharmacovigilance  were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns. The  following  additional  risk  minimisation  activities  were  required:  see  as  detailed  in  the  Annex \"Conditions or Restrictions with regard to the Safe and Effective Use of the Medicinal Product to be implemented by the Member States\". Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of FABLYN in the therapeutic indication: 'FABLYN  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  osteoporosis  in  postmenopausal  women  at increased  risk  of  fracture.  A  significant  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  vertebral  and  nonvertebral fractures but not hip fractures has been demonstrated (see section 5.1). When  determining  the  choice  of  FABLYN  or  other  therapies,  including  estrogens,  for  a postmenopausal woman, consideration should be given to menopausal symptoms, effects on uterine and breast tissues, and cardiovascular risks and benefits (see section 5.1).' was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised