---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:16:58
document_pages: 29
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/immunogam-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
document_name: immunogam-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 9.3109312
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-23 06:37:10.12173
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

FOR

© European Medicines Agency, 2010. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK Tel.  (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 7 418 85 45 E-mail: mail@emea.europa.eu     http://www.emea.europa.eu CHMP ASSESSMENT REPORT ImmunoGam International Nonproprietary Name: human hepatitis B immunoglobulin Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/001055 Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|   1. | BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE........................................... 3                                                         |
|------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  1.1 | Submission of the dossier ........................................................................................................ 3         |
|  1.2 | Steps taken for the assessment of the product.......................................................................... 3                    |
|  2   | SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 4                     |
|  2.1 | Introduction.............................................................................................................................. 4 |
|  2.2 | Quality aspects......................................................................................................................... 5   |
|  2.3 | Non-clinical aspects................................................................................................................. 9      |
|  2.4 | Clinical aspects ...................................................................................................................... 12   |
|  2.5 | Pharmacovigilance................................................................................................................. 24        |
|  2.6 | Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation ...................................... 26                                    |

Medicinal product no longer authorised TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE........................................... 3 1.1 Submission of the dossier ........................................................................................................ 3 1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product.......................................................................... 3 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION................................................................................................. 4 2.1 Introduction.............................................................................................................................. 4 2.2 Quality aspects......................................................................................................................... 5 2.3 Non-clinical aspects................................................................................................................. 9 2.4 Clinical aspects ...................................................................................................................... 12 2.5 Pharmacovigilance................................................................................................................. 24 2.6 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation ...................................... 26

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE 1.1 Submission of the dossier The  applicant  Cangene  Europe  Limited  submitted  on  23  July  2008  an  application  for  Marketing Authorisation to the European Medicines Agency for ImmunoGam, through the centralised procedure under Article 3 (2) (b) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 based on demonstration of interest of patients at Community level. The eligibility to the centralised procedure was agreed upon by the CHMP on 2 February 2008. The  legal  basis  for  this  application  refers  to  Article  8.3  of  Directive  2001/83/EC,  as  amended  complete and independent application. The applicant initially applied for the indication of Immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B (Intramuscular use) and for the indication of Prevention of hepatitis B virus recurrence after liver transplantation in HBsAg-positive  patients  (Intravenous  use). During  the procedure  the applicant requested the withdrawal  of  the  Prevention  of  hepatitis  B  virus  recurrence  after  liver  transplantation  in  HBsAg  positive patients indication. Licensing status: ImmunoGam has been given a Marketing Authorisation in USA for Immunoprophylaxis indication in January  2006  and  for  Liver  transplant  indication  in  April  2007,  in  Canada  for  Liver  trasplant indication in January 2007 and for the Immunoprophylaxis indication in April 2009 and in Israel in April 2009 for both indications. The Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur appointed by the CHMP and the evaluation teams were: Rapporteur: Robert James Hemmings Co-Rapporteur: Christian Schneider 1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product · The application was received by the EMEA on 23 July 2008. · The procedure started on 20 August 2008. · The Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all CHMP members on 3 November 2008. The Co-Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all CHMP members on 7 November  2008.  In  accordance  with  Article  6(3)  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  the Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur declared that they had completed their assessment report in less than 80 days. · During  the  meeting  on  18  December  2008,  the  CHMP  agreed  on  the  consolidated  List  of Questions to be sent to the applicant. The final consolidated List of Questions was sent to the applicant on 18 December 2008. · The applicant submitted the responses to the CHMP consolidated List of Questions on 19 June 2009. · The Rapporteurs circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the List of Questions to all CHMP members on 4 September 2009. · During the CHMP meeting on 24 September 2009, the CHMP agreed on a list of outstanding issues to be addressed in writing by the applicant. · The applicant submitted the responses to the CHMP consolidated List of Outstanding Issues on 13 November 2009. · During  the  meeting  on  14-17  December  2009,  the  CHMP,  in  the  light  of  the  overall  data submitted  and  the  scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued  a  positive  opinion  for granting  a  Marketing  Authorisation  to  ImmunoGam  on  17  December  2009.  The  applicant provided the letter of undertaking on the follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation on 15 December 2009.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION 2.1 Introduction Hepatitis B (HBV) infection is caused by a small enveloped DNA hepadnavirus that infects the liver. Approximately 2 billion people in the world have been infected by HBV and 300-350 million of them chronically infected with virus. Most of Northern and Western Europe is considered a low endemicity area for HBV (&lt;2% of chronic HBV). The incidence of reported HBV cases in the European Union (EU)  and  European  Economic  Area/European  Free  Trade  Association  (EEA/EFTA)  countries  has declined  over  the  past  ten  years  from  6.7  cases  per  100,000  population  in  1995  to  1.5  cases  per 100,000 population in 2005. In 2005, a total of 6,977 new HBV cases were reported. The most affected age group was 25-44 year-olds followed by 15-24 year-olds. Men were 1.8 times (range  1-3)  more  frequently  affected  than  women.  The  prevalence  of  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen (HBsAg)  in  the  general  population  varies  widely  between  European  countries.  The  most  common HBV genotypes in Europe are A and D of which the former is more prevalent in Northern Europe, and the latter in the Mediterranean region and Eastern Europe. Some groups are more frequently affected by  HBV  infection  than  the  general  population.  The  prevalence  of  HBsAg  in  injecting  drug  users (IDUs) ranges from 0 to 21% and the prevalence of antibodies to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc), which indicates past infection, ranges from 20 to 85%. Concurrent infections with HBV and/or HCV and  HIV  are  common,  especially  among  IDUs.  In  Spain  and  in  England,  the  HBsAg  prevalence among  sex  workers  varies  between  6-7%.  In  many  European  countries  immigrants  from  highly endemic regions are 5-90 times more frequently affected by HBV than the general population. Other populations at high risk of HBV infection are men having sex with men, and those having multiple sexual partners. Immunoprophylaxis with human hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) products is a well-established use. Clinical studies conducted in the 1970's demonstrated that Human Hepatitis B Immunoglobulin products  provide  passive  immunization  for  individuals  exposed  to  the  hepatitis  B  virus,  reducing hepatitis B transmission. Subsequent studies demonstrated the advantage of simultaneous administration  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  and  HBIG  (see  Cochrane  meta-analysis  by  Lee  et  al.,  2006). Current  recommendations  for  immunoprophylaxis  of  hepatitis  B  are  based  on  national  guidelines which rely on published studies and clinical practice. Population who could be at benefit of treatment includes:  Infants born to HBsAg-positive mothers are at risk of being infected with HBV and becoming chronic carriers. Mother to child transmission occurs often, either in utero or through exposure to blood or blood contaminated fluids at or around birth. Such perinatal transmission is believed to  account  for  35%  to  50%  of  hepatitis  B  carriers.  The  risk  of  perinatal  transmission  is associated with the HBeAg status of the mother. If a mother is positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg,  70%  to  90%  of  her  children  become  chronically  infected.  If  a  mother  is  HBsAgpositive but HBeAg-negative, the risk of transmission is significantly lower. For an infant with perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-positive and HBeAg-positive mother, a regimen combining one dose of HBIG at birth with the hepatitis B vaccine series started soon after birth has been shown to be 85-98% effective in preventing development of the HBV carrier state. Regimens involving either multiple doses of HBIG alone or the vaccine series alone have a 70-75% efficacy, while a single dose of HBIG alone has 50% efficacy.  HBV  infection  is  a  well-recognized  risk  to  health-care  personnel  (HCP).  The  risk  of  HBV infection is primarily related to the degree of contact with blood in the work place and also to the HBeAg status of the source person. In studies of HCP who sustained injuries from needles contaminated with blood containing HBV, the risk of developing clinical hepatitis if the blood was HBsAg and HBeAg-positive was 22%-31%; the risk of developing serologic evidence of HBV infection  was  37%-62%.  In  comparison,  the  risk  of  developing  clinical  hepatitis  from needles contaminated with HBsAg-positive, HBeAg-negative blood is 1%-6%, and the risk of developing serological evidence of HBV infection is 23%-37%. Immunoprophylaxis with HBIG

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised and hepatitis B vaccine series is recommended for any susceptible, unvaccinated person who sustains an occupational blood or body fluid exposure.  Sexual partners of HBsAg-positive persons are at increased risk of acquiring HBV infection. A single  dose  of  HBIG  is  75%  effective  if  administered  within  two  weeks  of  the  last  sexual exposure to a person with acute hepatitis B. Likewise, certain populations, such as haemodialysis  patients,  or  subjects  who  do  not  show  an  immune  response  to  hepatitis  B vaccination  (anti-HBs  levels  &lt;10  IU/L)  may  need  HBIG  immunoprophylaxis  to  prevent infection in the case of continuous risk of exposure. Although  hepatitis  B  vaccines  can  be  efficacious  in  almost  90%  of  uninfected,  healthy  normal individuals, most of HBV vaccines are unable to achieve &gt;10 mIU/ml protective levels in 5-10% of remaining healthy individuals. This category of patients includes immunosuppressed, drug users and liver transplanted patients when the donor or recipient is infected with HBV (Akbar &amp; Onji, 2008). The applicant initially applied for two indications associated with two different routes of administration,  namely  immunoprophylaxis  of  hepatitis  B  (intramuscular  use)  and  prevention  of hepatitis B virus recurrence after liver transplantation in HBsAg positive patients (intravenous use). During the assessment procedure, the applicant withdrew the intravenous use indication for prevention of hepatitis B virus recurrence from the application. The approved indication for ImmunoGam is: 'Immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B - In case of accidental exposure in non-immunised subjects (including persons whose vaccination is incomplete or status unknown). - In haemodialysed patients, until vaccination has become effective. - In the newborn of a hepatitis B virus carrier-mother. - In subjects who did not show an immune response (no measurable hepatitis B antibodies) after vaccination and for whom a continuous prevention is necessary due to the continuous risk of being infected with hepatitis B. Consideration should also be given to other official guidance on the appropriate use of human hepatitis B immunoglobulin for intramuscular use.' 2.2 Quality aspects Introduction ImmunoGam, Hepatitis B Immunoglobulin (Human), is a sterile solution containing 5% (50 mg/mL) of  purified  gamma  globulin  (IgG)  fraction  containing  anti-HBs,  antibodies  to  Hepatitis  B  surface antigen (HBsAg). ImmunoGam is manufactured from source plasma collected from selected and/or immunised healthy donors with high titres of anti-HBs that is purified by an anion-exchange chromatography method. The  ImmunoGam  manufacturing  process  includes  a  solvent/detergent  treatment  step  and  a  viral nanofiltration step for the inactivation of lipid enveloped viruses and the removal of lipid and nonlipid enveloped virus by size exclusion respectively. ImmunoGam is stabilized with 0.03% polysorbate 80 and 10% maltose and contains no preservative. The  product  potency  is  expressed  in  International  Units  (IU)  by  comparison  to  the  World  Health Organization (WHO) international reference Hepatitis B Immunoglobulin reference preparation. Each

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised millilitre  of  ImmunoGam  contains  312  IU  of  anti-HBs.  ImmunoGam  may  be  administered  only intramuscularly. ImmunoGam, solution for injection, is supplied in the following pack sizes: · 1 mL single dose (312 IU/mL) in a Type 1 glass vial, with a plastic flip off seal · 5 mL single dose (312 IU/mL) in a Type 1 glass vial, with a plastic flip off seal Each vial contains 312 IU/mL of anti-HBs. Active Substance ImmunoGam  is  a  sterile  solution  containing  5%  (50  mg/mL)  of  purified  gamma  globulin  (IgG) fraction containing anti-HBs, antibodies to Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). ImmunoGam is manufactured from source plasma collected from selected and/or immunised healthy screened donors with high titres of anti-HBs. The donor selection, testing for contaminating viruses and pooling of plasma have been certified and are covered in the Cangene Plasma Master file (PMF). The drug substance, as defined by the applicant, contains information concerning manufacturing up to the final vial filling and labelling. Manufacture ImmunoGam is manufactured by the Cangene Corporation in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. Information related to establishments responsible for plasma collection, testing, storage, transportation and control of Human Plasma are described within the current Plasma Master File (PMF). Human plasma for fractionation is used as starting material. The manufacture starts with the thawing of the plasma which is followed by a clarification step. Downstream manufacturing process include anion exchange chromatography, viral filtration, solvent detergent treatment, reverse phase chromatography and diafiltration steps. The  applicant  confirmed  that  no  reprocessing  /  reworking  is  allowed  during  the  manufacturing process. All  materials  used  in  the  ImmunoGam  manufacturing  process  are  from  non-animal  sources  and purchased  from  approved  suppliers.  Release  test  of  substances  not  described  in  Ph.  Eur.  were provided. The MAH has confirmed that in all cases, a test for identity will be performed. Critical steps in the manufacturing process of the drug substance of ImmunoGam were identified and are  adequately  monitored  with  the  quality  in-process  controls  and  manufacturing  specifications. Standard test methods for in-process controls are identical to finished product testing. The applicant has used a number of process and validation reports that were generated to support their WinRho product (a hyperimmune anti-D).  This is an acceptable approach as the proportion of the IgG targeted towards a named group of antigens e.g. anti-Hepatitis B forms a very small percentage of the total IgG contained within the product and so different hyperimmune products are in essence human normal immunoglobulin that contains a relatively high titre of IgGs that are directed towards a specific group of antigens. It has been confirmed that the WinRho and ImmunoGam processes are sufficiently similar so that validation data obtained from WinRho can be used to support ImmunoGam. The reproducibility and effectiveness of process steps designed to remove and/or inactivate potential viral contamination have been demonstrated in studies of model viruses in compliance with ICH and CHMP  guidance. Validation of the liquid-formulated ImmunoGam  process was performed concurrently, at the manufacturing scale.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised Elucidation of structure has been conducted using the drug product, ImmunoGam, which is essentially the  same  as  drug  substance.  The  ImmunoGam  manufacturing  process  is  continuous,  and  the  only significant steps carried out during drug product manufacture are final filtration and filling. Identity  and  Purity  demonstrated  that  the  electrophoretic  mobility  of  the  drug  product  is  consistent with that of gamma globulin. The determination of the Molecular Weight revealed for ImmunoGam the known molecular weight of human plasma IgG immunoglobulin. The IgG Subclass distribution for ImmunoGam is comparable to normal plasma. Initially the applicant applied for intravenous and intramuscular use of ImmunoGam. The product did not completely conform to the requirements of Ph. Eur. for immunoglobulins for intravenous use. As the  applicant  withdrew  the  indications  where  intravenous  administration  was  required,  this  was  no longer applicable as it does not apply to the use of ImmunoGam for intramuscular administration. Potential  impurities  in  ImmunoGam  may  include  species  carried  over  from  the  donor  plasma  or reagents from the purification process. The in-process testing for impurities were summarized and data from representative batches showing that most of these process related impurities are controlled. The  purification  process  potentially  enriches  Factor  XI  from  a  plasma  concentration.  During  the procedure  the  applicant  provided  results  of  suitable  control  tests  on  different  lots  of  ImmunoGam. Since the plasma used in these experiments were not within the specification for the assay, it cannot be totally concluded that there is no activated FXI in the product. The applicant has committed to repeat these experiments using plasma that is within specification. Purity of the drug substance is verified by drug product release testing. The analytical methods and the validation  for  testing  ImmunoGam  drug  substance  are  the  same  as  those  used  for  testing  the  drug product. The claimed stability for the drug substance is adequately validated with real time / real temperature data. Medicinal Product ImmunoGam is a clear to slightly opalescent and colourless or pale yellow liquid containing 5% (50 mg/ml) purified gamma globulin (IgG), antibodies to Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), stabilized with maltose and Polysorbate 80. ImmunoGam is supplied in single-dose glass vials with bromobutyl rubber stoppers, aluminum seals and plastic flip-off caps. ImmunoGam is intended for intramuscular administration only. The commercial product is available in two vial sizes: 1.0 mL and 5.0 mL. Both sizes contain 312 IU/mL. An  overage  is  provided  for  both  sizes  of  ImmunoGam  to  ensure  that  drug  product  will  meet  the acceptance criterion of 312 IU/mL throughout the entire shelf life of the product. Drug  product  manufacture  includes  sterile  filtration,  filling,  capping,  labelling  and  packaging.  A description  of  the  manufacturing  process  for  ImmunoGam  drug  product  was  provided  and  critical steps were indicated . Validation of the manufacturing process for ImmunoGam was demonstrated. A description of the procedure for shipping qualification was provided. The applicant confirmed that ImmunoGam will not be reprocessed during the manufacturing process. ImmunoGam is retested upon receipt in Europe for European batch release and importation testing. All retesting performed in Europe follows the same test methods as those performed in Canada.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised Initially, the release specification did not fully comply with all the Ph Eur requirements. Some of the non  compliant  specifications  were  only  related  to  the  intravenous  IgG.  During  the  procedure  the applicant has revised the specifications. The final product specifications for the drug product are suitable for the control of the drug product and comply with the requirements of Ph. Eur for Immunoglobulins for intramuscular administration. ImmunoGam is intended for intramuscular administration only. The  ImmunoGam  lots  were  produced  from  ImmunoGam  Drug  substance.  The  data  of  the  batch analysis were provided. The primary reference standard for ImmunoGam and in house qualified standard were described as were the standards of the other tests. ImmunoGam is filled in 3 ml or 6 ml vials depending on the fill volume. The stability of ImmunoGam has been evaluated at the recommended storage conditions of 2 to 8°C and  under  accelerated  conditions.  The  shelf  life  of  ImmunoGam  (36  months  at  2  to  8ºC)  was established  based  on  real  time  stability  studies  using  the  current  container  closure  system  based  on samples taken from commercial scale production. The recommended storage temperature of ImmunoGam vials is 2 to 8°C and the expiration period is 36  months  after  the  date  of  manufacture.  The  date  of  manufacture  begins  from  date  of  the  sterile filtration of drug substance. All studies supporting drug product stability were conducted using the current commercial container closure system and at commercial formulation and strength. Facilities and equipment are adequately described. Adventitious Agents safety Evaluation The applicant  confirms  that  the  excipients,  raw  materials,  and  reagents  used  in  the  manufacture  of ImmunoGam are not of animal origin and that ImmunoGam is prepared in compliance with the current Note  for  Guidance  on  Minimizing  the  Risk  of  Transmitting  Animal  Spongiform  Encephalopathy Agents via Human and Veterinary Medicinal Products, EMEA/410/01 rev.2. The applicant has provided adequate data to show that the nanofiltration will also remove significant quantities of spiked TSE agent.  To get more confidence on the capacity of the production process of ImmunoGam  to  remove  TSE  agents,  the  applicant  committed  to  perform  a  product  specific investigational study to analyse the prion removal capacity of the anion chromatography column step. ImmunoGam is produced from human plasma which is obtained from blood centres located in the USA and Canada. Donors are excluded with respect to vCJD risk according to European Directives or guidelines and US-regulations. Regarding adventitious viruses, two main viral removal/inactivation steps were studied. The applicant has  used  the  scale  down  models  developed  for  WinRho.  This  is  an  acceptable  approach  if  the manufacturing method for WinRho at the time that this scale down validation was done is the same for the  current  manufacturing method for ImmunoGam. The applicant has confirmed that these models also accurately model the ImmunoGam process. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Based on the submitted data, the marketing authorisation application for ImmunoGam  is recommended for approval based on quality grounds. Overall, information on manufacture and control

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised of  the  drug  substance  and  drug  product  has  been  presented  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  results  of tests carried out indicate satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important quality characteristics. 2.3 Non-clinical aspects Introduction ImmunoGam,  a  human  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin  (HBIG)  preparation,  is  a  sterile  solution  of purified gamma globulin (IgG) fraction of human plasma containing antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen  (anti-HBs).  ImmunoGam  is  manufactured  from  plasma  collected  from  healthy,  screened donors with high titres of anti-HBs which is purified by an anion-exchange column chromatography method. In  line  with  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  Preclinical  Safety  Evaluation  of  Biotechnology-derived Pharmaceuticals (CPMP/ICH/302/95, ICH S6), the principles of which may also be applied to plasmaderived products, no non-clinical studies have been conducted specifically with ImmunoGam due to its immunoglobulin nature. The applicant has provided a literature review of non-clinical data for the excipients as well as the solvent and detergent used in the viral clearance steps including a discussion of  their  projected  intakes.  In  addition,  data  was  provided  from  toxicology  studies  conducted  with another hyperimmune product, WinRho, which is already marketed by the applicant. Both products are IgG preparations and are prepared using an identical manufacturing process except for the final formulation steps. Pharmacology · Primary pharmacodynamics and secondary pharmacodynamics The mechanism of action of HBIG is a selective binding of the immunoglobulin to viral particles (via HBsAg)  and  their  elimination  via  complement-dependent  and  independent  pathways,  thereby preventing  further  dissemination  of  the  virus  and  its  reuptake  by  neighbouring  cells  during  postexposure prophylaxis. HBIG also undergoes endocytosis by hepatocytes and binds to HBsAg within cells already infected, thereby decreasing viral secretion. Primary  pharmacodynamic  effects  have  been  established  in  clinical  trials.  There  were  no  adverse effects of human immunoglobulins independent of primary pharmacodynamic effects that have been observed to warrant secondary pharmacodynamic studies in an animal model. Furthermore, no adverse pharmacodynamic  effects  were  described  in  a  study  conducted  for  WinRho,  another  hyperimmune product  manufactured  by  Cangene,  containing  residual  amounts  of  TNBP  and  Triton  X-100.  In addition,  the  solvent-detergent  component  (TNBP/Triton  X-100)  is  widely  used  in  parenteral medicinal products. Pharmacodynamic and safety pharmacology effects of polysorbate 80 were considered and sufficiently discussed. Cardiovascular effects of polysorbate 80 were observed in a variety of animal models only at very high doses, which are clinically not relevant. Toxic effects on the cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous system are not expected with HBIG. The applicant argued that in addition to the available  data  further  preclinical  pharmacodynamic  and  safety  pharmacology  studies  were  not considered necessary. This justification was considered acceptable by the CHMP. Pharmacokinetics The  active  ingredient  of  ImmunoGam  is  the  human  IgG,  a  protein  molecule  that  follows  classical absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion pathways in any species. Therefore, it is assumed that  ImmunoGam  will  be  degraded  into  small  peptides  and  component  amino  acids  via  catabolic pathways that are typically associated with endogenous IgG. Pharmacokinetic studies in animals were not  performed  for  ImmunoGam  or  its  components  as  information  regarding  metabolism,  excretion, pharmacokinetic  drug  interactions  and  other  pharmacokinetic  studies  are  available  from  published scientific  literature.  Furthermore,  as  a  human  protein  its  immunogenic  properties  in  non-human

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised species  would  make  the  interpretation  of  animal  data  questionable  and  animal  distribution  studies would not predict the distribution in humans accurately. The pharmacokinetic profile of ImmunoGam after  i.m.  administration  was  established  in  two  clinical  biopharmaceutical  studies  in  healthy volunteers.  Therefore,  the  justification  for  the  absence  of  non-clinical  pharmacokinetic  studies  was acceptable for the CHMP. The applicant has provided documentation on the metabolic fate of TNBP, polysorbate 80 and maltose in  animal  models  including  a  discussion  of  the  literature  with  respect  to  pharmacokinetics.  Studies collectively  suggest  that  TNBP  is  metabolised  rapidly  and  the  kidney  plays  a  major  role  in  its metabolism.  The  level  of  TNBP  present  in  the  maximum  intended  dose  of  ImmunoGam  is  low (approximately  0.6µg/kg)  and  in  view  of  fast  metabolism  and  excretion  of  TNBP,  ImmunoGam  is considered  safe  for  human  use.  Published  results  on  maltose  suggest  that  it  is  metabolised  to maltotetraose, maltotriose and glucose and that the kidney plays a major role in this metabolism. The literature results indicate that polysorbate 80 is eliminated in faeces similarly to natural neutral fats. A very small portion of polyoxyethylene moiety is absorbed and eliminated in urine. There are no specific pharmacokinetics/metabolism data available for Triton X-100. However, in view of the low residual levels in ImmunoGam ( ≤ 10ppm) and the fact that it is widely used in other pharmaceutical products, it is considered that such data are not crucial to the overall safety assessment. Toxicology Toxicology  studies  in  animals  were  not  performed  with  ImmunoGam  or  its  components  by  the applicant. Information regarding repeat-dose toxicity, genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and reproductive/developmental toxicity of the excipients was provided from published literature. · Single dose toxicity The  toxicology  data  obtained  from  a  related  lyophilised  product  WinRho  have  been  applied  to ImmunoGam. One single-dose toxicity study and two immunotoxicity studies were performed with WinRho, which contains residual amounts of TNBP and Triton X-100. In the GLP-compliant acute toxicity study, ten mice (5 males and 5 females) were each given a single 75 µg intravenous dose of product and observed for 14 days. At the end of the observation period, the mice were killed and gross necropsy was performed. No deaths and no intolerance reactions occurred. All  mice  gained  weight  during  the  14-day  observation  period.  Gross  necropsy  revealed  no  gross pathological findings. The intravenous LD50 exceeded 3750µg Anti-D Human Immune Globulin/kg bw (&gt;233 mg IgG/kg). Considering that immunoglobulins are normal constituents of the human body, conducting only limited acute preclinical studies was considered acceptable. · Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) No repeat dose toxicity studies were conducted with ImmunoGam and, subsequently, no toxicokinetic data are available. Given the potential for antigenicity following administration of a human protein to an  animal  species,  the  absence  of  repeated-dose  toxicity  studies  is  also  justified  for  this  product. Furthermore, ImmunoGam is intended for single use. · Genotoxicity Genotoxicity  studies  were  not  conducted  for  ImmunoGam  as  human  immunoglobulins  are  not expected to interact directly with DNA or other chromosomal material. This is in accordance with the Note for Guidance on Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-derived Pharmaceuticals. Carcinogenicity

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Carcinogenicity studies were not conducted, as administration of ImmunoGam is not likely to exceed a period of 6 months. This is in line with the Note for Guidance on Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-derived Pharmaceuticals. · Reproduction Toxicity Reproduction  toxicity  studies  were  not  conducted  with  ImmunoGam.  This  was  acceptable  as  for human plasma-derived immunoglobulin products such studies are not required. · Local tolerance Based on i.m. studies with a comparable product WinRho and on the available clinical experience with ImmunoGam, no adverse injection site reactions beyond some discomfort at the injection site are to be expected from i.m. administration of ImmunoGam. Further non-clinical testing for local tolerance was not  considered  justified  or  ethical  since  the  tests  are  unlikely  to  extend  the  scientific  knowledge  of local  tolerance  in  this  case.  The  absence  of  any  specific  non-clinical  local  tolerance  studies  is acceptable. · Other toxicity studies A literature review on the toxicity of the excipients has been presented with respect to the maximum dose exposure from ImmunoGam administration. Published polysorbate 80 toxicology studies in rats indicate that the compound  is  relatively  non-toxic by  oral or i.p. administration. Consistent carcinogenic  adverse  effects  and  phaeochromocytomas  in  adult  male  rats  were  found  at  a  dose  of 5,000 ppm/kg bw. The level of polysorbate 80 present in the maximum intended dose of ImmunoGam is far below the recommended daily consumption and the no adverse effect levels (NOAEL) in mice and rats. Collectively, the data presented suggest that the amount of polysorbate 80 in ImmunoGam presents a negligible toxic and carcinogenic risk to humans. Other immunoglobulin products also contain maltose, some with a maximum dose exceeding that in ImmunoGam. Both maltose and polysorbate 80 are of compendial quality. The  concentration  of  Triton  X-100  in  the  ImmunoGam  formulation  is  estimated  to  result  in  a maximum daily exposure of 5µg/kg/day following a single administration (up to 35 ml/patient). This is far below the NOAEL seen in rats given Triton X-100 repeatedly for 90 days and also far below the level of Triton X-100 that caused developmental toxicity in rats. For Triton X-100, the margin on an applied dose basis over the NOAEL for general toxicity is 4,700 and for the dose at which effects were seen  on  developmental  toxicity  it  is  8,300.  Therefore,  it  is  unlikely  to  present  a  risk  of  toxicity  to humans. The consistent  toxic  effects  seen  with  TNBP  are  in  the  form  of  hyperplasia  of  the  urinary  bladder epithelium  at  high  dose  levels.  The  level  of  TNBP  present  in  the  maximum  clinical  dose  of ImmunoGam is ≤ 10ppm; this is far below the NOAEL in mice and rats. For TNBP, the margin over the no adverse effect levels (NOAELs) on an applied dose basis for general toxicity in mice is 5,300 and  for  rats,  it  is  2,100  based  on  the  maximum  daily  exposure  of  5 μ g/kg/day.  For  embryo-fetal development, it is 80,000. If the dosage for rats is roughly applicable to humans, development of toxic symptoms in humans would result only from a very large exposure to TNBP. Collectively, the data presented suggest that the trace amounts of TNBP ( ≤ 10ppm) in ImmunoGam present negligible risk to humans. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment The applicant argued that ImmunoGam could be exempt from the requirement for an environmental risk  assessment  on  the  grounds  that  its  active  substance,  human  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin,  is  a naturally  occurring,  highly  purified  antibody  from  blood  plasma.  ImmunoGam's  excipients  include maltose (a disaccharide sugar), and polysorbate 80 which is a common surfactant or emulsifier present in food, cosmetics, household products and pharmaceuticals and are both compendial. The applicant's

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Study ID   | No. of study centres / locations           | Design                                              | Study Posology/ Route                                       | Study Objective/ Comparator                                                                                                     | Subjects Number                                                                                              | Duration                                    |
|------------|--------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| HB- 002    | 1 center in Canada                         | Randomized, single-blind parallel arm study         | Single dose Test: 50 mg/ml 0.06 ml/kg (19 IU/kg) / IM       | 1. To comparatively assess the pharmacokinetic characteristics of ImmunoGam and BayHep B 2. Safety / BayHep B (Bayer, Talecris) | Normal healthy volunteers: 70 enrolled, 61 received and 60 completed (30 per arm)                            | 84 days                                     |
| HB- 008    | 1 center in USA                            | Double-blind randomized with 2 parallel arms        | Single dose in 7 dosing cohorts. 0.06 ml/kg (19 IU/kg) / IM | 1.To establish comparative PK of ImmunoGam and Nabi-HB 2. Safety / Nabi-HB (Nabi, Baxter)                                       | Normal healthy volunteers: 80 enrolled, 75 completed and 5 discontinued                                      | 84 days                                     |
| HB- 004    | Vertical: Multicentre (India); Horizontal: | Open-label, non- randomized historically controlled | Infants: Single dose: 0.5 ml within 12 h of birth; Adults:  | Safety and efficacy of ImmunoGam used in combination with Hepatitis B vaccine, for the prevention of Hepatitis B infection /    | 253 infants enrolled and dosed. 178 completed and included in PP analysis. 75 infants excluded. All 253 were | Up to one year post- treatment for infants; |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised justification was in accordance with the applicable guideline (CHMP/SWP/4447/00) and the absence of an environmental risk assessment was acceptable. 2.4 Clinical aspects Introduction The  initial  application  for  marketing  authorisation  for  ImmunoGam  included  a  claim  for  two indications  associated  with  two  different  routes  of  administrations,  namely:  ImmunoGam  for intramuscular (i.m.) use for the immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B; and for intravenous (i.v.) use for the prevention of hepatitis B virus recurrence after liver transplantation in HBsAg-positive patients. Following  a  number  of  issues  raised  during  the  assessment  procedure  the  applicant  withdrew  the intravenous use indication for prevention of hepatitis B virus recurrence from the application. The approved indication for ImmunoGam is: Immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B - In case of accidental exposure in non-immunised subjects (including persons whose vaccination is incomplete or status unknown). - In haemodialysed patients, until vaccination has become effective. - In the newborn of a hepatitis B virus carrier-mother. - In subjects who did not show an immune response (no measurable hepatitis B antibodies) after vaccination and for whom a continuous prevention is necessary due to the continuous risk of being infected with hepatitis B. Consideration should also be given to other official guidance on the appropriate use of human hepatitis B immunoglobulin for intramuscular use. The  clinical  development  of  ImmunoGam  for  immunoprophylaxis  of  hepatitis  B  included  two biopharmaceutical studies (HB-002 and HB-008) to examine the pharmacokinetics and bioavailability in  healthy  adults,  and  an  efficacy  study  (HB-004).  In  the  healthy  volunteer  studies  ImmunoGam pharmacokinetics and safety was compared to two other HBIG products licensed in North America. An overview of the clinical studies submitted in support of the claimed indication is provided in Table 1. Table 1 Overview of clinical studies with ImmunoGam

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Multicentre (Canada, Brazil)   | study.   | Single dose: 0.06 mL/kg within 48 hours of potential exposure / IM   | N/A   | in the safety analysis. Adults: 42 subjects enrolled and dosed. 23 compl. subjects as PP analysis. 19 excluded. All 42 subjects were in safety analysis.   | 180 days post-exposure in adults.   |
|--------------------------------|----------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Multicentre (Canada, Brazil) study. Single dose: 0.06 mL/kg within 48 hours of potential exposure / IM N/A in the safety analysis. Adults: 42 subjects enrolled and dosed. 23 compl. subjects as PP analysis. 19 excluded. All 42 subjects were in safety analysis. 180 days post-exposure in adults. Current  recommendations  for  immunoprophylaxis  of  hepatitis  B  are  based  on  national  guidelines, which rely on published studies and clinical practice. It is noteworthy that the recommendations on doses of HBIG for immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B are based on the Core SPC recommendations with consideration given to national official guidance in individual EU countries. The clinical development program for ImmunoGam was essentially designed for approval by the FDA (USA) and Health Canada, respectively. There are several CHMP guidance documents, but those of specific  relevance  to  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin  products  became  available  some  time  after  the applicant had initiated the development program. The guideline on the Core SPC for human plasma derived hepatitis B immunoglobulin for intramuscular use (CPMP/BPWG/4222/02) has been in effect since  November  1,  2006.  Other  CHMP  guidelines  that  have  been  taken  into  account  during  the evaluation provide a general framework for the efficacy and safety assessment, e.g. guideline on the clinical investigation of the pharmacokinetics of therapeutic proteins (CHMP/EWP/89249/2004). Of note, no guideline for the clinical development of hepatitis B immunoglobulin products is currently available in the EU. No separate paediatric development has been described by the applicant. GCP The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. The EMEA conducted routine GCP inspections of several sites involved in the clinical trials submitted in the initial application for marketing authorisation: · The results of the inspection of selected sites from the HB-004 study in India were satisfactory and the study was deemed to be acceptable for assessment purposes. · The  inspection  at  the  site  of  the  pivotal  HB-005  study  (Turkey)  in  support  of  the  originally claimed intravenous use indication for prevention of hepatitis B virus recurrence identified a series of observations, including a critical finding on the reliability of the study. Data from this site was deemed unreliable for the assessment purpose. Pharmacokinetics ImmunoGam solution for injection is intended for intramuscular administration for the immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B. In the submitted dossier, the applicant provided two comparative bioavailability studies. (study HB-002 and study HB-008, Table 1). In both studies, the bioavailability of ImmunoGam  after  IM  injection  in  healthy  volunteers was  compared  to  two  hepatitis  B immunoglobulin products licensed in North America. The primary differences between the HB-002 and the HB-008 studies were the choice of anti-HBs assays and the comparator products. In the PK development program three different analytical techniques were employed for the estimation of serum levels of anti-HBs immunoglobulins and the potency in the investigated drug-products: In study HB-002 two different anti-HBs assays were employed one in-house for drug-product potency and one commercial kit for anti-HBs serum levels. In study HB-008 a commercial kit was used for the estimation  of  serum  levels  as  well  as  for  the  measurement  of  drug-product  potency.  The  applicant provided a validation report and justification for the potency correction factors utilised in the studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Parameter (unit)       | Mean ±SD Treatment T (n=30)   | Mean ±SD Treatment R (n= 30)   | Ratio T/R (90% Confidence Interval)   |
|------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| AUC last (mIU*.day/mL) | 7521 ± 1550                   | 5418 ± 1255                    | 140% [126%, 154%]                     |
| AUC (mIU*.day/mL)      | 8477 ± 1937                   | 6209 ± 1415                    | 136% [123%, 151%]                     |
| C max (mUI/mL)         | 215.6 ± 41.1                  | 157.2 ± 35.4                   | 138% [126%, 151%]                     |
| t max (day)            | 5.4 ± 2.4                     | 6.6 ± 2.6                      | -                                     |
| T 1/2 (day)            | 24.5 ± 4.6                    | 24.4 ± 5.2                     | -                                     |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Absorption / Distribution / Elimination Single-dose studies: Both PK studies provide an acceptable picture of the anti-HBs Ig of the tested products. The anti-HBs Ig is adequately absorbed after i.m. injection. The results of both HB-002 and HB-008 indicate that despite  some  differences  in  PK  parameters  due  to  difference  in  the  product  potency  and  use  of different analytical techniques across studies, ImmunoGam  has  PK  properties of a typical immunoglobulin product intended for intramuscular use with Cmax well above 100 mIU/mL, half-life of  22-25  days  and  Tmax  of  4-5  days.  These  results  are  broadly  in  line  with  those  seen  with  other intramuscular  immunoglobulin  products.  The  maximum  plasma  level  is  reached  3-6  day  after injection. The anti-HBs Ig is slowly cleared with an elimination half-life of around 3 to 4 weeks. Low inter-subjects variability of PK parameters was observed in both studies (around or less than 20 %). Two months (56 days) after single injection of approximately 21 IU/kg (study 1) or ≈ 40 IU/kg (study 2), the serum levels of anti-HBs Ig is higher than the protective 10 mIU/ml in all subjects. The main findings of study HB-002 are tabulated below: T : Test ( NP-002 ); R : Reference ( BayHep B) Repeat-dose investigations: No PK repeat-dose studies were performed. There is no current requirement for the conduct of such studies  and  extrapolation  proposed  by  the  applicant  based  on  the  modelling  approach  is  considered sufficient. Modelling for single dose immunoprophylaxis in adults and children To determine if the proposed posology is  sufficient  to  maintain  titres  above  the  protective  level  of 10 mIU/mL, 10,000 patients were simulated by the applicant using the distributions of pharmacokinetic parameters. The simulations took into consideration different scenarios, utilizing the variable dose of 0.06 mL/kg and a fixed dose of 1.6 mL (500 IU). In addition both the label-claim potency and the potency of the lots of ImmunoGam administered in the clinical studies were utilized. In  addition,  clinical  trial  lot  potencies  were  compared  to  production  lot  potencies  for  sensitivity analysis.  The  modelling  data  supports  that  an  immunoprophylaxis  dose  in  children  and  adults  will provide protective titres of 10 mIU/mL beyond 30 days after dosing. Using the minimum label claim potency of 312 IU/mL and the actual potencies within the manufacturing capabilities, all  modelled patients  have  protective  titres  of ≥ 10  mIU/mL at 30 days post-dosing and 60 - 93 % of modelled patients achieve ≥ 10 mIU/mL at 60 days post-dosing. Modelling for continuous (repeat-dose) immunoprophylaxis in adults and children The  applicant  originally  proposed  a  dose  of  19  IU/mL  in  children  based  on  the  North  American guidelines. This dose of 19 IU/mL is lower than the newborn dose of 156 IU. However, the Core SPC also  recommends  a  lower  dose,  8  IU/kg  every  2  months,  as  compared  to  the  birth  dose  of  30-100 IU/kg. This dosing discrepancy is explained by both the intensity of exposure, which is anticipated to be very high in the case of a neonate exposed to a hepatitis B positive carrier mother during birth, and the duration of sustaining protective anti-HBs levels, which for a newborn may be up to completion of the vaccination series. The modelling in adults predicted that with nominal potency of ImmunoGam of 312 IU/ml at least 98.3% and 60% of adults will have &gt;10 mIU/mL levels of anti-HBs at Day 30 and 60, respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised To  investigate  the  adequacy  of  an  8  IU/kg  dose  in  children,  a  pharmacokinetic  modelling  and simulation  study  was  conducted.  To  predict  the  pharmacokinetic  behaviour  of  ImmunoGam  in children, the model created for adult patients was scaled allometrically by weight. The results were used to predict PK outcomes for non-neonate paediatric (older than one year) patients in the weight range of 10 to 50 kg. First, a sampling of weights was created, using a uniform distribution between the  10  and  50  kg  limits.  When  the  8  IU/kg  dose  is  modelled,  &gt;99.8%  of  simulated  patients  have protective levels of anti-HBs greater than 10 mIU/mL at 30 days after ImmunoGam administration. Sixty  days  after  ImmunoGam administration, modelling demonstrates that 46- 89% of children are predicted  to  have  an  anti-HBs  antibody  level ≥ 10  mIU/mL.,  based  on  minimum  (312 IU/ml  label claim) or actual trended potencies. · Dose proportionality and time dependencies Dose  proportionality was  not investigated. As  only single-dose studies were performed, no information  regarding  time  dependency  could  be  drawn  from  the  investigations  carried  out  by  the applicant. · Special populations No studies were performed in special populations; however it is reasonable to extrapolate the efficacy of ImmunoGam from other available evidence (PK studies HB-002, HB-008 and study HB-004). In addition,  the  immunoprophylaxis  duration  will  be  guided  by  levels  of  anti-HBs  estimated  during monitoring of patients. Based on modelling simulations provided by the applicant, it is reassuring that the level of anti-HBs &gt;10 mIU/mL is predicted in &gt;98% of adults and children at Day 30 following the administration of HBIG. · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies No interaction studies have been conducted. Current WHO recommendations include combination of the  vaccination  against  hepatitis  B  along  with  passive  immunoprophylaxis  in  cases  of  acute  postexposure prophylaxis in high risk groups, e.g. healthcare personnel. · Pharmacokinetics using human biomaterials No pharmacokinetic studies using human biomaterials have been conducted, which is acceptable for this product containing a plasma-derived immunoglobulin. Pharmacodynamics There was no formal pharmacodynamic (PD) study for ImmunoGam conducted by the applicant. This is appropriate for this type of product as the efficacy of HBIG products was previously well studied and published in evidence-based literature. The mechanism of action of HBIG is a selective binding of the immunoglobulin to viral particles (via HBsAg) and their elimination via complement-dependent and independent pathways thereby preventing further dissemination of the virus and its reuptake by neighbouring cells during post-exposure prophylaxis. Refer to section Non-clinical aspects for details on the mechanism of action of HBIG. Clinical efficacy The clinical development of ImmunoGam for immunoprophylaxis of hepatitis B included one efficacy study  (HB-004).  The  study  was  conducted  in  two  immunoprophylaxis  populations  -  accidental exposure in adults (horizontal exposure) and neonatal exposure to HBsAg-positive mothers (vertical exposure).  Study  HB-004  was  originally  designed  for  the  horizontal  (adult  to  adult)  exposure  to hepatitis B but it was later amended to include a vertical (mother to infant) population. The horizontal arm  was  prematurely  terminated  due  to  poor  recruitment.  Conclusions  regarding  the  efficacy  of ImmunoGam in post-exposure prophylaxis are based on the results of the vertical arm and the results

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised for the horizontal arm, which are presented in a supplemental report (HB-004s), and are intended to provide supportive evidence of efficacy. It should be noted that none of the clinical studies has been conducted with the intended commercial product using the 20 nm viral filter however, comparability studies using the clinical trial material (35 nm) and the commercial product were accepted. · Dose response study There were no dose finding studies conducted for this submission. Posology differences persist in the national  recommendations  of  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  (CDC)  (USA)  and CHMP (EU), and the applicant's submission was acceptable. · Main study(ies) Study HB-004 - Immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B (horizontal and vertical arm) METHODS Study Participants In  the vertical  arm pregnant  women  were  screened  for  HBsAg  status.  Following  consent  from pregnant women at 5-9 months of gestation, a rapid HBsAg test was performed. A positive HBsAg test  was  verified  by  ELISA.  Following  delivery,  all  healthy  infants  identified  as  eligible  received  a HBIG and Hepatitis B vaccine within 12 hours from delivery. Inclusion Criteria allowed normal healthy newborn infants within 12 hours of birth negative for IgM anti-HBc*, HBsAg* and anti-HBs*, whose mother must be HBsAg-positive. The serology status of the infant may not have been known at time of dosing (delayed entry criteria). Since the results for certain  tests  (*)  may  have  taken  longer  than  12  hours,  the  infant  was  enrolled  into  the  study  and treated, in the interest of infant's safety. If the test results indicated that the subject was positive for any of the exclusion criteria, the subject was considered as 'not evaluable', and was excluded from the PP analysis. Most important Exclusion Criteria: infants for whom HBsAg data was not available from the mother; concurrent viral or other systemic infections, requirements antiviral therapy; under weight (&lt;2.0 kg) or pre-term (&lt;37 weeks gestation) infant; evidence of clinically significant medical conditions including, but not limited to hepatic, renal, cardiac insufficiency, haematological or neoplastic diseases; mother positive for HCV or HIV*. In  the horizontal  arm ,  healthy  males  and  females  of  18-55  years  of  age  were  included  who  were potentially exposed to HBV in the 48 hours prior to dosing (accidental, sexual, or household). Main exclusion criteria included history of hypersensitivity to blood or blood products, history of exposure in past 6 months to viral hepatitis other than hepatitis B, HBV, HIV or HCV positive tests. Treatments Enrolled infants of HBsAg-positive mothers were administered a single dose 0.5 ml of ImmunoGam (312 IU/ml) along with the hepatitis B vaccine (Engerix B) intramuscularly within 12 hours of birth. Infants  received  a  0.5  ml  injection  of  ImmunoGam  in  the  anterolateral  thigh  as  well  as  a  0.5 ml injection of hepatitis B vaccine at a different IM site. The infants also received follow-up injections of hepatitis B vaccine at Day 30 and Day 180, as directed in the vaccine labelling. An additional vaccine dose was administered at Day 270 for those infants who did not have sufficient anti-HBs at Day 180. Subjects enrolled in the horizontal arm who were potentially exposed to HBV were administered a single  dose  of  ImmunoGam  (0.06 ml/kg)  and  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (Recombivax  HB  or  Engerix-  B) intramuscularly  within  48  hours  of  exposure.  ImmunoGam  and  hepatitis  B  vaccine  were  given  at

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised different  intramuscular  (IM)  sites.  The  subjects  also  received  follow-up  injections  of  hepatitis  B vaccine at Day 30 and Day 180, as directed in the vaccine product information. Objectives The  study  objectives  were  to  assess  safety  and  efficacy  of  ImmunoGam  used  in  combination  with hepatitis  B  vaccine,  for  the  prevention  of  hepatitis  B  infection  following  vertical  or  horizontal exposure to the HBV. Outcomes/endpoints The primary endpoint of HB-004 study was the overall protection rate provided by ImmunoGam in combination with hepatitis B vaccine. The failure to protect from hepatitis B infection is measured by the appearance of HBsAg at any time point following ImmunoGam administration. The protection rate is defined as the proportion of infants/subjects who do not develop a positive HBsAg result. Secondary endpoints included: · Proportion of infants or adults and time to development of a positive HBeAg result at any time during the study period after baseline was calculated (HBeAg was only measured to Day 90 as per protocol); · Time to development of detectable HBsAg in serum (HBV occurrence in days); · Proportion of vaccine responders. Sample size Study HB-004 was originally designed in a horizontal (adult to adult) exposure population but it was later amended to include a population that was vertically (mother to infant) exposed to hepatitis B. It was  anticipated  that  approximately  200  and  175  subjects  would  be  enrolled  into  the  vertical  and horizontal arms of the study, respectively, in order to attain 155 evaluable subjects in one of the study arms. The population (vertical or horizontal) achieving the recruitment goal first would be analyzed for efficacy, while the other arm would provide supportive data only. Assuming a true  protection  rate  of  97%,  155  subjects  provide  80%  power  to  show  non-inferiority, where non-inferiority is declared if the lower limit of a 95% two-sided confidence interval using the exact binomial distribution is greater than 92% (i.e. a type I error of 2.5% was assumed). Randomisation / Blinding (masking) The study design was a single arm, open label trial; therefore, no randomisation or blinding procedures did apply. Statistical methods The study was described by the applicant as an uncontrolled non-randomized open trial comparing the protective  efficacy  of  combined  HBIG  and  vaccine  use  during  the  vertical  transmission  of  HBV against historical reference data. The pre-specified reference of a protective level of 97% was based on data from a study on the vertical transmission of HBV from HBsAg-positive/HBeAg-positive mothers to infants in Thailand and the protection rate of around 95% afforded with a combined administration of  HBIG and vaccination schedule of Engerix B (at 0, 1 and 6 months) (Poovorawan et  al .,  1997). Proportions  and  two-sided  95%  confidence  intervals  were  calculated  using  the  exact  binomial distribution.  The  confidence  interval  for  the  primary  endpoint  was  compared  to  the  reference protection rate of 0.97 with the margin of equivalence set at 0.05. RESULTS (VERTICAL ARM) As discussed in both the protocol and the SAP, since the horizontal arm of study HB-004 did not meet the target enrolment, the efficacy analyses were performed but no conclusions regarding efficacy of NP-002 were based on these analyses. All efficacy conclusions for study HB-004 are based on the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised results  from  the  vertical  arm  which  are  presented  in  a  separate  clinical  study  report.  Therefore,  the results of the horizontal arm which are considered supportive in this application and results from both arms are presented separately in this report. Participant flow Figure 1 Participant flow - Pregnant women (HB-004)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Characteristic        | Variable        |                         |
|-----------------------|-----------------|-------------------------|
| Gender                | Male Female     | 137 (54.2%) 116 (45.8%) |
| Race/Ethnicity        | Asian           | 253 (100%)              |
| Age of Mother (years) | Mean (SD) Range | 24.0 (4.1) 16.4 - 36.9  |
| Weight (kg)           | Mean (SD) Range | 2.8 (0.4) 2.0 - 4.5     |

<!-- image -->

| Viral Marker   | Visit     |   N* | Positive (%)   |
|----------------|-----------|------|----------------|
| HBsAg          | Baseline  |  178 | 0 (0.0)        |
|                | Day 30    |  178 | 0 (0.0)        |
|                | Day 90    |  174 | 0 (0.0)        |
|                | Day 180** |  178 | 3 (1.7)        |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Figure 2 Participant flow - Infants (HB-004) Recruitment In the vertical arm, the first infant was dosed on November 17, 2003 and the last infant completed on July 3, 2006. Conduct of the study Substantial  changes  have  been  made  in  the  statistical  analysis  plan  of  this  HB-004  study.  The horizontal arm of this study was terminated prematurely following recruitment failure. There was an interim analysis planned in the study but the applicant stated that it has not been carried out. Baseline data A summary of the overall demographic characteristics in both arms is presented in Table 2 and 3. All infants were born between November 16, 2003 and July 16, 2005 and were dosed within 12 hours of birth. All of 249 mothers were tested positive for HBsAg at baseline. Table 2 Summary of infant demographics (vertical arm) Numbers analysed Two analysis populations were used: per-protocol (PP) and safety populations. The safety population in the vertical arm (n=253) was used for all safety assessments and includes all infants who received ImmunoGam, including infants who did not complete the study. The PP population consisted of 178 infants who received ImmunoGam and completed the study as per protocol and was the population used for the primary analysis and to generate the study conclusions. Efficacy data was also available from 6 infants who were ineligible to enter the study. In addition, three infants (one from each of the three  sets  of  twins)  were  excluded  in  order  to  maintain  an  independent  population  for  all  statistical analyses. Data from all 184 infants who completed the study (excluding the three twins) were included in the robustness analysis. Outcomes and estimation Primary efficacy analysis: The  primary  endpoint  for  this  study  was  the  overall  protection  rate  provided  by  ImmunoGam  in combination with hepatitis B vaccine. The protection rate is defined as the proportion of infants who do  not  develop  a  positive  HBsAg  result  (at  any  time  during  the  study  period)  following  vertical exposure to hepatitis B. The summary of the HBsAg results in the vertical arm is presented in Table 3. Table 3 Summary of Infant Serology Results over Time - PP population

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|       | Day 270**   |   175 | 2 (1.1)   |
|-------|-------------|-------|-----------|
|       | Day 365     |   178 | 0 (0.0)   |
| HBeAg | Baseline    |   162 | 1 (0.6)   |
|       | Day 30      |   177 | 0 (0.0)   |
|       | Day 90      |   171 | 0 (0.0)   |

| Population   |   N |   Protection Rate | 95% Confidence Interval*   |
|--------------|-----|-------------------|----------------------------|
| Per-Protocol | 178 |             0.978 | (0.944, 0.994)             |
| Robustness   | 184 |             0.978 | (0.945, 0.994)             |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised HBeAg *  N=Total  Number  of  Infants  with  Test  Result  at  Each  Visit  WD  Day  180  and  WD  Day  365  are  Reported  with  the Corresponding Scheduled Visit Day 180 and Day 365. WD = Withdrawal **Note: 1 patient had 2 HBsAg-positive test results (1 at Day 180 and 1 at Day 270) An overall summary of the results is presented below by analysis population. Table  4 . Summary of Overall ImmunoGam Protection Rate (vertical arm). *Exact confidence interval limits for the binomial proportion using the F distribution method For both PP and robustness analyses four infants became HBsAg positive at any point in the study, thus  the  overall  protection  rate  achieved  was  0.98  (174/178)  with  a  corresponding  95%  confidence interval of (0.94, 0.99). The lower 95% confidence bound for the calculated protection rate is greater than 0.92 and therefore the study objectives were achieved. Secondary efficacy analysis · Appearance of HBeAg The proportion of infants with detectable HBeAg (at any time after baseline) was computed along with a  95%  confidence  interval.  None  of  the  infants  in  the  study  became  HBeAg-positive,  therefore  the proportion was 0% (0/178). A summary of the HBeAg results by study visit is presented in the Table 3. Of  note,  one  infant  included  in  the  PP  population  was  HBeAg  positive  at  birth  (prior  to  NP-002 dosing). The infant likely became HBeAg positive from his mother who was also HBeAg-positive at birth. The infant had no evidence of infection in utero or during the course of the study. HBeAg has been demonstrated to cross placenta in  utero .  All  subsequent  HBeAg  results  were  negative  for  this subject, and hence this subject was not regarded as an endpoint for HBeAg. · Time to Occurrence of HBsAg and HBeAg The secondary endpoints of time-to-occurrence of HBsAg and HBeAg are based on the first detectable serum HBsAg (or HBeAg) result. The time to occurrence (in days) was calculated for infants from the date  of  birth  to  the  actual  date  of  the  first  positive  HBsAg  (or  HBeAg)  result.  A  summary  of  the HBsAg and HBeAg results by study visit is presented in Table 3. All infants who did not develop detectable HBsAg (or HBeAg) were censored at their last study visit. As only 4 infants of the 178 infants  evaluated  developed  detectable  HBsAg  (Days  179,  181,  185  and  270)  and  none  of  the  178 infants developed detectable HBeAg, the median time to occurence and 95% confidence interval were not calculable. All occurrences happened between 179 and 270 days while all censoring took place between 346 and 460 days. · Anti-HBe, Anti-HBc, and Anti-HBs Levels Additional hepatitis B markers were tabulated as part of secondary endpoints. Summary statistics for anti-HBe, anti-HBc (total) and anti-HBc (IgM) antibodies over time were calculated. Summary statistics for anti-HBs over time are presented in Table 5.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Visit    |   N | Mean (SD) (mIU/ml)   | Range 1             |
|----------|-----|----------------------|---------------------|
| Baseline | 178 | 0.3 (1.1)            | 0.0 - 7.6           |
| Day 30   | 178 | 217.1 (163.5)        | 15.9 - 2260.0       |
| Day 90   | 174 | 92.7 (152.2)         | 15.0 - 1307.0       |
| Day 180  | 178 | 216.8 (369.0)        | longer 0.0 - 2000.0 |
| Day 270  | 175 | 853.0 (723.4)        | 0.0 - 2000.0        |
| Day 365  | 178 | 630.4 (650.4)        | 0.0 - 2000.0        |

Table 6

|                | Variable   |            |
|----------------|------------|------------|
| Gender         | Male       | 17 (40.5%) |
| Gender         | Female     | 25 (59.5%) |
| Race/Ethnicity | Asian      | 1 (2.4%)   |
| Race/Ethnicity | Black      | 3 (7.1%)   |
| Race/Ethnicity | Caucasian  | 27 (64.3%) |
| Race/Ethnicity | Hispanic   | 6 (14.3%)  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Infants acquire anti-HBe or anti-HBc (IgG) antibodies passively from their mothers either in utero or through  breast-feeding.  In  addition,  infants  may  develop  their  own  anti-HBe  from  exposure  to maternal HBeAg, which can cross the placenta. Anti-HBe results available for Days 180, 270, and 365 visits demonstrated that 71% of the infants were anti-HBe-positive at Day 180 and by Day 365 only 26% were positive. Anti-HBc (total) was positive in the vast majority of infants until Day 180 (8999%),  and  began  to  decline  with  11%  positive  at  Day  365.  The  decline  in  anti-HBe  and  anti-HBc (total)  by  the  end  of  the  study  likely  corresponds  to  a  decrease  in  breast  feeding.  Anti-HBc  (IgM), indicating  a  new  HBV  infection,  was  detected  in  one  of  the  four  HBsAg-positive  infants  and  not detected in any of the other infants enrolled. Anti-HBs levels indicate long-term immunity. The mean anti-HBs increased from baseline over the course of the study in a biphasic fashion. (Table 5). The first increase was seen at Day 30, likely due to ImmunoGam administration, followed by a decrease as ImmunoGam was cleared from the body and subsequent gradual increase due to HBV vaccination providing long-term immunity. Table 5 Summary of Anti-HBs Results Over-time - PP Population 1 Undetectable levels (&lt;3.0) were set to 0.0 for summary purposes. Ancillary analyses As  efficacy  data  was  available  for  6  infants  who  did  not  meet  all  inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  a robustness analysis was performed where these infants were included. It can be seen that the results for the per-protocol and robustness populations are nearly identical. This confirms that the effect of excluding this subset of infants from the PP population on the study results is negligible. RESULTS (HORIZONTAL ARM) Participant flow Of 42 subjects enrolled and dosed in the horizontal arm, ten subjects discontinued, nine were excluded by the investigators and 23 subjects completed the study (per-protocol population). Recruitment The first subject in the horizontal arm was dosed on November 1, 2002 and the last subject completed on December 4, 2003. Baseline data Summary of demographics in horizontal arm

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|             | Native Other   | 1 (2.4%) 4 (9.5%)   |
|-------------|----------------|---------------------|
| Age (years) | Mean (SD)      | 37.8 (10.3)         |
|             | Range          | 20.5 - 57.4         |

| Viral Marker   | Visit     | N Positive (%)   |
|----------------|-----------|------------------|
| HBsAg          | Baseline* | 42 1 (2.4)       |
|                | Day 30*   | 30 1 (3.3)       |
|                | Day 90    | no 27 0 (0.0)    |
|                | Day 180   | 23 0 (0.0)       |
|                | Early WD* | 8 1 (12.5)       |
| HBeAg          | Baseline  | 162 1 (0.6)      |
|                | Day 30    | 177 0 (0.0)      |
|                | Day 90    | 171 0 (0.0)      |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Numbers analysed In  the  horizontal  arm,  the  PP  population  consisted  of  23  subjects  who  received  ImmunoGam  and completed the study as per protocol and is the population used for the primary efficacy analysis. Nine subjects were excluded from the efficacy analysis by the investigators and an additional 10 subjects either withdrew from the study or were lost to follow-up. The safety population (n=42) is used for all safety assessments and includes all subjects who received ImmunoGam, including subjects who did not complete the study. Outcomes and estimations In  the  horizontal  arm,  none  of  the  subjects  became  HBsAg  positive  during  the  study.  Thus,  a  1.0 (23/23)  protection  rate  was  achieved  with  a  corresponding  95%  confidence  interval  of  (0.85,  1.00) using the exact binomial method. None of the subjects in the horizontal arm became HBeAg positive, therefore the proportion was 0 (0/23) with a corresponding 95% confidence interval of (0.00, 0.18). Summary  statistics  for  anti-HBe,  anti-HBc  (IgG)  and  anti-HBc  (IgM)  antibodies  over  time  in  the horizontal arm were calculated. Table 7 Summary of Serology Results over Time - Safety Population (horizontal arm) WD = Withdrawal * Three HBsAg-positive results were from 1 patient who was HBsAg-positive at baseline (i.e. HBV infection prior to entry into study HB-004S). This patient was withdrawn as soon as the entry criterion violation was detected. · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) A meta-analysis of historical clinical data from studies with HBIG products has been provided by the applicant (Lee et al. (2006)). This meta-analyses found that hepatitis B immunoglobulin alone or when added to hepatitis B vaccine decreased the risk of hepatitis B infection (0.52, 0.44 to 0.63). Conclusively, the current immunisation advice remains that HBIG are 'immediately effective and seem protective for several months, after which the efficacy wanes'. · Clinical studies in special populations No studies were performed with ImmunoGam in special populations. Clinical safety Patient exposure

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Study                      | Study Population                                       |   Number of Subjects | ImmunoGam Dose and Route   |
|----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------------|
| PK Study 1                 | Healthy adults                                         |                   30 | 0.06 ml/kg IM              |
| Efficacy Study             | Neonates born to HBsAg-positive mothers (vertical arm) |                  253 | 0.5 ml IM                  |
| Efficacy Study- Supplement | Adults potentially exposed to HBV (horizontal arm)     |                   42 | 0.06 ml/kg IM              |
| PK Study 2                 | Healthy adults                                         |                   40 | 0.06 ml/kg IM              |

| Study                      | Number of AEs                          | Number of subjects with AEs            | SAEs/ subjects   |   Deaths |
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------|----------|
| PK Study 1                 | 43 (25 in ImmunoGam; 18 in comparator) | 23 (12 in ImmunoGam; 11 in comparator) | longer 0         |        0 |
| PK Study 2                 | 12                                     | 11                                     | 0                |        0 |
| Efficacy Study-            | 531                                    | 159                                    | 43/38*           |        1 |
| Efficacy Study- Supplement | 69                                     | 25                                     | 0                |        0 |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The overall extent of exposure to ImmunoGam in the applied for indication is presented in Table 8. Table 8 Overall extent of exposure in post-exposure prophylaxis. · Adverse events / Serious adverse events / deaths * Some cases contained multiple SAE terms within a single case. In the PK studies a total of 55 AEs were reported in 34 patients irrespective of treatment; of those AEs 47 were mild and 8 were moderate. No serious adverse events were reported in both studies. The most common  adverse  events  after  ImmunoGam  administration  were  headaches  and  nasopharyngitis.  A total  of  30  adverse  events  were  reported  by  17  (24%)  of  the  subjects  who  were  administered ImmunoGam in both studies. Eleven (37%) subjects who were administered BayHep B reported 18 adverse events and 6 (15%) subjects who were administered Nabi-HB reported 7 adverse events. In  both  the  ImmunoGam and the Nabi-HB group, the organ system with the highest occurrence of adverse events was the nervous system disorders. In the BayHep B group, respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders was the system organ class with the highest number of adverse events. Only one adverse event, nausea, was reported to be related to the study drug, in a subject who was administered ImmunoGam in PK study 2. In the Efficacy study, a total of 531 adverse events were reported from 159 of the infants (63%) over the duration of the study. 478 of the adverse events were mild, 40 were moderate and 12 were severe. A total of 43 serious adverse events terms were captured on CRFs for 38 infants. The most common adverse events amongst infants in this study were diarrhoea (57 events) and pyrexia (52 events). Only one adverse event was regarded as possibly related to ImmunoGam; the adverse event was indurations in  right  and  left  thighs.  No  action  was  taken  and  the  adverse  event  was  resolved  after  2  days.  One infant death was reported in this study and considered to be unrelated to ImmunoGam. Amongst SAEs in  infants  the  majority  of  events  included  gastroenteritis,  infections,  sepsis,  and  neonatal  jaundice unrelated to ImmunoGam. In the horizontal arm of the study, a total of 69 adverse events were reported by 25 subjects (60%) over  the  duration  of  the  study.  The  most  common  adverse  event  amongst  adults  in  this  study  was headache which was reported by 9 subjects. Nausea, pyrexia, arthralgia and myalgia were also AEs which were experienced by more than 5% of subjects in this study. A total of 46 adverse events were mild, 14 were moderate and 1 headache was categorized as severe. Related adverse events included

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety concern                                                                                                   | Proposed Pharmacovigilance activities (routine and additional)                                                   | Proposed risk minimization activities (routine and additional)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Important potential risks (product specific)                                                                     | Important potential risks (product specific)                                                                     | Important potential risks (product specific)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Blood Glucose False Positive Hypoglycaemia (Masked hypoglycaemia) Hypoglycaemia (Life threatening hypoglycaemia) | • Routine Pharmacovigilance Signal detection Investigation of possible confounding condition that precipitate or | Labelling information SPC section 4.5: Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 'Some types of blood glucose testing systems (for example, those based on the glucose dehydrogenase pyrroloquinolinequinone (GDH-PQQ) or glucose-dye- oxidoreductase methods) falsely interpret the maltose contained in ImmunoGam as glucose. This may result in falsely elevated glucose readings and consequently in |

Medicinal product no longer authorised nausea, fatigue, malaise, pain, pyrexia, hypersensitivity, arthralgia, back pain, myalgia, headache, and dizziness. No SAEs were reported during this study. · Laboratory findings In the IM route immunoprophylaxis studies, most of laboratories findings were within normal range. · Safety in special populations Studies in special populations were not conducted with ImmunoGam. · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions No data on drug-drug interactions is available specifically for ImmunoGam. Information on potential interactions of immunoglobulins in general, such as a potential interference with the development of an immune response to live attenuated virus vaccines, is included in the SPC. · Discontinuation due to adverse events One subject was withdrawn from the study due to experiencing a facial rash which was reported on study day 7. The rash was assessed as moderate in intensity and assessed by investigator to be unlikely caused by ImmunoGam administration. · Post marketing experience As  of  June  25,  2008,  there  have  been  two  post-marketing  adverse  event  reports  from  use  of ImmunoGam in North America, which were both expected adverse events: dyspepsia (Gastrointestinal disorders) and back pain (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders). These adverse events are described in the SPC. 2.5 Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described by the applicant fulfils the legislative requirements. Risk Management Plan The MAH submitted a risk management plan. Important potential risks (product specific) · Routine Pharmacovigilance Signal detection Investigation of possible confounding condition that precipitate or

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Safety concern Proposed Pharmacovigilance activities (routine and additional) Proposed risk minimization activities (routine and additional) exacerbate potential complications the inappropriate administration of insulin, resulting in life-threatening hypoglycaemia. Also, cases of true hypoglycaemia may go untreated if the hypoglycaemic state is masked by falsely elevated glucose readings. Accordingly, when administering ImmunoGam or other parenteral maltose-containing products, the measurement of blood glucose must be done with a glucose-specific method. The product information of the blood glucose testing systems, including that of the test strips, should be carefully reviewed to determine if the system is appropriate for use with maltosecontaining parenteral products'. Important potential risks  (class related) Hypersensitivity · Routine Pharmacovigilance Labelling information 4.3 Contraindications Hypersensitivity to any of the components. Hypersensitivity to human immunoglobulins, especially in very rare cases of IgA deficiency when the patient has antibodies against IgA. 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use Ensure that ImmunoGam is not administered into a blood vessel, because of the risk of shock. True hypersensitivity reactions are rare. ImmunoGam contains a small quantity of IgA (less than 40 micrograms/ml). Individuals who are deficient in IgA have the potential for developing IgA antibodies and may have anaphylactic reactions after administration of blood components containing IgA. The physician must therefore weigh the benefit of treatment with ImmunoGam against potential risk of hypersensitivity reactions. Rarely, human hepatitis B immunoglobulin can induce a fall in blood pressure with anaphylactic reaction, even in patients who have tolerated previous treatment with immunoglobulin. Suspicion of allergic or anaphylactic type reactions requires immediate discontinuation of the injection. In case of shock, standard medical treatments for shock should be implemented. Transfusion-related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI) Acute Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) · Routine Pharmacovigilance None

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety concern                                        | Proposed Pharmacovigilance activities (routine and additional)   | authorised Proposed risk minimization activities (routine and additional)   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| • Routine Pharmacovigilance                           | None                                                             | Aseptic meningitis                                                          |
| • Routine Pharmacovigilance                           | None                                                             | Renal impairment                                                            |
| Embolism (pulmonary embolism, deep vein thrombosis) • | Routine Pharmacovigilance None                                   |                                                                             |
| anaemia • Routine Pharmacovigilance                   | None                                                             | Haemolytic                                                                  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 2.6 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality ImmunoGam is a purified human hepatitis B immunoglobulin preparation which complies with the Ph. Eur. monograph no. 0722 on human hepatitis B immunoglobulin and is obtained from plasma from selected and/or immunised donors having antibodies against hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen. The  applicant  has  demonstrated  adequately  the  consistency  and  robustness  of  the  manufacturing process. The results of tests carried out for the control of the drug substance and drug product indicate satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important quality characteristics. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology As  immunoglobulins  are  normal  constituents  of  the  human  body,  and  in  the  absence  of  a  suitable animal model in which to test ImmunoGam, the lack of a full toxicology programme was considered acceptable.  The  use  of  the  single-dose  toxicity  and  immunotoxicity  data  from  WinRho  another hyperimmune IgG product manufactured by an almost identical process, was accepted as a reasonable approach  and  there  is  no  reason  to  assume  that  the  different  immunoglobulin  will  influence  the toxicity.  The  absence  of  local  tolerance  data  is  acceptable  and  no  further  studies  were  considered necessary. The review of the toxicity data on the excipients, solvent and detergent is satisfactory. For TNBP, the margin over the NOAELs on an applied dose basis for general toxicity in mice is 5,300 and  for  rats  it  is  2,100  based  on  the  maximum  daily  exposure  of  5 μ g/kg/day;  for  embryo-fetal development, it is 80,000. For Triton X-100, the margin on an applied dose basis over the NOAEL for general toxicity is 4,700 and for the dose at which effects were seen on developmental toxicity it is 8,300. Although different routes of administration are involved, these margins indicate that any risks from traces of the solvent and detergent will be negligible. Given  the  clinical  experience  with  ImmunoGam,  for  which  marketing  licence  was  first  granted January 2006 in the USA, the information provided on toxicology is sufficient. Efficacy ImmunoGam  provides  passive  immunisation  for  individuals  exposed  to  the  hepatitis  B  virus. According to the WHO and national European guidelines, human hepatitis B immunoglobulin remains an essential component of the passive immunisation protection of infants during vertical transmission following  birth  and  of  any  subjects  following  accidental  exposure  to  hepatitis  B  (sexual,  and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised percutaneous  route  of  transmission)  when  the  concomitant  administration  with  vaccine  allows  the maintenance  of  a  reasonable  level  of  protective  anti-HBs  antibodies  (&gt;10  IU/l)  while  the  host  is initiating an immunological response to vaccine. A level of anti-HBsAg of 10 IU/L is usually accepted as the lower limit that stills confers protection. Therefore, in order to make  comparisons  to  historical data and infer evidence of efficacy, characterisation of PK is of importance. The PK profile of ImmunoGam after single administration was determined using a product manufactured by the 35 nm filter process, which is different to the product to be marketed (20 nm filtration). The comparability between different versions of the product was sufficiently demonstrated. The applicant has conducted pharmacokinetic studies HB-002 and HB-008, which have demonstrated that ImmunoGam has PK properties of a typical immunoglobulin product intended for intramuscular use. The anti-HBs Ig is slowly cleared with an elimination half-life of around 3 to 4 weeks. Despite the fact that the drug products investigated in studies HB-002 and HB-008 are different from the product to be marketed, the applicant provided comparability data between batches produced using 35 nm and 20 nm filters which reassure that the finally marketed product will have a similar PK profile to the one observed in the HB-002 and HB-008 studies. The release specifications for the finally manufactured product comply with Ph. Eur for intramuscular immunoglobulin products. The applicant is asked to provide some PK data with the commercial product from a limited subset of patients as a follow-up measure. To determine if  a  dose  evaluated  in  studies  HB-002  and  HB-008  can  be  effectively  bridged  to  the posology proposed by the CHMP Core SPC in terms of the maintenance of titres above the protective level  of  10 mIU/mL,  10,000  patients  were  simulated  by  the  applicant  using  the  distributions  of pharmacokinetic parameters. The simulations took into consideration different scenarios, utilizing the variable dose of 0.06 mL/kg and doses proposed by CHMP Core SPC. The modelling data supports an immunoprophylaxis  dose  in  children  and  adults  that  will  provide  protective  titres  of  10  mIU/mL beyond 30 days after dosing in single dose and continuous (repeat use) settings. Using the minimum label claim potency of 312 IU/mL and the actual potencies within the manufacturing capabilities, all modelled patients have protective titres of ≥ 10 mIU/mL at 30 days post-dosing and 60% of modelled patients achieve ≥ 10mIU/mL at 60 days post-dosing. The application included the results of one Phase 3 efficacy trial. Study HB-004 contained a vertical and a horizontal arm which enabled it to produce clinical data in both infants and adults. The study was  open  and  non-randomized  in  nature  and  compared  protection  rates  to  the  published  historical reference.  The  endpoints  for  both  vertical  and  horizontal  arms  were  the  same  and  the  choice  of endpoints  in  the  study  was  acceptable,  except  for  one  secondary  endpoint,  HBeAg,  which  was  not monitored beyond Day 90 as per protocol. In  relation  to  the  immunoprophylaxis  in  infants,  the  combined  efficacy  of  ImmunoGam  and vaccination was demonstrated using PP analysis and protective rates were comparable to those seen in Poovorawan et al . studies and published in meta-analysis by Lee et al. (2006). There were no subjects with HBsAg+ amongst adults, although the number of adults in the study was extremely small and the horizontal arm was terminated prematurely and therefore without statistically significant results. The historical reference of protection rate 97% based on data from study on the vertical transmission of HBV from HBsAg-positive/HBeAg-positive mothers to infants in Thailand and the protection rate of around 95% afforded with a combined administration of HBIG and vaccination schedule of Engerix B (at 0, 1 and 6 months) (Poovorawan et al ., 1997) with 5% margin were selected. The conduct of a study with HBIG alone (without concurrent vaccination) is not considered to be ethical as it would provide  inferior  protection  (around  70-85%)  and  potentially  may  expose  children  and  adults  to  a greater  risk.  Also,  the  efficacy  of  HBIG  products  was  previously  well  studied  and  reported  in numerous studies (see Cochrane meta-analysis by Lee et al., 2006). Therefore the approach selected by the applicant is acceptable. The applicant commented that the study is not interpreted as a noninferiority  study  but  rather  as  an  uncontrolled  non-randomized  open  trial.  Confidence  intervals  for protective rates were presented and compared to historical rates observed in Poovorawan et al. studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised In the per-protocol analysis only 4 infants became HBsAg positive at any point in the study, thus the overall protection rate achieved was 0.98 (174/178) with a corresponding 95%CI of (0.94, 0.99). The historical reference protection rate is 0.97, therefore the protection rate provided by ImmunoGam in combination with the Hepatitis B vaccine is comparable to the protection rates seen in the historical reference from the literature. In  the  horizontal  arm  none  of  the  subjects  became  HBsAg  positive  during  the  study.  Thus,  a  1.0 (23/23) protection rate was achieved with a corresponding 95% confidence interval of (0.85, 1.00). The confidence interval for the protection rate from the horizontal arm was wide due to an insufficient sample size. Although statistical significance was not achieved for the horizontal arm of the study, the point estimate of the protection rate was 1.0; all subjects in the PP population were protected from possible  infection  with  HBV.  These  results  provide  strong  support  for  the  conclusions  which  were drawn  for  the  vertical  arm  of  the  study  that  ImmunoGam  in  combination  with  hepatitis  B  vaccine provides a protection rate that is not inferior to the protection rates seen in the literature. Despite the limitations in this study, it is considered to be conducted in conservative settings (only a single dose of HBIG was provided without repeat doses given) and therefore it is supportive of the claimed  indication.  The  overall  proportion  of  non-responders  (anti-HBs  of  &lt;10 mIU/mL)  was  only 5.6%.  Considering  the  challenging  circumstances  of  conducting  a  study  in  horizontal  transmission settings, the extrapolation of data from the vertical arm is possible. In addition the modelling results from the PK studies are supportive of the protective efficacy of ImmunoGam in immunoprophylaxis. Therefore the approach selected by the applicant is acceptable and results of the Efficacy study can be considered supportive of the efficacy in the immunoprophylaxis indication. Overall,  the  conclusions  from  the  Efficacy  study  are  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of ImmunoGam in combination with HBV vaccine in immunoprophylaxis settings in children and adults following vertical and horizontal transmission of the HBV. No studies were performed in special populations; however, it is reasonable to extrapolate the efficacy of  ImmunoGam  from  other  available  evidence  (PK  studies  and  Efficacy  study).  In  addition,  the immunoprophylaxis  duration  will  be  guided  by  levels  of  anti-HBs  estimated  during  monitoring  of patients. Based on modelling simulations provided by the applicant, it is reassuring that the level of anti-HBs  &gt;10 mIU/mL  is  predicted  in  &gt;98%  of  adults  and  children  at  Day  30  following  the administration of HBIG. Safety The  safety  profile  of  ImmunoGam  appears  to  be  acceptable.  The  proportion  of  local  reactions observed with the intramuscular administration of ImmunoGam was low. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials and post-marketing have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. · User consultation A user consultation on the package leaflet has been performed. Based on satisfactory results of the user test, it is possible to conclude that the PIL for ImmunoGam is acceptable to convey the necessary patient information on use of the product in immunoprophylaxis settings. The PIL is presented in a useful and readable format and can be utilized as a good educational material for patients. Risk-benefit assessment The  risk-benefit  ratio  for  ImmunoGam  for  the  indication  of  immunoprophylaxis  of  hepatitis  B  in children and adults is positive. From the physician's point of view, an administration of HBIG should provide an adequate passive immunisation while the vaccine response is developing or if the vaccine

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised response  failed.  All  proposed  posology  for  ImmunoGam  is  aligned  with  the  CHMP  Core  SPC requirements. A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that:  routine pharmacovigilance was adequate to monitor the safety of the product.  no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information. Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of ImmunoGam in the immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B in the following settings (Intramuscular use): 'Immunoprophylaxis of Hepatitis B: - In case of accidental exposure in non-immunised subjects (including persons whose vaccination is incomplete or status unknown). - In haemodialysed patients, until vaccination has become effective. - In the newborn of a hepatitis B virus carrier-mother. - In subjects who did not show an immune response (no measurable hepatitis B antibodies) after vaccination and for whom a continuous prevention is necessary due to the continuous risk of being infected with hepatitis B. Consideration should also be given to other official guidance on the appropriate use of human hepatitis B immunoglobulin for intramuscular use.' was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.