---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:19:11
document_pages: 16
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/assessment-report/rivastigmine-teva-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
document_name: rivastigmine-teva-epar-public-assessment-report_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.9027395
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 19:56:18.353163
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR Rivastigmine Teva International Non proprietary Name: rivastigmine Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/001044 Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

|   1. | ........................................... 3 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE                                                         |
|------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  1.1 | ........................................................................................................ 3 Submission of the dossier          |
|  1.2 | .......................................................................... 4 Steps taken for the assessment of the product                    |
|  2   | ................................................................................................. 5 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION                     |
|  2.1 | .............................................................................................................................. 5 Introduction |
|  2.2 | ......................................................................................................................... 5 Quality aspects   |
|  2.3 | ................................................................................................................ 8 Non-Clinical aspects       |
|  2.4 | ....................................................................................................................... 8 Clinical Aspects    |
|  2.5 | ................................................................................................................. 14 Pharmacovigilance        |
|  2.6 | ...................................... 15 Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation                                     |

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE

## 1.1 Submission of the dossier

The  applicant  Teva  Pharma  B.V submitted on 03 July 2008  an application for  Marketing Authorisation to the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) for Rivastigmine Teva, in accordance with the centralised procedure falling within the scope of the Annex to Regulation (EC) 726/2004 under Article 3 (3) - 'Generic of a Centrally authorised product'.

<!-- image -->

The application legal basis refers to Article 10(1) at the time of the opinion. The chosen reference product is: ■ Reference  medicinal  product  which  is  or  has  been  authorised  in  accordance  with  the  community provisions in force for not less than 6/10 years in the EEA:  Product  name,  strength,  pharmaceutical  form: Exelon  1.5mg  hard  capsules,  Exelon  3mg  hard capsules, Exelon 4.5mg hard capsules, Exelon 6mg hard capsules  Marketing authorisation holder: Novartis Europharm Limited  First authorisation: 12/05/98  Member State (EEA)/Community: EU registration ■ Reference medicinal product authorised in the Community/Member State where the application is made:  Product  name,  strength,  pharmaceutical  form: Exelon  1.5mg  hard  capsules,  Exelon  3mg  hard capsules, Exelon 4.5mg hard capsules, Exelon 6mg hard capsules  Marketing authorisation holder: Novartis Europharm Limited  Marketing authorisation number(s): EU/1/98/066/001-3, EU/1/98/066/004-6, EU/1/98/066/007-9, EU/1/98/066/010-12, EU/1/98/066/014-16, EU/1/98/066/017. ■ Medicinal Product used for bioequivalence study (where applicable)  Product name, strength, pharmaceutical form: Exelon 1.5 mg hard capsules, Exelon 6 mg hard capsules  Marketing authorisation holder: Novartis Europharm Limited  Member State of source: UK Rapporteur : Dr. Broich Pharmacovigilance Rapporteur : Dr. Demolis Scientific Advice: The applicant did not seek scientific advice at the CHMP. Licensing status: The product was not licensed in any country at the time of submission of the application. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.2 Steps taken for the assessment of the product

-  The application was received by the EMEA on 03 July 2008.
-  The procedure started on 23 July 2008.
-  The Rapporteur's first Assessment Report was circulated to all  CHMP  members  on 10 October 2008.
-  During the meeting on 17 - 20 November 2008, the CHMP agreed on the consolidated List of Questions to be sent to the applicant. The final consolidated List of Questions was sent to the applicant on 20 November 2008.

<!-- image -->

 The  applicant  submitted  the  responses  to  the  CHMP  consolidated  List  of  Questions  on 18 December 2008.  The Rapporteur circulated the Joint Assessment Report on the applicant's responses to the List of Questions to all CHMP members on 30 January 2009.  During  the  meeting  on  16  -  19  February  2009,  the  CHMP,  in  the  light  of  the  overall  data submitted  and  the  scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued  a  positive  opinion  for granting a Marketing Authorisation to Rivastigmine Teva on 19 February 2009. The applicant provided the letter of undertaking on the follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation on 10 February 2009. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 2.1 Introduction

Rivastigmine  Teva  1.5  mg,  3  mg,  4.5  mg,  6  mg  hard  capsules  is  a  generic  medicinal  product containing rivastigmine hydrogen tartrate as the active substance. The reference product Exelon 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4.5 mg and 6 mg hard capsules has been centrally authorised on 12 May 1998.

Rivastigmine  is  an  acetyl-  and  butyrylcholinesterase  inhibitor  of  the  carbamate  type,  thought  to facilitate  cholinergic  neurotransmission  by  slowing  the  degradation  of  acetylcholine  released  by functionally  intact  cholinergic  neurones.  Thus,  rivastigmine  may  have  an  ameliorative  effect  on cholinergic-mediated cognitive deficits in dementia associated with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. Rivastigmine  interacts  with  its  target  enzymes  by  forming  a  covalently  bound  complex  that temporarily inactivates the enzymes. In healthy young men, an oral 3 mg dose decreases acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  activity  in  CSF  by  approximately  40%  within  the  first  1.5 hours  after administration.  Activity  of  the  enzyme  returns  to  baseline  levels  about  9 hours  after  the  maximum inhibitory effect has been achieved. In patients with Alzheimer's disease, inhibition of AChE in CSF by rivastigmine was dose-dependent up to 6 mg given twice daily, the highest dose tested. Inhibition of butyrylcholinesterase activity in CSF of 14 Alzheimer patients treated by rivastigmine was similar to that of AChE. The  safety  and  efficacy  of  rivastigmine  has  been  demonstrated  in  randomised,  placebo-controlled trials in patients with Alzheimer's disease. A summary of these studies may be found in the EPAR of Exelon. The indication proposed for Rivastigmine Teva is the same as for the authorized Reference medicinal product Exelon. Rivastigmine Teva is indicated for the treatment of mild to moderately severe Alzheimer's dementia and treatment of mild to moderately severe dementia in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Treatment  should  be  initiated  and  supervised  by  a  physician  experienced  in  the  diagnosis  and treatment of Alzheimer's dementia or dementia associated with Parkinson's disease. Diagnosis should be made according to current guidelines. Therapy with rivastigmine should only be started if a caregiver is available who will regularly monitor intake of the medicinal product by the patient. 2.2 Quality aspects Introduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

Rivastigmine Teva is presented as hard gelatin capsules containing 2.4 mg, 4.8 mg, 7.2 mg and 9.6 mg of rivastigmine hydrogen tartrate as active substance, corresponding respectively to 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4.5 mg  and  6  mg  of  rivastigmine.  The  other  ingredients  are  microcrystalline  cellulose,  hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose, colloidal silicon dioxide, magnesium stearate, purified water, gelatin capsules and Imprinting Inks (shellac glaze-45% in ethanol, iron oxide black, N-butyl alcohol, Isopropyl alcohol, propylene glycol, ammonium hydroxide). The hard gelatin capsules are marketed in blister (PVC/alu) packed in cartons or in bottles (HDPE) with a white polypropylene cap. It was verified that the pack sizes are consistent with the posology and treatment duration as approved in the summary of product characteristics.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Active substa n ce

The  drug  substance  is  Rivastigmine  hydrogen  tartrate  and  its  chemical  name  is  (S)-N-ethyl-3-  [1(dimethyl  amino)  ethyl]  -  N-methyl  phenyl  carbamate  hydrogen  tartrate  according  to  the  IUPAC nomenclature.

Rivastigmine  hydrogen  tartrate  white  to  off-white  fine  crystalline  powder,  very  hygroscopic  and deliquescent. According the information described in the literature this active substance is very soluble in water, in ethanol and acetonitrile, slightly soluble in n-octanol and slightly soluble in ethyl acetate. It was noticed that rivastigmine hydrogen tartrate has one chiral centre. Therefore, it is optically active.

The  stability  results  from  long-term  and  accelerated  studies  were  completed  according  to  ICH guidelines  demonstrated  adequate  stability  of  the  active  substance.  The  following  parameters  were monitored  during  the  stability  studies:  identification  (IR),  melting  point,  specific  optical  rotation, water content, assay (HPLC) and impurities (HPLC). It is important to underline that the test methods applied are those used for release of the drug substance. Following stress studies, which performed under  heat,  acidic  and  alkaline  conditions,  oxidizing  conditions  as  well  as  under  light  stress conditions, it was concluded that no major changes occurred in the assay and chromatographic purity. Furthermore, the photatsability study that was performed in accordance with the note for guidance on photostability testing of new active substances and medicinal products (CPMP/ICH/279/95) confirmed that the active substance is not photosensitive since no degradation of the active substance has been observed. In can be concluded that the proposed re-test period is justified based on the stability results when the active substance is stored in the original packing material.

 Manufacture Rivastigmine hydrogen tartrate is synthesised in three reactions steps. The manufacturing process has been adequately described. Critical parameters have been identified and adequate in-process controls included. Specifications for starting materials, reagents, and solvents have been provided. Adequate control  of  critical  steps  and  intermediates  has  been  presented.  The  active  substance  is  purified  by filtration. The purified active substance is finally packed in a double polythene bag enclosed within a triple laminated high barrier bag, which is placed in a fibre drum. Silica gel desiccant bags are at the top of the triple laminated high barrier bag. It was confirmed that the polythene bags comply with EU Directive 2002/72/EC and Ph.Eur. monograph 3.1.3 Polyolefines. Structure elucidation has been performed by infrared absorption spectroscopy, ultraviolet spectroscopy, 1 H-NMR spectroscopy and mass spectroscopy. The molecular weight was determined by  elemental  analysis.  Taking  into  account  that  the  active  substance  has  one  chiral  centre  it  was established  that  the  specific  optical  rotation  should  be  between  +4.00  and  +6.5  when  calculated  on dried basis.  Specification The active  substance  specifications  include  tests  for  appearance  (white  to  off-white  fine  crystalline powder, very hydroscopic and deliquescent), Identification (IR/ complies with the requirements of test for tartrate), water content (KF), sulphated ash (Ph.Eur.) assay (HPLC), release potency, heavy metals (Ph.Eur.), impurities (HPLC), residual solvents (GC) and particle size. All specifications reflect the relevant quality attributes of the active substance. The analytical methods, which were used in the routine controls, were well described and their validations are in accordance with the relevant ICH Guidelines. Impurities were described, classified as process related impurities and possible degradation products, and specified. Residual solvents were satisfactorily controlled in the active substance according to the relevant  ICH  requirements.  Certificates  of  analyses  for  the  active  substances  were  provided  and  all batch analysis results comply with the specifications and show a good uniformity from batch to batch.  Stability Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Medicinal Product

##  Pharmaceutical Development

All information regarding the choice of the drug substance and the excipients are sufficiently justified. The  main  aim  of  the  applicant  was  to  develop  an  oral  immediate  release  capsule  formulation bioequivalent  to  the  reference  product  (Exelon).  Due  to  the  very  low  concentration  of  the  active substance  in  the  hard  capsules,  wet  granulation  was  chosen  as  the  method  of  manufacture  for  the proposed hard capsules in order to achieve the required content uniformity.

the  EU  submission  batches  were  compared  to  the  European  Reference  product  (Exelon).  The comparative  dissolution  profiles  shows  that  there  is  a  closely  match  in  the  0.1  N  HCl  dissolution media. Furthermore, it was verified that the physical characteristics of the two innovators products are very similar. All the excipients used are well known and commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry.  Adventitious Agents Neither the excipients nor the active substance is derived from human or animal origin. Certificates of suitability have been provided for the gelatine capsule which is of ruminant origin.  Manufacture of the Product The  proposed  commercial  manufacturing  process  involves  standard  technology  using  standard manufacturing processes such as granulation, drying, milling, blending, final blend, encapsulation and packaging. Furthermore, the equipment used is commonly available in the pharmaceutical industry. It was verified that the critical steps of this manufacturing site have been identified and characterised. Furthermore,  the  manufacturing  process  has  been  adequately  validated  for  two  commercial  scale batches (1.5mg and 6 mg) and for common granulation (3 mg, 4.5 mg and 6 mg) and the results of the manufacturing validation reports were considered satisfactory.  Product Specification The  drug  product  specifications  were  established  according  the  ICH  guidelines  and  include  the following  tests:  appearance,  identification  (UV/HPLC),  identification  of  colorants,  identification  of tartaric  acid,  uniformity  of  weigh  (Ph.  Eur.),  dissolution,  assay,  impurities  and  microbial  limits  (Ph Eur). No new impurities  have  been  arising  compared  to  the  active  substance  and  the  specifications  have been justified. All  analytical  procedures  that  were  used  for  testing  the  drug  product  were  properly  described. Moreover,  all  relevant  methods  were  satisfactorily  validated  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  ICH guidelines. The  batch  analysis  data  for  two  batches  of  each  strength  confirm  that  the  hard  capsules  can  be manufactured reproducibly according to the agreed finished product specification, which is suitable for control of the finished product. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  Stability of the Product

The stability studies were conducted according to the relevant ICH guidelines.

Two batches of each strength have been stored at long term, intermediate and accelerated conditions. The  following  parameters  were  controlled:  description,  appearance  of  capsule  content,  assay, dissolution, related substances and microbial limits.

Following the  stress  testing  on  the  finished  product  it  was  concluded  that  the  medicinal  product  is relatively stable under ultraviolet light irradiation, sonication, humidity and acid hydrolysis, somewhat susceptible  to  dry  heat  and  base  hydrolysis,  and  sensitive  towards  oxidation.  The  results  of  the photostability study that was conducted under ICH conditions demonstrated that the finished product is not affected by the exposure to the light.

To support this application two single-dose, comparative bioequivalence studies (study: 2007-1526/ 1.5  mg  strength  and  study:  2007-1527/  6  mg  strength)  were  submitted.  Study:  2007-1527/  6  mg strength being the pivotal study of this assessment. Bioequivalence determined at the 6 mg dose was extrapolated to the 3 mg and 4.5 mg strength. Furthermore a bioequivalence study with the 1.5 mg dose rivastigmine was conducted as it contains a separate granulation formulation

Based on the available stability data, the proposed shelf life and storage conditions as stated in the SmPC are acceptable. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Information  on  development,  manufacture,  control  of  the  active  substance  and  the  finished  product have been presented in a satisfactory manner and justified in accordance with relevant CHMP and ICH guidelines.  The  results  of  tests  carried  out  indicate  satisfactory  consistency  and  uniformity  of  the finished product. Therefore, this medicinal product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance  in  the  clinic.  The  bioequivalence  studies  indicate  bioequivalence  with  the  reference product (Exelon). At the time of the CHMP opinion, there was an unresolved quality issue, which will not have an impact on the benefit/risk ratio of the medicinal product. Therefore, it can be concluded that the quality characteristics of the finished product are adequate and should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. 2.3 Non-Clinical aspects This  generic  application  is  made  in  accordance  with  Article  10(1)  of  Directive  2001/83/EC.  The applicant did not provide further non-clinical studies. However based on published pharmacological, toxicological and pharmacokinetic data, the properties of the active substance have been sufficiently described by the applicant in the non-clinical overview. All  impurities  contained  in  the  formulation  of  Rivastigmine  Teva  are  below  levels  which  would require  any  further  qualification.  Therefore  additional  non-clinical  studies  are  not  necessary.  The SmPC is in line with that of the reference medicinal product. No environmental risk assessment is required as the use of Rivastigmine Teva is unlikely to result in any significant increase in the combined sales volumes for all rivastigmine containing products. 2.4 Clinical Aspects Introduction This generic application concerns a medicinal product that contains the strengths of 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4.5 mg and 6 mg rivastigmine in hard capsules. The proposed SmPC of the generic product is in line with the one of the reference medicinal product. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Scientific advice was not sought for the development programme. For the clinical assessment the Note for Guidance on Investigation of Bioavailability and Bioequivalence (CPMP/EWP/QWP/1401/98) in its  current  version  as  well  as  the  Questions  &amp;  Answers  on  the  Bioavailability  and  Bioequivalence Guidelines (EMEA/CHMP/EWP/40326/2006) are relevant.

## GCP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The bioequivalence studies were complying with GCP, as claimed by the applicant. The applicant has provided a statement to the effect that clinical trials 2007-1526 and 2007-1527 were conducted outside the community and were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC.

## Clinical studies

To support the application, the applicant has submitted two single-dose, comparative bioequivalence studies (study: 2007-1526 for the lowest 1.5 mg strength and study: 2007-1527 for the highest 6 mg strength).  The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  evaluate  the  comparative  bioavailability  between Rivastigmine Teva and the originator Exelon from Novartis.

Since this is a generic application, no further clinical studies were required and the applicant provided none.  The  clinical  overview  provided  an  adequate  summary  of  the  clinical  data  of  rivastigmine.  It consists of an overview of the published literature regarding clinical pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy aspects of orally administered rivastigmine. Pharmacokinetics  Methods STUDY DESIGN Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) and Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) In the two bioequivalence studies the 1.5 mg and 6 mg Rivastigmine Teva hard capsules  were chosen for comparison to the originator (1.5 mg and 6 mg respectively Exelon hard capsules) in 40 healthy male  subjects.  A  randomized  crossover  design  in  an  open-label,  single  dose,  two  periods,  two sequence bioavailability studies under standardized fed conditions was employed. The hard capsules (one capsule each) were administered with 240 ml of water after a standardized high fat, high calorie breakfast. Meals (xanthine-free) and beverages (caffeine-free) during further study conduct were also standardized In each period, 19 blood samples from 18 time points were obtained from an arm vein of each subject by direct venipuncture or from an indwelling cannula. All blood samples were collected  (prior to drug administration and at 0.33, 0.67, 1, 1.33, 1.67, 2, 2.33, 2.67, 3, 3.33, 3.67, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10 and 12 hours after  dosing  following  drug  administration)  in  pre-chilled,  labelled  6  ml  blood  collection  tubes containing K2EDTA as the anticoagulant. All samples were stored at -20ºC ± 5ºC or colder pending shipment. The stored samples were then transferred to the analytical facility. The washout interval between successive drug administrations was 7 days. Concomitant treatment in study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) only: Subjects received two 75 mg doses of Gravol (dimenhydrinate, 50 mg/ml; Church &amp; Dwight Canada Corp.,  Canada;  Lot  No.:  KK6  3046)  as  intra  muscular  injections,  in  order  to  avoid  vomiting  at  10 minutes prior to rivastigmine dosing and at 3 hours post dosing. The  clinical  part  of  the  study  as  well  as  the  analytical  and  statistical  analysis  was  performed  by  a contract research organisation in Ontario, Canada. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TEST AND ORIGINATOR

## Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule)

Test Product: Rivastigmine 1.5 mg Capsules (Novopharm Limited, Canada);

Lot No.:35300619;

Manufacturing Date: 26/07/2007

Originator: Exelon 1.5 mg Capsules (Novartis Europharm Limited, United Kingdom);

Lot No.: B5070;

Expiration Date: 10/2011

<!-- image -->

| Subject No.                                                 | Age (years)                                                 | Height (cm)                                                 | Height (in) product                                         | Weight (kg)                                                 | Weight (lb)                                                 | BMI                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       |
| Mean                                                        | 34                                                          | 174.9                                                       | 68.9                                                        | 78.6                                                        | 173.2                                                       | 25.7                                                        |
| +/- SD                                                      | 10                                                          | 7.3                                                         | 2.9                                                         | 9.5                                                         | 20.9                                                        | 2.5                                                         |
| Median                                                      | 35                                                          | 176                                                         | 69.3                                                        | 79.4                                                        | 175                                                         | 25.6                                                        |
| Range                                                       | 20-54                                                       | 160-187.5                                                   | 63-73.8                                                     | 56.4-95.8                                                   | 124.3-211.2                                                 | 20.5-29.8                                                   |
| Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 39) |
| Mean                                                        | 34                                                          | 174.7                                                       | 68.8                                                        | 78.6                                                        | 173                                                         | 25.7                                                        |
| +/- SD                                                      | 10                                                          | 7.3                                                         | 2.9                                                         | 9.5                                                         | 21.1                                                        | 2.5                                                         |
| Median                                                      | 35                                                          | 176                                                         | 69.3                                                        | 79.4                                                        | 176.6                                                       | 25.6                                                        |
| Range                                                       | 20-54                                                       | 160-187.5                                                   | 63-73.8                                                     | 56.4-95.8                                                   | 124.3-211.2                                                 | 20.5-29.8                                                   |

Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) Test: Rivastigmine Teva 6 mg hard capsules (Novopharm Limited, Canada); Lot No.: 35300656 Originator: EXELON 6 mg hard capsules (Novartis Europharm Limited, United Kingdom); Lot No.: B8018 POPULATIONS STUDIED Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) 40 healthy male non-smoking subjects were enrolled and received either test or originator. One subject (subject 19) voluntarily withdrew from the study prior to period 2 due to personal reasons. The plasma samples from 39 subjects were assayed for rivastigmine. Of the 39 subjects who completed the study, 19  were  Caucasian,  6  were  Black,  7  were  Asian  and  7  were  Hispanic.  The  demographics  of  the subjects are summarised in table 1. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were presented and were acceptable for the product and for this type of study. Table 1: Demographics of participants in study 2007-1526 Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) 40 healthy male non-smoking subjects were enrolled and received either test or originator. Five  subjects  withdrew  from  the  study,  three  of  them  due  to  adverse  events  (AE)  and  two  due  to protocol non-compliance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The plasma samples from 35 subjects were assayed for rivastigmine.

Of the 35 subjects who completed the study, 24 were Caucasian, 6 were Black, 4 were Asian and 1 was Hispanic. The demographics of the subjects are summarised in table 2.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria were presented and were acceptable for the product and for this type of study.

Table 2: Demographics of participants in study 2007-1527

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Subject No.                                                 | Age (years)                                                 | Height (cm)                                                 | Height (in)                                                 | Weight (kg)                                                 | Weight (lb)                                                 | BMI                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       | All Subjects (N = 40)                                       |
| Mean                                                        | 38                                                          | 177.9                                                       | 70                                                          | 84.1                                                        | 185.4                                                       | 26.5                                                        |
| +/- SD                                                      | 9                                                           | 7.2                                                         | 2.8                                                         | 9.6                                                         | 21.1                                                        | 2.2                                                         |
| Median                                                      | 38                                                          | 178.3                                                       | 70.2                                                        | 83.3                                                        | 183.6                                                       | 27                                                          |
| Range                                                       | 19-54                                                       | 157-192                                                     | 61.8-75.6                                                   | 64.3-102.9                                                  | 141.8-226.9                                                 | 21.5-29.6                                                   |
| Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) | Subjects Completed (included in the data analysis) (N = 35) |
| Mean                                                        | 37                                                          | 178.3                                                       | 70.2                                                        | 84.4                                                        | 186                                                         | 26.5                                                        |
| +/- SD                                                      | 9                                                           | 7.2                                                         | 2.9                                                         | 10                                                          | 22.1                                                        | 2.2                                                         |
| Median                                                      | 37                                                          | 178.5                                                       | 70.3                                                        | 83.4                                                        | 183.9                                                       | 26.9                                                        |
| Range                                                       | 19-54                                                       | 157-192                                                     | 61.8-75.6                                                   | 64.3-102.9                                                  | 141.8-226.9                                                 | 21.5-29.6                                                   |

+/- SD 9 Median 37 Range 19-54 ANALYTICAL METHODS Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) and Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) The bioanalytical procedure for the determination of Rivastigmine from human plasma treated with K2EDTA anticoagulant was as follows: Subject plasma concentrations of Rivastigmine were measured according to a liquid chromatographic (LC)  tandem  mass  spectrometric  detection  (MSMS)  method.  The  method  involved  liquid-liquid extraction. PHARMACOKINETIC VARIABLES Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) and Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) The pharmacokinetic parameters AUCt ,  AUC inf ,  C max ,  T max ,  K el and T1/2 were  estimated  based  on rivastigmine plasma levels for each subject included in the statistical analysis. STATISTICAL METHODS Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) and Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) Pharmacokinetics: Statistical  analysis  was  applied  to  quality  assured  data  from  all  subjects  in  the  final  data  set.  The PROC GLM procedure from SAS was used. Analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  was  applied  to  log-transformed  AUC t ,  AUCinf,  C max and  to untransformed K el and T1/2 parameters. The significance of the sequence, period, treatment and subject (within  sequence)  random  effects  were  tested.  Using  the  same  statistical  model,  the  least  square means,  the  differences  between  the  treatments  least  square  means,  and  the  corresponding  standard errors  of  these  differences  were  estimated  for  log-transformed  AUC t ,  AUC inf and  C max parameters. Based on these statistics the ratios of the geometric means for treatments and their 90% confidence intervals  were  calculated.  Values  for  the  Tmax  parameter  were  analyzed  by  a  non-parametric approach. Based on the log-transformed parameters, the following criteria were used to evaluate the bioequivalence between the test and originator: ·  The  90%  confidence  intervals  of  the  relative  mean  AUC t ,  AUC inf and  C max of  the  test  to originator should be between 80% and 125%. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Sample size determination:

Taking into account an intra-subject variability for rivastigmine Cmax of approximately 27% under fed conditions. Assuming a 30% intra-subject variability and a difference between the treatment means of 5% or less (true ratio of treatment means between 95 and 105), the necessary sample size for a 75% probability  of  the  90%  confidence  interval  of  the  treatment  means  ratio  to  be  within  the  80-125% range was estimated to be 34 subjects.

The statistical methods were deemed adequate for the analysis of the data.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  Results

## Study No.: 2007-1526 (rivastigmine 1.5 mg)

Table 1. Pharmacokinetic parameters (non-transformed values; arithmetic mean ± SD)

| Treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | AUC 0-t ng/ml*h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | AUC 0- ∞ ng/ml*h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | C max ng/ml                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | t max h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | T 1/2 h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Test                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 5.73                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 5.99                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 2.18                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 2.62                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 0.98                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Reference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 5.55                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 5.78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 2.08                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 2.67                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 0.88                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| *Ratio (90% CI)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 103.32 (98.21 - 108.70)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 103.62 (98.66 - 108.82)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 104.83 (97.56 - 112.64)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| CV (%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 13%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 13%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 19%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life authorised |

| Treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | AUC 0-t ng/ml*h 68.53                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | AUC 0- ∞ ng/ml*h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | C max ng/ml                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | t max h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | T 1/2 h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Test                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 69.32                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 18.74                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 2.66                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 1.44                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Reference                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 64.01                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 64.93                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 18.26                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | 2.74                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 1.46                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| *Ratio (90% CI) CV (%)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 107.06 (101.21 - 113.25) 14%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 106.75 (101.00 - 112.83) 14%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 102.61 (97.34 - 108.17) 13%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal | AUC 0- ∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity AUC 0-t area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to t hours C max maximum plasma concentration T max time for maximum concentration T 1/2 half-life Medicinal |

AUC0-∞ area under the plasma concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity Cmax maximum plasma concentration *lg-transformed values The 90% confidence intervals of the relative mean rivastigmine AUC t , AUCinf and C max of the test to originator are within the 80-125% range. Therefore, Rivastigmine 1.5 mg Capsules (Novopharm Limited, Canada) exhibited equivalent rate and extent of absorption to Exelon 1.5 mg Capsules (Novartis Europharm Limited, United Kingdom) in healthy subjects after an oral single-dose, under fed conditions. Study No.: 2007-1527 (rivastigmine 6 mg) Table 1. Pharmacokinetic parameters (non-transformed values; arithmetic mean ± SD) Medicinal product no longer authorised

*lg-transformed values

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A statistically significant difference ( α = 0.05) was detected between the two periods of the study in the analysis of K el (p=0.0465) and Thalf (p=0.0227). All clinical procedures were under strict control and were kept the same between the two periods of the study. Hence, it is possible that the observed effect is due solely to chance. The least-squares means of the treatment effect were adjusted for the period effect.  Therefore,  the  final  results  are  not  influenced  by  the  statistically  significant  period  effect noticed for K el and T half parameters.

A significant treatment effect was detected by ANOVA for AUC t parameter (p=0.0480). However it is considered  that  the  statistically  significant  difference  has  no  clinical  importance  since  the  90% confidence  intervals  for  the  relative  mean  AUC 0-t,  AUC0-∞ and  C max are  contained  within  the  80  125% range.

Therefore, Rivastigmine 6 mg capsules (Novopharm Limited, Canada) exhibited equivalent rate and extent  of  absorption  to  Exelon  6  mg  capsules  (Novartis  Europharm  Limited,  United  Kingdom)  in healthy subjects after an oral single-dose, under fed conditions. Systemic  concomitant  medication  has  been  applied  to  all  subjects  (2x  75  mg  dimenhydrinate  intra muscular) however no interaction of rivastigmine and dimenhydrinate in regard to PK is expected. Cytochrome  P450  isozymes  are  minimally  involved  in  rivastigmine  metabolism  and  no  drug interactions related to cytochrome P450 have been observed in humans. Dimenhydrinate on the other hand  is  metabolized  by  the  liver  primarily  by  the  cytochrome  P450  isozymes.  Additionally  the absorption  of  the  rivastigmine  tables  would  not  have  been  affected  by  the  intra  muscular  coadministration  of  the  antiemetic,  since  the  dimenhydrinate  would  not  have  interfered  with  oral absorption.  Furthermore  there  is  no  published  data  indicating  that  there  is  a  pharmacokinetic interaction between rivastigmine and dimenhydrinate. Protocol deviations Study No.: 2007-1527 (rivastigmine 6 mg) None  of  the  protocol  deviations  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  safety  of  the  subjects  or  on  the integrity of the study results. Safety Study: 2007-1526 (1.5 mg hard capsule) There were 43 adverse events (AE) in 27 subjects from the test and originator treatment groups. The most commonly reported adverse event was increased creatinine levels. The AE did not require any intervention; all of them were graded as mild. No  relevant  difference  between  number  and  severity  of  AE  was  found  between  the  tested  drug (Rivastigmine Teva) and the originator (EXELON). Study: 2007-1527 (6 mg hard capsule) There  were  226  adverse  events  (AE)  involving  39  subjects  from  the  test  and  originator  treatment groups. The most commonly reported AE were pain at injection site, somnolence (might have been caused by dimenhydrinate or rivastigmine), edema at injection site and increased creatinine levels. All of them were graded as mild and none of the AEs had a significant impact on the safety of the subjects or on the integrity of the study results. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Three subjects (subject 07, 40 and 02) withdrew from the study due to adverse events (AE):

- -Subject 07 prior to Period 2 check-in due to AE (body ache, burning sensation and pain in the throat)
- -Subject 40 after Period 1 dosing due to AE (vomiting)
- -Subject 02 after Period 2 dosing due to AE (vomiting)

No  relevant  difference  between  number  and  severity  of  AE  was  found  between  the  tested  drug (Rivastigmine Teva) and the originator (EXELON).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Transferability of study results to other strengths

The Applicant claims that the bioequivalence studies with rivastigmine 1.5 mg and 6 mg hard capsules also prove bioequivalence for the 3 mg and 4.5 mg strengths hard capsules.

Rivastigmine exhibits non linear kinetics with more than proportional increase in AUC and C max with the dose without dose accumulation. Therefore a bioequivalence study with the highest dose of 6 mg rivastigmine is submitted in accordance with the Questions and Answers on the Bioavailability and Bioequivalence Guideline EMEA/CHMP/EWP/40326/2006, Section 9.

The 1.5 mg strength is a separate granulation formulated to be proportional to the 3 mg strength. The 3 mg, 4.5 mg and 6 mg is formulated as an all strength granulation (common/geometric granulation). Therefore a bioequivalence study with the 1.5 mg dose rivastigmine was submitted in addition.

All the strengths are manufactured by the same manufacturer and process. The qualitative composition of all strengths is the same. The ratio between the amounts of excipients is similar. Dissolution tests with release medium (0.1 N HCL), pH 6.8 phosphate buffer and pH 4.5 acetate buffer showed  comparable  dissolution  profiles  to  the  originator  Exelon  from  Novartis  and  the  rapid  drug release from Rivastigmine Teva hard capsules in all three media could be confirmed. In conclusion extrapolation of the results obtained for the 1.5 mg and 6 mg rivastigmine hard gelatine capsules to the 3 mg and 4.5 mg capsules was deemed acceptable.  Conclusions Based on the two presented bioequivalence studies Rivastigmine Teva 1.5 mg and 6 mg hard capsules are considered bioequivalent with Exelon 1.5 mg and 6 mg hard capsules. The results of study 2007-1527 with the 6 mg strength can be extrapolated to the 3 mg and 4.5 mg strengths,  according  to  conditions  in  Note  for  Guidance  on  the  Investigation  of  Bioavailability  and Bioequivalence CPMP/EWP/QWP/1401/98, section 5.4. Post marketing experience No post-marketing data are available. The medicinal product has not been marketed in any country. 2.5 Pharmacovigilance  Description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements. The company must ensure that this system is in place and functioning before the product is placed on the market. The company should ensure that the pharmacovigilance activities are in line with the current safety measures applied to the reference medicinal product.  Risk Management Plan A Risk Management Plan was not submitted. Since the application concerns a generic of a reference medicinal product for which no safety concerns requiring additional risk minimisation activities have been identified, a Risk Management Plan was not required.  PSUR Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  PSUR  submission  schedule  for  Rivastigmine  Teva  hard  capsules  should  follow  the  PSUR schedule for the reference medicinal product (Exelon).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  User consultation

The  results  of  user  consultation  provided  indicates  that  the  package  leaflet  is  well  structured  and organised, easy to understand and written in a comprehensible manner. The test shows that the leaflet is readable in patients /users are able to act upon the information that it contains.

## Discussion on Clinical aspects

Two single doses two periods, two sequences cross over bioequivalence studies under fed conditions were  conducted  to  support  the  marketing  authorisation  application  for four  generic  products containing 1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4.5 mg and 6 mg rivastigmine. The  study  was  conducted  under  fed  conditions  and  the  SmPC  of  the  originator  recommends  drug intake with food twice a day (in the morning and evening). The starting dose in adults is 1.5 mg and can be gradually increased, depending on how  the patient responds to the treatment.  The recommended maximum daily dose is 6 mg. Rivastigmine exhibits non linear kinetics with more than proportional increase in AUC and C max with the  dose  without dose accumulation. Therefore the highest dose of 6 mg was tested. Furthermore a bioequivalence  study  with  the  1.5  mg  dose  rivastigmine  was  conducted  as  it  contains  a  separate granulation formulation. In  the  1.5  mg  rivastigmine  bioequivalence  study  the  90%  confidence  intervals  of  the  relative  mean rivastigmine AUCt , AUCinf and C max of the test to originator are within the 80-125% range. In the 6 mg  rivastigmine  bioequivalence  study  a  significant  treatment  effect  was  detected  by  ANOVA  for AUCt parameter (p=0.0480). It is considered that the statistically significant difference has no clinical importance  since  the  90%  confidence  intervals  for  the  relative  mean  AUC 0-t,  AUC0-∞ and  C max are contained within the 80 - 125% range. In the 1.5 mg bioequivalence study 39 out of 40 subjects were included in the data analysis due to withdrawal of one subject for personal reasons. In  the  6  mg  bioequivalence  study  35  out  of  40  subjects  were  included  in  the  data  analysis  due  to withdrawal  of  five  subjects  for  occurrence  of  adverse  events  (three  subjects)  and  protocol  noncompliance (two subjects). Subject 09 who did not reveal any rivastigmine in his plasma throughout period two was still included in the data analysis but his pharmacokinetic values were set to missing. The CHMP agreed to this approach. The  adverse  events  in  both  studies  were  graded  mild  and  comparable  to  the  reference  medicinal product. In the higher dose bioequivalence study (6 mg) concomitant medication with dimenhydrinate has been applied intra muscular to all subjects and a pharmacokinetic interaction between rivastigmine and dimenhydrinate was deemed unlikely. Based on the available data it is concluded that bioequivalence of the product containing 1.5 mg and 6 mg  rivastigmine  has  been  demonstrated.  On  the  grounds  of  the  non  linear  pharmacokinetics  of rivastigmine and the separate granulation formulation of the 1.5 mg dose the selected doses for the bioequivalence studies are acceptable and the 6mg strength can be extrapolated to the 3 mg and 4.5 mg strength. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 2.6 Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation

## Overall conclusion and Benefit/risk assessment

The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SmPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. At the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a few minor unresolved quality issues, which do not have any

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

impact on the benefit/risk ratio of the medicinal product. These will be addressed as part of the followup measures post-authorisation.

The  application  contains  adequate  non  clinical  and  clinical  data  and  the  bioequivalence  has  been shown. A benefit/risk ratio comparable to the originator can therefore be concluded.

The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application  and  available  on  the  chosen reference  medicinal  product,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no  additional  risk  minimisation  activities  are required beyond those included in the product information.

<!-- image -->

Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of available data, the CHMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk ratio of Rivastigmine Teva (1.5 mg, 3 mg, 4 mg and 6 mg strengths hard capsules) in the treatment of mild to moderately severe Alzheimer's dementia, mild to moderately severe dementia in patients with idiopathic  Parkinson's  disease  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the  granting  of  the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised