---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:48:57
document_pages: 3
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/avonex-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: avonex-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.3929137
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 19:16:31.582241
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

## For procedures finalised after 1 June 2002 please refer to module 8B.

- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 9 May 1997 an application for a Notification of a Type I variation (Extension of shelf life as foreseen at time of authorisation), pursuant to Article  4  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  as  amended.  The procedure started on 14 May 1997.  The Head of the Human Medicines Evaluation Unit signed a positive notification on 13 June 1997 (EMEA/H/C/102/I/01) and the European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 27 August 1997.
- The  MAH  also  submitted  a  notification  to  the  EMEA  in  order  to  introduce  changes  to  the Labelling not connected to the Summary of Product Characteristics, pursuant Article 10(3) of Council Directive No. 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992. The notification was signed by the Head of  Human  Medicines  Evaluation  Unit  on  17  June  1997  and  forwarded  to  the  European Commission (EMEA/H/C/102/N/02).
- Pursuant  to  Article  4  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  as amended, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA on 29 August 1997 an application  for  two  Type  I  variations  (narrowing  of  the  range  of  specifications  of  the  active substance and narrowing of the range of the specifications and a change of method of testing for a release specification of the finished medicinal product-related respectively to items No 14 &amp; 17 of Annex I to the Regulation). The procedure started on 26 September 1997. Supplementary information  was  supplied  by  the  MAH  on  13  November  1997  and  a  positive  opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/I/03-04) was adopted by the CPMP on 18 November 1997. This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 3 September 1997 an application for a Type II  variation  (additional  manufacturing  site),  pursuant  to  Article  6  of  Commission  Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 26 September 1997 and  a  positive  opinion  (EMEA/H/C/102/II/05)  was  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  18  November 1997. This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 11 September 1997 an application for a type II  variation  (change  in  summary  of  product  characteristics,  section  4.4  Special  Warnings  and Special Precautions for Use and changes related to the package leaflet, section 8 Instructions for Proper Use) pursuant to Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 26 September 1997 and supplementary information was supplied by the MAH on 16 December 1997, 29 January 1998, 26 February 1998 and 14 April 1998. A positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/II/06) was adopted by the CPMP on 22 April 1998 and the European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 17 August 1998.
- The MAH submitted to the EMEA on 19 September 1997 an application for a Type I variation (additional  manufacturing  site  for  the  active  substance)  pursuant  to  Article  4  of  Commission Regulation  (EC)  No  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  26 September 1997 and supplementary information was supplied by the MAH on 24 October and 10  November  1997.  A  positive  opinion  was  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  18  November  1999. (EMEA/H/C/102/I/07)
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 15 April 1998 an application for a type II variation (change in summary of product characteristics and to the package leaflet, following the conclusions of the PSUR) pursuant to Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of  March  1995,  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  24  April  1998.  A  positive  opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/II/08)  was  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  24  June  1998  and  the  European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 23 October 1998.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The  MAH  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  15  June  1998  an  application  for  a  Type  I  variation (change  of  manufacturing  site  for  part  or  all  of  the  manufacturing  process  of  the  medicinal product) pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended.  The  procedure  started  on  15  June  1998.  A  positive  notification  was  signed  by  the Head  of  the  Human  Medicines  Evaluation  Unit  on  15  July  1998  (EMEA/H/C/102/I/09)  and forwarded to the European Commission.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 30 September 1998 an application for a Type I variation No. 14 of Annex I to the regulation (Change in specification of the active substance), pursuant  to  Article  4  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  as amended.  The  procedure  started  on  7  October  1998,  and  the  Head  of  the  Human  Medicines Evaluation Unit signed a positive notification on 06 November 1998 (EMEA/H/C/102/N/10). This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 30 September 1998 an application for a Type I  variation  No.  17  of  Annex  I  to  the  regulation  (Change  in  specification  of  the  medicinal product), pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 7 October 1998, and the Head of the Human Medicines Evaluation Unit signed a positive notification on 06 November 1998 (EMEA/H/C/102/N/11). This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 30 September 1998 an application for a Type I variation (change in shelf-life of the active ingredient), pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 7 October 1998 and a positive notification (EMEA/H/C/102/N/12) was signed by the Head of the Human Medicines  Evaluation  Unit  on  06  November  1998.  This  variation  did  not  require  any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 30 September 1998 an application for a type II variation (change in summary of product characteristics and to the package leaflet, following the conclusions of the second and third PSUR) pursuant to Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 23 October 1998. A positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/II/13) was adopted by the CPMP on 25 February 1999 and the European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 18 June 1999.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder also submitted evidence of compliance with the specific obligations pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation No. 2309/93, as amended and Part 4G of the Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC, allowing re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile of the medicinal product. A positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/S/14) was adopted by the CPMP on 22 October 1998.
- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  evidence  of  compliance  with  the  specific obligations pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation No. 2309/93, as amended and Part 4G of the Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC, allowing re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile of the medicinal product. A positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/S/15) was adopted by the CPMP on 21 October 1999.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 12 October 1999 an application for a type II variation (change in summary of product characteristics and to the package leaflet, following the conclusions of the fourth PSUR) pursuant to Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95  of  March  1995,  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  22  October  1999.  A  positive opinion  (EMEA/H/C/102/II/16)  was  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  18  November  1999  and  the European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 09 March 1999.
- The MAH submitted to the EMEA on 10 December 1999 an application for a Type I variation (change  of  manufacturing  site  for  part  or  all  of  the  manufacturing  process  of  the  medicinal product) pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended.  The  procedure  started  on  17  December  1999.  The  Head  of  the  Human  Medicines Evaluation Unit signed a positive notification on 14 January 2000 (EMEA/H/C/102/I/17). This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 26 January 2000 an application for a Type II variation (additional supplier of Human Serum Albumin), pursuant to Article 6 of Commission Regulation  (EC)  No  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  18 February 2000 and a positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/II/18) was adopted by the CPMP on 13 April  2000.  This  variation  did  not  require  any  amendment  to  the  Community  Marketing Authorisation.
- The Marketing Authorisation  Holder submitted on 17 May 2000 an application for a Type I variation  No.  1  of  Annex  I  to  the  regulation  (Change  in  the  content  of  the  manufacturing authorisation), pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 22 May  2000. A positive notification (EMEA/H/C/102/I/19) was signed by the Head of the Human Medicines Evaluation Unit on 20 June 2000 and forwarded to the European Commission.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 19 July 2000 an application for a Type II variation  (new  vial  presentation),  pursuant  to  Article  6  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 28 July 2000 and a positive opinion  (EMEA/H/C/102/II/20)  was  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  21  September  2000.  The European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 22 January 2001.
- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  evidence  of  compliance  with  the  specific obligations pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation No. 2309/93, as amended and Part 4G of the Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC, allowing re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile of the medicinal product. A positive opinion (EMEA/H/C/102/S/21) was adopted by the CPMP on 21 September 2000 and the European Commission granted a Commission Decision on 29 December 2000.
- The  MAH  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  19  July  2000  an  application  for  a  Type  I  variation (change  of  manufacturing  site  for  part  or  all  of  the  manufacturing  process  of  the  medicinal product) pursuant to Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended. The procedure started on 26 July 2000. A positive notification (EMEA/H/C/102/I/23) was signed by the Head of Sector of the Human Medicines Evaluation Unit on 17 August 2000. This variation did not require any amendment to the Community Marketing Authorisation.

Subsequent post Marketing Authorisation applications agreed upon are summarised in the table below:

| Scope                                                                                         | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amen ded on   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Extension of the indication                                                                   | II/0022              | II                       | 16.01.02                            | 07.05.02                                 |
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet following the 5 th PSUR      | II/0024              | II                       | 01.03.01                            | 08.06.01                                 |
| Quality changes                                                                               | II/0025              | II                       | 01.03.01                            | 13.03.01                                 |
| Quality changes                                                                               | II/0026              | II                       | 27.06.01                            | 03.07.01                                 |
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics following the outcome of a dose comparison study | II/0027              | II                       | 25.07.01                            | 03.12.01                                 |
| Annual Reassessment                                                                           | S/0029               | S                        | 15.11.01                            | 08.03.02                                 |
| Renewal                                                                                       | R/0030               | R                        | 17.01.02                            | 07.05.02                                 |

1

In accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended: I refers to a minor variation (Type I variation); II refers to a major variation (Type II variation); I/II refers to a minor variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application.

T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996.

N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992.

2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly.