---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:13:55
document_pages: 5
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/cellcept-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: cellcept-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.975996
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 00:22:45.746887
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## For procedures finalised after 1 August 2004 please refer to module 8B.

## Steps taken after granting the Marketing Authorisation

- On 29 February 1996, Roche Registration Ltd submitted two applications for a Type I variation in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95.  The  scope  of  the  variations related  to  minor  changes  of  the  manufacturing  process  of  the  finished  medicinal  products. On 25 March 1996, the EMEA approved the variations. These variations did not require any amendments to the Commission Decision.
- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  4  October  1996  two applications for a Type II variation in accordance to Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started 15 October 1996. The scope of the variations related to the introduction  of  an  additional  package  size  of  300  capsules  for  CellCept  250  mg  and  an additional package size of 150 tablets for CellCept 500 mg respectively. The CPMP, during its meeting  on  15-17  November  1996,  considered  both  type  II  variations  to  be  acceptable  and adopted  a  positive  Opinion  for  both  type  II  variations  on  20  November  1996,  and  the corresponding Commission Decisions were issued on 13 May 1997.
- The Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted on 12 November 1996 another application for a Type  II  variation  related  to  the  addition  of  'colitis'  as  an  adverse  event  into  the  SPC. The  procedure  started  on  19  November  1996.  The  CPMP  considered  this  Type  II  variation acceptable  and  agreed  on  the  revised  SPC  and  the  Package  Leaflet.  The  CPMP  adopted therefore  on  19  December  1996  a  positive  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation,  and  the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 2 May 1997.
- On 16 April 1997, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started on 25 April 1997. The scope of the variation related to the extension of the shelf-life for both CellCept 250 mg capsules and500 mg tablets from two years to three years. On 23 May 1997, the EMEA issued the Notification. This variation required amendments to be incorporated into the relevant sections of the Commission Decision, and the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 14 July 1997.
- On 4 July 1997 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for two Type I variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedures started on 24 July 1997. The scope of the variations related to a tightening of the specifications for the active substance and a minor change in the manufacturing process of the active substance. The EMEA considered the variations to be acceptable and issued on 20 August and 9 September, respectively,  positive  notifications  for  the  Type  I  variations.  These  variations  did  not  require any amendments to the Commission Decision.
- On 7  July  1997,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started  on  25  July  1997.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  the  extension  of  the  approved indication  to  include  prophylaxis  of  acute  transplant  rejection  in  patients  receiving  allogenic cardiac transplant, in combination with cyclosporine and corticosteroids. The CPMP, during its April 1998 plenary meeting, considered the variation acceptable and issued on 22 April 1998 a positive opinion on the Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 17 August 1998.
- On 4 July 1997, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted several applications for Type I variations in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedures started on 24 July 1997. The scope of the variations related to minor changes in the  specification  and  test  methods  of  the  active  substance  for  250  mg  capsules  and  500  mg tablets.  On  20  August  1997,  the  EMEA  issued  the  Notifications,  which  did  not  require  an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- On  28  August  1997  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a Marketing Authorisation for CellCept powder for concentrate for solution for infusion falling

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

within  the  scope  of  Part  B  of  the  Annex  of  the  Council  Regulation  (EEC)  2309/93. The procedure started on 29 September 1997. The CPMP, during its May 1998 plenary meeting, considered  the  application  acceptable  and  issued  on  27  May  1998  a  positive  Opinion  for granting a Marketing Authorisation for CellCept 500 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 20 October 1998.

- On  30  September  1997,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a Marketing  Authorisation  for  CellCept  1 g/5 ml  powder  for  oral  suspension  falling  within  the scope of Part B of the Annex of the Council Regulation (EEC) 2309/93. The procedure started on 22 October 1997. The CPMP, during its November 1998 plenary meeting, considered the application  acceptable  and  issued  on  19  November  1998  a  positive  Opinion  for  granting  a Marketing Authorisation for CellCept 1g/5ml powder for oral suspension. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 26 February 1999.
- On 11 March 1998, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started on 27 March 1998. The scope of the variation related to the inclusion of several postmarketing  experiences,  which  had  been  collected  in  the  Periodic  Safety  Update  Reports.  In particular the Marketing Authorisation Holder proposed changes in sections 4.4, 4.5, 4.8 and 5.1 of the SPC and the corresponding sections of the Package Leaflet. The CPMP, during its May 1998  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  variations  acceptable  and  issued  on  27  May  1998  a positive opinion on the Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 18 September 1998.
- On  25  August  1998,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  several  applications  for Type I variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedures started  on  9  September  1998.  The  scope  of  the  variations  related  to  the  introduction  of  an alternative  manufacturing  site  and  change  in  batch  size  for  CellCept  250  mg  capsules  and 500 mg  tablets,  minor  changes  in  the  finished  product  specification  and  primary  packaging material for 250 mg capsules and 500 mg tablets. On 30 October 1998, the EMEA issued the Notifications, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision. The scope of one variation related to a minor change in the composition of the 250 mg capsule shell. On 30 October  1998,  the  EMEA  issued  the  Notification.  This  variation  required  amendments  to  be incorporated  into  the  relevant  sections  of  the  Commission  Decision,  and  the  corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 17 December 1998.
- On 10 May 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started  on  21  May  1999.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  the  inclusion  of  several  postmarketing  experiences,  which  have  been  collected  in  the  Periodic  Safety  Update  Reports.  In particular the Marketing Authorisation Holder proposed changes in sections: 2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.8 5.2, and 6.4 of the SPC and to the relevant sections of the Package Leaflet. Furthermore changes were proposed to section 4.2 and minor changes were proposed to sections 2, 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3. The  SPC,  labelling  and  Package  Leaflet  have  been  updated  according  to  the  new  QRD recommendations/templates. The CPMP, during its July 1999 plenary meeting, considered the variations acceptable and issued on 30 July 1999 a positive opinion on the Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 8 December 1999.
- On  4  June  1999,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  I variation for the powder for oral suspension in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No.  542/95.  The  procedure  started  on  9  June  1999.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  a change in the manufacture of the medicinal product. On 4 August 1999, the EMEA issued the Notification, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- On 4 October 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation  (24)  in  accordance  with  Art.  6  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95.  The procedure started on 22 October 1999. The scope of the variation related to  the extension to the therapeutic  indications  of  the  product  to  include  prophylaxis  of  acute  transplant  rejection  in patients receiving allogenic hepatic transplants. In addition, the SPC and Package Leaflet were updated according to the new QRD templates. The CPMP during its July 2000 plenary meeting

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

considered the variation acceptable and issued on 27 July 2000 a positive opinion on the Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 9 November 2000.

- On 10 February 2000 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Art. 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started  on  15  February  2000.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  the  deletion  of  the  Roche Colarado, Boulder site  (formerly  Syntex  Chemicals,  Boulder),  as  it  is  no  longer  used  for  the manufacture of the active substance. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued  on  7  March  2000  a  positive  notification,  which  did  not  require  an  amendment  to  the Commission Decision.
- On 10 February 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission  Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started on 18 February 2000. The scope of the variation related to changes to the manufacture of the active substance using a new strain of Penicillium stoloniferum to increase production. The CPMP, during its June 2000 meeting, considered the variation acceptable and issued on 29 June 2000 a positive opinion on the Type II variation application, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- On 28 February 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission  Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The  procedure  started  on  17  March  2000.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  dose recommendations  for  CellCept,  in  combination  with  cyclosporin  and  corticosteroids,  for  the prophylaxis of acute allogenic renal transplant rejection in paediatric patients and adolescents. The  CPMP  during  its  March  2001  plenary  meeting  considered  the  variation  acceptable  and issued on 29  March 2001 a positive Opinion on the Type II variation application. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 16 July 2001.
- On 3 November 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Art. 6 of Commission  Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The  procedure  started  on  17  November  2000.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  the demonstration  of  compliance  with  the  Commission  Directive  1999/82/EC  and  the  Note  for Guidance on minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform Encephalopathy agents via medicinal  products  (CPMP/BWP/1230/98  rev.  1).  The  CPMP,  during  its  April  2001  plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable and issued on 25 April 2001 a positive Opinion on the Type II variation, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- Pursuant to Article 13 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 of 22 July 1993, as amended, Roche Registration Limited submitted to the EMEA on 11 October 2000 an application for a renewal  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation.  The  procedure  started  on  20  October  2000.  This renewal required amendments to be incorporated into the relevant sections of the Commission Decision.  The  CPMP,  during  its  January  2001  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  renewal acceptable and  issued on  25  January  2001  a  positive  Opinion,  and  the  corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 03 May 2001.
- On 6 November 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II  variation  in  accordance  with  Article  6  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95. The procedure started on 17 November 2000. The scope of the variation related to an update of the  SPC  (section  4.5,  Oral  Contraceptives).  The  CPMP,  during  its  January  2001  plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable and issued on 25 January 2001 a positive Opinion on  the  Type  II  variation  application  to  the  terms  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation,  and  the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 27 April 2001.
- On 6 November 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II  variation  in  accordance  with  Article  6  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95. The procedure started on 17 November 2000. The scope of the variation related to an update of the SPC (section 5.3), to reflect the genotoxic potential of mycophenolate mofetil. The CPMP, during  its  March  2001  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes  acceptable  and  issued  on 29  March  2001  a  positive  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation  application.  The  corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 16 July 2001.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- On 10 May 2001 the Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  I variation in accordance with Art. 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started  on  15  May  2000.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  a  change  in  the  name  of  the manufacturer of the finished product for CellCept 500 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 18 May 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- On 11 June 2001 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Article 6 of Commission  Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The  procedure  started  on  29  June  2001.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to  an  update  of section 4.8 (undesirable effects) of the SPC to add information in line with the recommendations  outlined  by  the  CPMP  in  the  11 th PSUR  assessment  report.  The  CPMP, during its August 2001 plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable and issued on 23 August  2001  a  positive  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation  application  to  the  terms  of  the Marketing Authorisation, and the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 6 th December 2001.
- On 3 September 2001 the Marketing Authorisation Holder notified the EMEA of their intention to introduce changes to aspects of the Package Leaflet not connected to the Summary of Product Characteristics in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 92. The procedure started on 5 September 2001. Changes were made to the package leaflets to update the leaflets in line with the latest QRD template and to amend details of several of the local  representatives  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder.  The  EMEA  considered  this notification to be acceptable and informed the Commission on 20 September 2001. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 12 November 2001.
- On  17  October  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  several  applications  for Type I variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedures started  on  24  October  2001.  The  scope  of  the  variations  related  to  the  introduction  of  an alternative  manufacturing  site,  deletion  of  packaging  sites,  changes  to  the  excipients  and excipient  specifications  and  change  in  batch  size  for  CellCept  250  mg  capsules  and  500 mg tablets.  In  addition,  minor  changes  were  made  to  the  manufacturing  process  and  in  process controls  for  the  500 mg  tablets.  On  23  November  2001,  the  EMEA  issued  the  Notifications, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision. The scope of two variations related to a deletion of a batch release site for CellCept 250 mg capsules and 500 mg tablets and a change from printing to engraving for the 500mg tablets. On 23 November 2001, the EMEA issued  the  Notification.  These  variations  required  amendments  to  be  incorporated  into  the relevant sections of the Commission Decision.
- On  31  October  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  several  applications  for Type I variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedures started  on  8  November  2001.  The  scope  of  the  variations  related  to  a  change  to  the manufacturing  process,  new  methods  of  analysis  and  a  change  to  the  packaging  sites  for CellCept  powder  for  oral  suspension.    On  30  November  2001  and  19  November  2001,  the EMEA  issued  the  Notifications,  which  did  not  require  amendments  to  the  Commission Decision.
- On 6 November 2001, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The procedure started on  9  November  2001.  The  scope  of  the  variations  related  to  an  increase  in  batch  size  for CellCept 500 mg tablets.  On 30 November 2001 the EMEA issued the Notification, which did not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Subsequent post Marketing Authorisation applications agreed upon are summarised in the table below:

| Scope                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amen ded on   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Update section 5.2, pharmacokinetic properties of the SPC to include details of the pharmacokinetic interaction with Cyclosporin.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | II/0036              | II                       | 13.12.01                            | 15.05.02                                 |
| Change in kit procedures of the medicinal product                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0049               | I                        | 30.11.01                            |                                          |
| Application to register a larger batch size of 300 kg, in addition to the approved batch size of 150 kg for imprinted tablets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | I/0050               | I                        | 30.11.01                            |                                          |
| Change in kit procedures of the medicinal product                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0051               | I                        | 04.02.02                            |                                          |
| Minor change of of the manufacturing process of the active substance.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | I/0053               | I                        | 14.08.02                            |                                          |
| Change in supplier (see notification)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | I/0054               | I                        | 14.08.02                            |                                          |
| Update sections 4.5 (Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction), 4.8 (Undesirable effects) and 4.9 (Overdose) of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) in line with the recommendations made in the company Core Safety Information. Changes to the information with regards to interactions between the mycophenolate mofetil and prodrugs of aciclovir and ganciclovir (e.g. valaciclovir and valganciclovir respectively). Additionally, the information regarding the undesirable effects and overdose were updated with regards to the frequency of treatment-related adverse effects in paediatric patients and experience in overdose respectively. | II/0055              | II                       | 25.07.02                            | 18.10.02                                 |
| Minor changes in manufacture of the medicinal product.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | I/0056               | I                        | 23.08.02                            |                                          |
| Change in storage conditions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | I/0057               | I                        | 18.10.02                            | 12.02.02                                 |
| Change in the site of manufacture of the medicinal product, also minor changes in the product manufacturing process reduction of product batch size, change in degradation product assay method, change in primary packaging                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | II/0058              | II                       | 24.07.03                            |                                          |

1 In accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended: I refers to a minor variation (Type I variation); II refers to a major variation (Type II variation); I/II refers to a minor variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application.

T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996.

N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992.

2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly.