---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 21:10:38
document_pages: 6
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/crixivan-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: crixivan-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.7971392
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-29 19:55:05.32801
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 October 2004 please refer to module 8B.

· On  13  February  1997  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  two applications for a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of  10  March 1995. The scope of the first variation related to the extension of shelf life. The second variation related to the change of batch size of the active substance. On 10 April 1997, the  EMEA  approved  these  variations.  Only  the  first  variation  required  amendments  to  the Annex  I  (Summary  of  Product  Characteristics)  of  the  Commission  Decision.  The  European Commission amended the Decision on 13 June 1997. · On 8 April 1997 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a  Type  II  variation  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  No.  542/95.  This  application was related to the update of the Summary of Product Characteristics and of the Package Leaflet on the basis of the results of the evaluation of a previously submitted Periodic Safety Update Report and on results from interaction studies with rifabutin and rifampicin as required in the follow-up measures to which the Marketing Authorisation Holder is subject. The implementation of this variation was accelerated by the application of an urgent safety measure procedure  (Art  1(2)  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95).  The  EMEA  agreed  on 15 May 1997  on  the  urgent introduction of modifications in  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  and  in  the  Package  Leaflet.  The  CPMP  confirmed  the  acceptability  of  the corresponding Type II variation and issued a favourable opinion. This opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 27 August 1998. · Pursuant to article 10(3) of Council Directive No. 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992, the Marketing Authorisation  Holder  notified  the  EMEA  on  14  July  1997  of  their  intention  to  introduce changes  to  the  labelling.  On  21  July  1997  the  CPMP  issued  a  favourable  opinion,  and  the European Commission amended the Decision on 1 October 1997. · On 4 July 1997, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a  Type  II  variation  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  No.  542/95.  This  application was related to the update of the Summary of Product Characteristics and of the Package Leaflet on the basis of the results of the evaluation of a Periodic Safety Update Report covering the period  from  13  September  1996  to  13  March  1997.  The  scope  of  the  variation  related  to information  on  bioavailability,  interaction  with  warfarin,  hyperglycaemia/diabetes  mellitus, alopecia  and  other  adverse  reactions.  The  CPMP  issued  a  positive  opinion  on  the  Type  II variation  on  24 September 1997  and  the  European  Commission  amended  the  Decision  on 22 January 1998. · The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  2  September  1997  the documentation which formed the basis for the annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile for Crixivan pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 and Part 4 G of the annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC. During its December plenary meeting, the CPMP adopted an opinion on the annual re-assessment of the specific obligations and the benefit/risk ratio stating that amendments  of Annexes  I, II  and  III  to  the  Community  Marketing Authorisation  were  necessary.  Subsequent,  simultaneous  applications  for  a  Type  II  variation (update of SPC and Package Leaflet) were submitted by the Marketing Authorisation Holder and  respective  opinions  were  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  17  December  1997.  The  European Commission amended the Decisions on 8 and 29 April 1998 respectively. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  24  December  1997  eight Type I variations related to part II (chemical/pharmaceutical) of the dossier in accordance with Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995.  Only  2  variations  related  to changes in the SPC; one related to the colour of the capsules and the other to the extension of shelf  life  for  the  400  mg  capsule.  The  European  Commission  amended  the  Decision  on 13 May 1998.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- On 6 February 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 related to a change in the test procedure of the medicinal product. The EMEA approved the variation on 12 March 1998. This variation did not require any amendments to the Commission Decision.

•

- On 23 March 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation related to the update of the SPC, and consequently the Package Leaflet following  the  availability  of  new  interaction  data  with  other  medicinal  products.  At  this occasion,  the  SPC,  Labelling  and  Package  Leaflet  have  been  amended  in  line  with  the  new EMEA/QRD Template. The CPMP, during its July plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes acceptable,  and  adopted  on  30  July  1999  a  favourable  opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 8 December 1999.

· On 23 February 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 related to a change in the test procedure of the active substance. The EMEA approved the variation on 24 March 1998. This variation did not require any amendments to the Commission Decision. · On 27 January 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation related to the update of the SPC. The CPMP, during its February plenary meeting,  considered  the  changes  acceptable,  and  issued  on  25 February 1998  a  favourable opinion on the Type II variation. This opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 24 June 1998. · On 15 April 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation related to the update of the SPC and the Package Leaflet. The CPMP, during its June plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable, and issued on 24 June 1998 a  favourable  opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This  opinion  was  forwarded,  in  all  official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 29 October 1998. · On 16 June 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation to introduce a new package size for the 400 mg capsules. The CPMP issued a favourable opinion 23 July 1998. This opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 6 November 1998. · On 4 August 1998, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for Crixivan 333 mg hard capsules, under Annex II to Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended.  The  CPMP  recommended the approval  for  this  additional  strength  and  adopted  an opinion on 17 December 1998. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 13 April 1999. · On 8 October 1998, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation related to the update of the SPC and Package Leaflet. The CPMP, during its December plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable, and adopted on 17 December 1998 a favourable opinion on the Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 19 April 1999. · Pursuant  to  CPMP  discussion  on  cases  of  lipodystrophy  and  other  metabolic  disorders  as reported  from  HIV  infected  patients  and  treated  with  protease  inhibitors,  the  Marketing Authorisation  Holders  for  the  respective  protease  inhibitors  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application  for  a  Type  II  variation  to  include  a  class  labelling  wording  into  the  SPC.  On 19  November  1998,  the  CPMP  adopted  an  opinion  on  this  variation  and  the  respective Commission Decision was issued on 12 March 1999. On  23  December  1998,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application  for  a  Type  I  variation  related  to  the  addition  of  a  manufacturing  site  for  blister labelling. The EMEA approved this variation on 17 February 1999 which did not require any amendments to the Commission Decision. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- On 7 June 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a  Type  II  variation  related  to  modifications  in  the  in-process  controls.  The  CPMP,  during  its July  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes  acceptable,  and  adopted  on  30  July  1999  a favourable  opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This  variation  did  not  lead  to  any  changes  to Annexes to Commission Decision.

•

- On 9 March 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for  a  Type  II  variation  related  to  the  update  of  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  and Package  Leaflet  to  include  new  information  on  interactions  with Hypericum  perforatum (St

· Pursuant to CPMP discussion on cases of rhabdomyolysis reported from HIV infected patients and  treated  with  protease  inhibitors,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holders  for  the  respective protease inhibitors submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation to include a class labelling wording into the SPC and consequently the Package Leaflet. On 30 July 1999, the CPMP adopted an opinion on this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 8 December 1999. · On 9 July 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type I variation related to the extension of the shelf life. The EMEA approved this variation on 25 August 1999, which required amendments to Annexes of the Commission Decision. · On 3 August 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type I variation related to a minor of the manufacturing process of the medicinal product with a minor consequential change of the manufacturing process of the active substance. · On  21  September  1999,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  three applications for a Type I variation. The applications related to: -a  new pack size (75 ml high-density polyethylene bottle containing 18 Crixivan 400 mg hard capsules). -change  in  the  qualitative  composition  of  immediate  packaging  material  for  Crixivan aluminium blister 400 mg, 42 hard capsules. -change in the shelf-life of Crixivan 400 mg, 42 hard capsules blister from 15 months to 24 months. The  EMEA  approved  these  variations  on  27  October  1999,  which  required  amendments  to Annexes of the Commission Decision. · On  4  November  1999,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  variation application related to the update of the Summary of Product Characteristics, and consequently Package  Leaflet  following  the  availability  of  new  interaction  data  of  indinavir  with  other medicinal products (sildenafil and saquinavir), new pharmacokinetics data in females and new safety data. The CPMP considered the changes acceptable, and adopted on 19 January 2000 a favourable opinion on the Type II variation. The subsequent Commission Decision was issued on 11 May 2000. · On  7  January  2000,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  two applications for a Type I variation. The applications related; -The addition of a batch release site for blister packs of Crixivan 400 mg. -The addition of a pack size for Crixivan 400 mg hard capsules (blister pack containing 180 hard capsules). The  EMEA  approved  these  variations  on  10  February  2000,  which  required  amendments  to Annexes of the Commission Decision. Pursuant to article 10(3) of Council Directive No. 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992, Merck Sharp &amp; Dohme Ltd notified the EMEA on 4 February 2000 of their intention to introduce changes to aspects of the Labelling not connected to the Summary of Product Characteristics. (Amendments of the name of the Marketing Authorisation Holder on the blister card to include the country of origin). The EMEA approved this notification on 10 February 2000. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

John's wort) and pimozide. The CPMP considered the changes acceptable, and adopted on 16 March  2000  a  favourable  opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  The  subsequent  Commission Decision was issued on 5 July 2000.

<!-- image -->

· The  MAH  submitted  on  6  January  2000  an  application  for  a  marketing  authorisation  for Crixivan 100 mg hard capsules under Annex II to Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 as amended. This low strength was intended to be indicated for children of 4 years of age and older who are able to swallow capsules. The procedure started on 21 January 2000 and the CPMP agreed on a consolidated list of questions on 25 May 2000. Additional data were submitted by the  MAH  on  5  June  2000.  During  its  June  meeting,  the  CPMP,  in  light  of  the  overall  data submitted and the scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued by consensus a positive opinion for granting a Marketing Authorisation to Crixivan 100 mg hard capsules on 29 June 2000.  The  CPMP  opinion  was  forwarded  to  the  European  Commission  which  adopted  the respective Decision on 16 November 2000.On 17 October 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type I variation related to a minor changes in manufacture of the medicinal product. The EMEA approved this variation on 20 November 2000. · On  1  December  2000,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application for  a  Type  II  variation  related  to  the  update  of  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  and  Package  Leaflet  to  harmonise  the  information  between  the  different strengths of Crixivan, to be in accordance with the current Guideline on Summary of Product Characteristics (December 1999) and to amend some wordings related to interaction data.  The CPMP considered the changes acceptable, and adopted on 1 March 2001 a favourable opinion on the Type II variation. The subsequent Commission Decision was issued on 8 June 2001 · On  1  December  2000,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application for a Type II variation related changes to the manufacture of the active substance and control methods for the active substance, intermediates and starting material. The CPMP considered the changes acceptable, and adopted on 1 March 2001 a favourable opinion on the Type II variation, which did not lead to any amendments of the Annexes to the Commission Decision. · On  4  December  2000,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application  for  a  Type  I  variation  related  to  a  change  of  the  imprint  on  the  100  mg  hard capsules. The EMEA approved this variation on 20 December 2000. · On  26  February  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  an application for a Type I variation related to compliance with supplements to Pharmacopoeias. The EMEA approved this variation on 28 March 2001. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Subsequent post Marketing Authorisation applications agreed upon are summarised in the table below:

| Scope                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amen ded on   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Change in weight of capsule shells                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | I/0046               | I                        | 01.06.01                            | -                                        |
| Replacement of an excipient with a comparable excipient                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | I/0047               | I                        | 01.06.01                            | -                                        |
| Change in test procedure of the medicinal product, with a consequential change in the specification of the medicinal product                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | I/0048               | I                        | 01.06.01                            | -                                        |
| The Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) applied to update section 4.5 of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) with respect to potential for drug interactions between indinavir and calcium channel blockers and to update section 4.8 of the SPC with references to anemia, cerebrovascular disorders, hypersensitivity vasculitis and thrombocytopenia based on post-marketing reports. Relevant sections of the Patient leaflet (PL) are updated accordingly.    | II/0050              | II                       | 13.12.01                            | 21.03.02                                 |
| To update the analytical methods in the three higher strengths (200, 333 and 400 mg) in order to be in alignment with those approved for the 100 mg strength. The marketing authorisation holder takes the opportunity to correct typographical errors, to define the standard solution absorbance and to add information for analyst in all strengths. Moreover, the test method for assay of cis-aminoindanol in HPLC method is updated for the strength of 100mg.         | II/0051              | II                       | 30.05.02 authorise                  | 07.06.02                                 |
| The (MAH) applied to update section 4.4 and section 4.5 of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) further to the CPMP request to implement the class labeling adopted for protease inhibitors with regard to the risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis, when co-administered with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. In addition to a request by the CPMP, section 5.2 of the SPC is updated with information on the circadian rhythm in the kinetics of indinavir. no | II/0052              | II longer                | 27.06.02                            | 17.10.02                                 |
| The (MAH) applied for the use of sodium hypochlorite in place of N-chlorosuccinimide for the formation of the iodohydrin intermediate (transition from Compound IVa to IVb) in Step 3 of the indinavir process, as an alternative process to the already approved one.                                                                                                                                                                                                       | I/0053               | I                        | 12.07.02                            | 15.07.02                                 |
| Change of the address of the manufacturing site. The new address is South 2778 South East Highway, Elkton, Virginia. The manufacturing site will remain the same.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | I/0054               | I                        | 10.09.02                            | 17.09.02                                 |
| Change of the amount of capsules used for manufacture due to revised individual capsule target weight. The new target weights are within 1-2 mg of the original values. The manufacturing formulas for Crixivan 100 mg, 200 mg, 333 mg and 400 mg are updated so that the weight of capsules used and total batch weight are calculated based on the new target capsule weight. Product                                                                                      | I/0055               | I                        | 10.09.02                            | 17.09.02                                 |
| Change in the 400 mg Crixivan hard capsules batch size from 1940 kg to either 1875 kg or 1834 kg. This change is due to the use of part of the total blended granulation for the manufacture of the 100 mg Crixivan hard capsules.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | I/0056               | I                        | 10.09.02                            | 17.09.02                                 |
| The MAH applied to update section 4.4, section 4.5 and section 4.8 of the (SPC), with regard to the interstitial nephritis in patients with asymptomatic severe leukocyturia and with regard to indinavir/ritonavir drug interaction. In addition, a minor editorial amendment is proposed to the PL, clarifying the dosing regimen.                                                                                                                                         | II/0057              | II                       | 20.02.03                            | 08.05.03                                 |
| The MAH applied to update section 4.4 and section 4.8 of the (SPC) further to the CPMP request to implement the class-labelling for 'antiretroviral therapy and lipodystrophy' in the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | II/0058              | II                       | 19.03.03                            | 26.06.03                                 |
| The MAH applied for a 2-year retest period for indinavir sulfate. In addition, the Marketing authorisation holder took the opportunity to correct an editorial error in the dossier                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | I/0059               | I                        | 26.06.03                            | -                                        |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| The MAH applied to update sections 4.2, 4.4, 5.2 of the SPC as a class labelling on liver impairment and anti-HIV products. Relevant changes are equally proposed for the Package Leaflet (PL), section 2. Lipodystrophy wording is also implemented in the PL, sections 2 and 4.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | II/0060   | II   | 20.11.03   | 30.01.04   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|------|------------|------------|
| Extension of the shelf life of Crixivan 100 mg hard capsules from 2 to 3 years.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0061    | I    | 28.08.03   | -          |
| Change in batch size of the finished product - downscaling down to 10-fold                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | IA/0062   | IA   | 25.03.04   | -          |
| To update of the Package Leaflet (PL) in order to include the additional local representatives of the MAH for all 10 new European Member States and to revise the format of the list in line with the latest EMEA/ QRD template.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | N/0063    | N    | 20.05.04   | -          |
| To update section 4.6 (Pregnancy and lactation) and 5.2 (Pharmacokinetic properties) of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) with results of study PACTG358, concerning pharmacokinetics in pregnant women. In addition, the statements on lactose in section 4.4 (Special warnings and special precautions for use) of the SPC and section 2 of the Package leaflet (PL) were revised for consistency with the current Guideline on Excipients. Additional editorial changes were made throughout the SPC and the PL. | II/0064   | II   | 29.07.04   | 09.09.04   |
| Deletion of 42 and 180 hard capsule pack sizes for Crixivan 400 mg.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | IA/0065   | IA   | 20.08.04   | -          |

variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application. T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996. N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992. 2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly. To  update  of  the  Package  Leaflet  (PL)  in  order  to  include  the additional local representatives of the MAH for all 10 new European Member States and to revise the format of the list in line with the latest EMEA/ QRD template. To update section 4.6 (Pregnancy and lactation) and 5.2 (Pharmacokinetic properties) of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) with results of study PACTG358, concerning pharmacokinetics in pregnant women. In addition, the statements on lactose in section 4.4 (Special warnings and special precautions for use)  of  the  SPC  and  section  2  of  the  Package  leaflet  (PL)  were revised  for  consistency  with  the  current  Guideline  on  Excipients. Additional editorial changes were made throughout the SPC and the PL. Deletion of 42 and 180 hard capsule pack sizes for Crixivan 400 mg. Medicinal Product no longer authorise