---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:14:53
document_pages: 3
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/exelon-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: exelon-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.3399921
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 18:19:26.15435
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 April 2004 please refer to module 8B

- On 5 August 1998, the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) submitted an application for a marketing  authorisation  for  Exelon  2  mg/ml  oral  solution,  in  accordance  with  Annex  II  to Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  542/95  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  21  August 1998.  The  CPMP  adopted  a  list  of  questions  on  17  December  1998  to  which  the  MAH responded on 14 January 1999. During its February meeting, the CPMP, in light of the overall data  submitted  and  the  scientific  discussion  within  the  Committee,  issued  a  positive  opinion (majority)  for  granting  a  Marketing  Authorisation  for  Exelon  2  mg/  ml  oral  solution  on  24 February 1999. The CPMP opinion was forwarded to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding decision on 2 June 1999.
- On 4 February 1999,  the  MAH applied  for  5  Type  I  variations  for  Exelon  hard  capsules,  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  542/95  as  amended.  The  MAH  applied  for changes  to  the  manufacturer  of  the  finished  product,  the  manufacturer  responsible  for  batch release,  the  manufacturing  process,  the  test  procedures  and  the  specification  of  the  medicinal product. On 11 March 1999 the EMEA issued the corresponding notifications.
- On 18 March 1999, the MAH applied, in accordance with the Regulation, for a Type I variation to  extend  the  shelf  life  of  Exelon  hard  capsules  from  2  years  to  3  years.  Additional  minor typographical corrections  were  also  implemented in  the  SPC, Labelling  and  Package  Leaflet. The EMEA issued a notification on 19 April 1999. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 8 July 1999.
- The MAH submitted on 20 September 1999 a request to introduce changes to an aspect of the Labelling not connected to the SPC, in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive No 92/27/EEC. This change concerned the introduction of 'Instructions for Use' for the oral dosing syringe in the PL. The MAH received a positive notification from the EMEA on 16 December 1999.  The  respective  Commission  Decision  was  issued  on  12  April  2000.On  20  September 1999,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in  accordance  with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the SPC (sections 4.4,  4.8,  4.9  and  5.1)  and  the  Package  leaflet  as  recommended  by  the  CPMP  following assessment  of  the  PSURs.  Some  minor  administrative  changes  to  the  SPC.  Labelling  and Package  leaflet  were  also  introduced.  On  14  December  1999,  the  CPMP  adopted  a  positive opinion  on  this  Type  II  variation.  The  amendments  included  the  addition  of  'gastric  and duodenal  ulcers',  'bradycardia',  'seizures'  and  'rashes'  under  undesirable  effects.  The respective Commission Decision was issued on 12 April 2000.
- On  22  September  2000,  the  MAH  applied,  in  accordance  with  the  Regulation,  for  2  Type  I variations to extend the shelf life of Exelon hard capsules from 3 years to 4 years, and the shelf life of Exelon oral solution from 2 to 3 years. The EMEA issued the notifications on 9 October 2000 and the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 1 December 2000.
- On 22 September 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted a Type II Variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the  SPC  (section 4.8) and  the  Package  leaflet  as  recommended  by  the  CPMP  following assessment  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  PSURs  and  the  evaluation  of  a  post  marketing  study investigating  the  effect  of  food  on  the  bioavailability  of  the  oral  solution.  Some  minor administrative changes local representatives list on the Package leaflet were also introduced. On 14  December  2000,  the  CPMP  adopted  a  positive  opinion  on  this  Type  II  variation.  The amendments  included  the  addition  of  'very  rare  cases  of  atrio-ventricular  block'  under undesirable effects. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 20 March 2001.
- On  26  January  2001,  the  MAH  applied  for  a  Type  I  variation  for  Exelon  hard  capsules,  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  542/95  as  amended.  The  MAH  applied  to demonstrate compliance with the Commission Directive 1999/82/EC and the Note for Guidance

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

on Minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform Encephalopathy agents via medicinal products (CPMP/BWP/1230/98), and provided certificates of suitability issued by the European Pharmacopoeia.

The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 28 February 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application.

- On  2  February  2001,  the  MAH  applied  for  a  Type  I  variation  for  Exelon  hard  capsules,  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied to change the source of one of the excipients used in the formulation (magnesium stearate) from animal origin to vegetable origin. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 28 February 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application.
- On  9  February  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the  SPC  and  the  Package  leaflet  to  include  a  recommendation  on  re-initiation  of  therapy following treatment interruption. On 25 April 2001, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 1 August 2001.
- On  28  August  2001,  the  MAH  applied  for  a  Type  I  variation  for  Exelon  hard  capsules,  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied to exend the shelf life as foreseen at time of authorisation from 4 years to 5 years. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 3 October 2001 a positive Notification for the Type I variation application.
- The MAH submitted on 18 September 2001 a request to introduce changes to an aspect of the Labelling not connected to the SPC, in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive No 92/27/EEC. This change concerned an update to the contact details of the local representatives. The MAH received a positive Notification from the EMEA on 19 October 2001.
- On  27  December  2001,  the  MAH  applied  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC) 542/95 as amended, for two Type I variations, one for Exelon hard capsules and one for Exelon oral  solution.  The  MAH  applied  for  an  additional  manufacturer,  and  a  transfer  of  the manufacturer/importer for batch release in the EEA and of the site where the batch release takes place  for  the  capsules.  The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  also  applied  for  a  change  in  the name of the manufacturer of the finished product and site of manufacture, and in the name of the  manufacturer/importer  responsible  for  batch  release  in  the  EEA  and  site  where  the  batch release takes place for the oral solution. The EMEA considered these variations to be acceptable and issued on 22 January 2002 a positive Notification for the each of the two Type I variations.
- On  6  February  2002,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  applied  for  an  update  to  section  5.1  of  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  and  section  1  of  the  Package  Leaflet  to  include  new  information  on  the pharmacodynamic properties of rivastigmine not only as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, but also  as  a  butyrylcholinesterase  inhibitor.  On  27  June  2002,  the  CPMP  adopted  a  positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 10 September 2002.
- On  20  May  2002,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  applied  for  an  update  to  section  4.4,  4.9  and  4.8  of  the  Summary  of Product Characteristics and section 4 and 5 of the Package Leaflet following the assessment of the sixth PSUR and the follow up to the sixth PSUR. Furthermore the Marketing Authorisation Holder applied for inclusion of the term 'mild pancreatitis' in section 4.8 of the SPC and section 5 of the Package Leaflet. On 19 September 2002, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 7 January 2003.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Scope                                                                                 | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amended on   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Change in or addition of manufacturer(s) of active substance                          | I/23                 | I                        | 20/12/02                            | -                                       |
| Renewal of the Marketing Authorisation                                                | R/24                 | R                        | 19/03/03                            | 30/06/03                                |
| New presentation(s)                                                                   | II/25                | II                       | 17/12/03                            | 04/03/04                                |
| Change in BR/QC testing - repl./add. manuf. responsible for BR - not incl. BC/testing | I/27                 | I                        | 22/10/03                            | -                                       |
| New presentation(s)                                                                   | II/28                | II                       | 17/12/03                            | 04/03/04                                |
| Change in batch size of the finished product - up to 10-fold                          | I/29                 | I                        | 03/03/04                            | -                                       |
| Replacement/add. of manufacturing site: Primary packaging site - Solid forms          | I/30                 | I                        | 23/03/04                            | -                                       |

1 In accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended and after 1 October 2003 according to Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1085/03: I refers to a minor variation (Type I variation); II refers to a major variation (Type II variation); I/II refers to a minor variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application. T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996. N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 61(3) of Council Directive 2001/83/EC.

2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly.