---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:44:15
document_pages: 5
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/norvir-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: norvir-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.2670961
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 17:36:43.742863
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 October 2004 please refer to module 8B .

- On  29  August  1996,  the  EMEA  approved  the  variation  (Type  I)  submitted  by  the  company relating  to  an  additional  manufacturing  site  as  a  site  where  the  product  assembly  of  bulk capsules imported from Abbott North Chicago takes place.
- On 11 December 1996, the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The scope of  the  variation  concerned  the  update  of  the  safety  information  in  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  (SPC)  and  consequently  the  Package  Leaflet  (PL)  based  on  post-marketing experience and new pharmacokinetic data. On 19 March 1997, the CPMP adopted an opinion on the Type II variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 22 July 1997.
- On 4 April 1997, the MAH submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95.  The  MAH  applied  for  the  change  in  the  storage recommendations  for  Norvir  capsule.  As  a  consequence  to  this  change  the  Marketing Authorisation Holder applied also for lowering the assay specification at the end of shelf life. On 18 June 1997, the CPMP adopted an opinion on the Type II variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 30 September 1997.
- On  11  September  1997,  the  MAH  submitted  two  applications  for  a  Type  I  variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95.  The  first  variation  related  to  the change in the manufacturer of the active substance meanwhile the second application concerned the amendment of the SPC with regard to the temperature at which the oral solution should be kept by the patient. On 6 November 1997, the EMEA approved both variations.
- Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No. 2309/93 and Part 4g of Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC, the MAH provided throughout the year additional efficacy and safety  data  as  stated  in  Annex  IIC  to  Commission  Decision,  which  formed  the  basis  of  the annual re-assessment of the risk/benefit profile of Norvir (e.g. results from the clinical endpoint studies). On 11 September 1997, the MAH provided an updated expert report summarising the different  specific  obligations  already  submitted  within  the  period  August  1996-August  1997. The procedure started on 26 September 1997. During its November plenary CPMP meeting, the CPMP agreed with the Rapporteur's assessment report that the risk/benefit profile of ritonavir remained  favourable  and  that  the  MA  remains  under  exceptional  circumstances  until  all  the specific obligations are fulfilled.
- The  CPMP  adopted  on  19  November  1997  an  Opinion  on  the  annual  re-assessment  of  the specific obligations and the risk/benefit ratio, stating that amendments of Annexes I, II and III to the Community Marketing Authorisation are necessary. Subsequent applications for a Type II variation  (update  of  the  statement  in  the  SPC  on  the  combination  saquinavir/ritonavir  and update of the SPC, including the implementation of a warning statement regarding the use of Norvir  in  diabetic  patients)  were  submitted  by  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  and Opinions  were  adopted  by  the  CPMP  on  19  November  1997.  The  respective  Commission Decisions were issued on 17 March 1998.

In  July  1998  Abbott  International  notified  the  EMEA  of  manufacturing  and  batch  release problems with the capsule due to the emergence of a new polymorphic form of ritonavir having a  much-reduced  solubility.  This  was  considered  by  CPMP  during  the  July  1998  meeting. Furthermore, a precipitation of the new polymorph had also been observed in the oral solution. Therefore, because of the foreseen supply shortage with the hard capsules, on 30 July 1998 the MAH submitted a request for an urgent safety restriction to the product literature for Norvir oral solution  to  enable  patients  to  be  transferred  from  the  hard  capsule  to  the  oral  solution.  This request was to allow the oral solution to be stored out of the refrigerator, with a reduced shelf life  and  warning  statements  concerning  storage  and  use.  This  urgent  safety  restriction  was agreed on public health grounds in the interests of maintaining continuity of ritonavir therapy.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Revised,  provisional  SPC,  label  and  package  leaflet  texts  were  adopted  within  the  24-hour timetable  allowed  for  in  this  procedure.  The  hard  capsules  were  subsequently  no  longer available for prescription.

- The  MAH  submitted  a  Type  II  variation  application  for  Norvir  80  mg/ml  oral  solution, subsequent  to  the  request  by  the  MAH  to  introduce  an  urgent  safety  restrictions  on  30  July 1998, in accordance to Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended. The CPMP adopted an Opinion on this variation on 16 September 1998 and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 11 January 1999.
- On 13 August 1998, the EMEA issued a notification on a Type I variation submitted by the MAH on 13 July 1998. This variation related to minor modifications to the synthetic process of ritonavir and as a consequence the tightening of the specification with respect to impurities.
- On  27  November  1998,  the  EMEA  issued  a  notification  on  a  Type  I  variation  for  Norvir 80  mg/ml  submitted  by  the  MAH  on  18  September  1998.  This  variation  related  to  the introduction of a new in-process control to confirm the absence of undissolved ritonavir crystals due to the low solubility of polymorphic Form II of ritonavir.
- The  MAH  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  II  variation  on  14  April  1998  related  to  the extension of the indication for paediatric population. The variation procedure was extended in order to provided requested additional data on efficacy and safety to allow for further evaluation of the variation. On 19 November 1998, the CPMP adopted an Opinion on this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 26 February 1999.
- The MAH submitted an application for variation on 15 October 1998 related to the update of the SPC  (interaction  section).  On  19  November  1998,  the  CPMP  adopted  an  Opinion  on  this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 26 February 1999.
- Pursuant  to  CPMP  discussion  on  cases  of  lipodystrophy  and  other  metabolic  disorders  as reported  from  HIV  infected  patients  and  treated  with  protease  inhibitors,  the  MAHs  for  the respective PIs submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation to include a class labelling wording into the SPC. On 19 November 1998, the CPMP adopted an Opinion on this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 26 February 1999.
- Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 as amended and Part 4G of Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC as amended, the MAH provided throughout the year additional efficacy and safety data as stated in Annex II to Commission Decision, which formed the basis of the  2 nd annual re-assessment of the risk/benefit profile of Norvir. On 1 September 1998, the MAH provided the documentation and the procedure for the annual reassessment started  on  18  September  1998.  During its  November  CPMP  plenary  meeting,  the CPMP agreed that the risk/benefit profile of Norvir remained favourable. The CPMP adopted on 19 November 1998 an Opinion on the annual re-assessment stating that no amendments to Annexes to Community Marketing Authorisation are necessary and that the MA should be kept under exceptional circumstances until all the specific obligations are fulfilled.  The respective Commission Decision was issued on 23 February 1999.

## Norvir 100 mg soft capsules

- The MAH submitted on 8 January 1999 an application for a marketing authorisation for Norvir 100 mg soft capsules under Annex II to Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 as amended. The  procedure  started  on  29  January  1999  and  the  CPMP  agreed  on  a  consolidated  list  of questions on 21 April 1999.
- Additional data were provided by the MAH on 12 May 1999. The Inspection Services United Kingdom between 10-13 May 1999 carried out an inspection of the manufacturing site of the finished product (R.P. Scherer, USA) further to the request of the CPMP. The findings of the inspection are in compliance with the Community Good Manufacturing Practices requirements.
- An oral explanation was held before the CPMP on 27 July 1999 to address the quality of the product. The CPMP considered satisfactory the responses provided by the MAH.  Amendments to the Summary of Product Characteristics and package leaflet were discussed and agreed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- A letter of undertaking on the follow-up measures to be fulfilled post opinion was provided by the MAH on 27 July 1999.
- During its July CPMP meeting the CPMP in light of the overall data submitted and the scientific discussion within the Committee issued by consensus a positive opinion for the granting of a marketing authorisation for Norvir 100 mg soft capsules on 30 July 1999. The CPMP opinion was  forwarded  to  the  European  Commission,  which  adopted  the  respective  Decision  on  29 November 1999.

## Norvir 80 mg/ml and 100 mg soft capsules

- Pursuant to CPMP discussion on cases of rhabdomyolysis reported from HIV infected patients and  treated  with  protease  inhibitors,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holders  for  the  respective protease inhibitors submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type II variation to include a class labelling wording into the SPC and consequently the Package Leaflet. On 30 July 1999, the CPMP adopted an opinion on this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 29 November 1999.
- Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 as amended and Part 4G of Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC as amended, the MAH provided throughout the year additional efficacy and safety data as stated in Annex II to Commission Decision, which formed the basis of the 3 rd annual re-assessment of the risk/benefit profile of Norvir. On 25  August  1999,  the  MAH  provided  the  documentation  and  the  procedure  for  the  annual  reassessment started  on  24  September  1999.  During  its  November  CPMP  plenary  meeting,  the CPMP agreed that the risk/benefit profile of Norvir remained favourable. The CPMP adopted on 12 November 1999 an Opinion on the annual re-assessment stating that no amendments to Annexes to Community Marketing Authorisation are necessary and that the MA should be kept under exceptional circumstances until all the specific obligations are fulfilled.  The respective Commission Decision was issued on 9 March 2000.
- On 24 March 2000, the Commission issued a decision on the withdrawal of Norvir 100 mg hard capsules.
- Pursuant  to  CPMP  discussion  on  the  potential  of  St  John's  wort  ( Hypericum  perforatum) to interact  with  protease  inhibitors  (PIs)  and  non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors (NNRTIs), the MAHs for the respective PIs and NNRTIs submitted to the EMEA an application for  a  Type  II  variation  to  include  a  class  labelling  wording  in  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics and Package leaflet. On 29 June 2000, the CPMP adopted an Opinion on this variation and the respective Commission Decision was issued on 24 October 2000.
- On  8  May  2000,  the  MAH  submitted  two  applications  for  a  Type  II  variation.  The  first application related to an update the Summary of Product Characteristics to include new safety information  following  the  evaluation  of  the  previously  submitted  5 th and  6 th Periodic  Safety Update Reports for ritonavir. The second application related to the update of the Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet with respect to the therapeutic indication to reflect current medical practice for administration of protease inhibitors and with respect to the dosage recommendation  to  introduce  a  dose  escalation  regimen  in  order  to  improve  the  tolerance. Supplementary  information  was  supplied  by  the  Marketing Authorisation Holder  on  7 September 2000 and on 4 January 2001. The CPMP adopted a favourable Opinion on 1 March 2001 and the respective Commission decision was issued on 14 June 2001.
- Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 as amended and Part 4G of Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC as amended, the MAH provided throughout the year additional efficacy and safety data as stated in Annex II to Commission Decision, which formed the basis of the 4 th annual re-assessment of the risk/benefit profile of Norvir. On 28  August  2000,  the  MAH  provided  the  documentation  and  the  procedure  for  the  annual  reassessment  started  on  22  September  2000.  During  its  December  CPMP  plenary  meeting,  the CPMP agreed that the risk/benefit profile of Norvir remained favourable. The CPMP adopted on 14 December 2000 an Opinion on the annual re-assessment stating that no amendments to Annexes  to  Community  Marketing  Authorisation  are  necessary  and  that  there  were  no

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

remaining grounds for the Marketing Authorisation to be kept under exceptional circumstances since  all  specific  obligations  have  been  fulfilled.  The  respective  Commission  Decision  was issued on 13 March 2001.

- On 29 September 2000, the MAH submitted an application for a Type I variation related to the change in test procedures of Norvir oral solution. On 15 November 2000, the EMEA approved the variation.
- On 2 November 2000, the MAH submitted an application for a Type I variation related to the introduction  of  a  slightly  different  alternative  method  of  manufacture  of  Norvir  100  mg  soft capsules. On 12 January 2001, the EMEA approved the variation.
- On 1 December 2000, the MAH submitted an application for a Type I variation related to the addition  of  a  manufacturing  site  for  Norvir  100  mg  soft  capsules.  On  5  January  2001,  the EMEA approved the variation.

Subsequent post Marketing Authorisation applications agreed upon are summarised in the table below:

| Scope                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amended on   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| 80 mg/ml oral solution only - Quality change (to introduce an alternative analytical method for the finished product)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | II/0033              | II                       | 27.06.01                            | 07.07.01                                |
| 100 mg soft capsules only - Quality change (to comply with the European TSE Directive and Guidance)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | II/0027              | II                       | 15.11.01                            | -                                       |
| Renewal of the Marketing Authorisation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | R/0029               | R                        | 27.06.01                            | 12.11.01                                |
| The Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) applied to vary the Marketing Authorisation for Norvir 100 mg, Soft Capsules, by extending the shelf-life from 1 year to 2 years.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0034               | I                        | 26.10.01                            | 17.12.01                                |
| The MAH applied to tighten the specification for 5-Wing HCl, one of the starting materials used in the manufacture of the ritonavir active substance, by tightening its purity limit, tightening all the limits for the impurities (specified and unspecified), tightening the limit for the residual solvent ethyl acetate, and specifying a new impurity.                                                                               | I/0035               | I                        | 27.02.02                            | 04.03.02                                |
| The MAH applied to amend the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) for 80 mg/ml oral Solution and 100 mg soft capsules with respect to section 4.5, 'Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction'. The proposed change is to add a statement on the interaction with amprenavir. The MAH have also taken this opportunity to make other minor changes and corrections to the SPC and the package leaflet. | II/0036              | II                       | 30.05.02                            | 10.09.02                                |
| The MAH applied for a change in the GC method used for the identification and determination of Ethyl Alcohol in Norvir Soft Elastic Capsules and premix. The new GC method employs a capillary column instead of the packed column already used.                                                                                                                                                                                          | I/0037               | I                        | 3.10.02                             | 10.10.02                                |
| The MAH applied for a change in the chromatographic conditions used for the content uniformity determination of retonavir in Norvir Soft Elastic Capsules.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0038               | I                        | 3.10.02                             | 10.10.02                                |
| The MAH applied for a change in HPLC method for an improvement in the preparation procedure to reduce or eliminate interfering oleic acid excipient components. The chromatographic procedure remains unchanged.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | I/0039               | I                        | 3.10.02                             | 10.10.02                                |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| The MAH applied for an improvement of the identification of Polyoxyl 35 Castor Oil in Norvir Oral Solution and Norvir Soft Capsules. The current identification test (decolourisation of a bromide solution) is replaced by a GC method, monitoring the primary corresponding fatty acid methyl ester.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | I/0040   | I   | 3.10.02   | 10.10.02   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-----|-----------|------------|
| The MAH applied for a change in HPLC method for the determination of related substances in Norvir Oral Solution.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | I/0041   | I   | 3.10.02   | 10.10.02   |
| Changes to the Patient Leaflet local representatives address and telephone number for Greece, contact company name for Iceland and minor corrections in compliance with the template.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | N/0043   | N   | 17/10/02  | 07.11.02   |
| The MAH applied to update section 4.4 and section 4.8 of the SPC further to the CPMP request to implement the class-labelling for 'antiretroviral therapy (ART) and lipodystrophy' in the SPC. In addition, the MAH seeks to implement the CPMP recommendations on the 10 th PSUR, affecting section 4.3 and 4.5 of the SPC. A change to the warfarin interaction statement in section 4.5 of the SPC is also proposed, further to the CPMP recommendations received on study report M01-291.                                                                                                                                      | II/0044  | II  | 19.03.03  | 14.07.03   |
| The MAH applied to update section 4.2 and 4.4 of the SPC as a class labelling on liver impairment and anti-HIV products. Corresponding changes are made in the PIL, section 2 and 4. Lipodystrophy wording is also implemented in section 2 and 4 of the PL.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | II/0045  | II  | 20.01.03  | 27.01.04   |
| The MAH applied to change the test method used to determine related substances in ritonavir.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | I/0046   | I   | 05.08.03  | -          |
| The MAH applied to change the name of manufacturing sites for Norvir soft capsule .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | I/0047   | I   | 07.10.03  | -          |
| The variation concerns an update to section 4.2 (Posology and method of administration) of the SPC, to mention the use of small (\"baby\") doses of ritonavir in combination with other antiretroviral therapy. Also, amendments to sections 4.5 to add the interaction with buspirone and 4.8 of the SPC, to include thrombocytopenia and menorrhagia. Consequential changes are included in sections 2 and 3 of the PL.                                                                                                                                                                                                            | II/0048  | II  | 21.01.04  | 25.03.04   |
| To update section 4.5 'Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction' of the SPC to include an interaction with delavirdine. A consequential change is proposed in section 2 of the PL. In addition, SPC, PL and labelling have been updated to bring the storage conditions in line with current guidance. Minor typographical errors in the SPC are corrected and cross-references have been updated in line with QRD templates. In the PL, the list of local representatives has been updated to include the 10 new EU Member States and to update the address for the Spanish local representative. | II/0049  | II  | 23.06.04  | 02.08.04   |
| Change to batch release arrangements and quality control testing of the finished product - replacement or addition of a site where batch control/testing takes place                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | IA/0050  | IA  | 21.09.04  | -          |