---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:25:45
document_pages: 3
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/prometax-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: prometax-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.2812482
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 14:52:17.386269
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 April 2004 please refer to module 8B

- On 4 February 1999, the MAH applied for 5 Type I Variations for Prometax hard capsules, in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  542/95  as  amended.  The  MAH  applied  for changes  to  the  manufacturer  of  the  finished  product,  the  manufacturer  responsible  for  batch release, the manufacturing process, the test procedures and the specifications of the medicinal product. On 11 March 1999 the EMEA issued the corresponding Notifications.
- On 18 March 1999, the MAH applied, in accordance with the Regulation, for a Type I variation to  extend  the  shelf  life  of  Prometax  hard  capsules  from  2  years  to  3  years.  Additional  minor typographical corrections were also implemented in the SPC, Labelling and Package Leaflet The EMEA issued a Notification on 19 April 1999.
- On 20 September 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted a Type II Variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the SPC (sections 4.4, 4.8, 4.9 and 5.1) and the PL as recommended by the CPMP following assessment  of  the  PSURs.  Some  minor  administrative  changes  to  the  SPC.  Labelling  and  PL were also introduced. On 14 December 1999, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The  amendments  included  the  addition of 'gastric and duodenal ulcers', 'bradycardia',  'seizures'  and  'rashes'  under  undesirable  effects.  The  respective  Commission Decision was issued on 12 April 2000.
- On 5 October 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) submitted an application for a marketing  authorisation  for  Prometax  2  mg/ml  oral  solution,  in  accordance  with  Annex  II  to Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  542/95  as  amended.  The  procedure  started  on  22  October 1999. During its December 1999 meeting, the CPMP, in light of the overall data submitted and the scientific discussion within the Committee, issued a positive opinion (majority) for granting a  Marketing  Authorisation  for  Prometax  2  mg/  ml  oral  solution  on  15  December  1999.  A corrigendum to correct a typographical error in this opinion was made on 19 January 2000. The CPMP opinion was forwarded to the European Commission which adopted the corresponding Decision on 11 May 2001.
- On  22  September  2000,  the  MAH  applied,  in  accordance  with  the  Regulation,  for  2  Type  I variations to extend the shelf life of Prometax hard capsules from 3 years to 4 years, and the shelf life of Prometax oral solution from 2 to 3 years. The EMEA issued the notifications on 9 October 2000 and the corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 18 December 2000.
- On 22 September 2000, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted a Type II Variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the  SPC  (section 4.8) and  the  Package  leaflet  as  recommended  by  the  CPMP  following assessment  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  PSURs  and  the  evaluation  of  a  post  marketing  study investigating  the  effect  of  food  on  the  bioavailability  of  the  oral  solution.  Some  minor administrative changes local representatives list on the Package leaflet were also introduced. On 14  December  2000,  the  CPMP  adopted  a  positive  opinion  on  this  Type  II  variation.  The amendments  included  the  addition  of  'very  rare  cases  of  atrio-ventricular  block'  under undesirable effects. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 20 March 2001.
- On 26 January 2001, the MAH applied for a Type I variation for Prometax hard capsules, in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  542/95  as  amended.  The  MAH  applied  to demonstrate compliance with the Commission Directive 1999/82/EC and the Note for Guidance on Minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform Encephalopathy agents via medicinal products (CPMP/BWP/1230/98), and provided certificates of suitability issued by the European Pharmacopoeia.

The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 28 February 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- On 2 February 2001, the MAH applied for a Type I variation for Prometax hard capsules, in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied to change the source of one of the excipients used in the formulation (magnesium stearate) from animal origin to vegetable origin. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 28 February 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application.
- On  9  February  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the  SPC  and  the  Package  leaflet  to  include  a  recommendation  on  re-initiation  of  therapy following treatment interruption. On 25 April 2001, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 13 August 2001.
- On 28 August 2001, the MAH applied for a Type I variation for Prometax hard capsules, in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied to exend the shelf life as foreseen at time of authorisation from 4 years to 5 years. The EMEA considered this variation to be acceptable and issued on 3 October 2001 a positive notification for the Type I variation application.
- The MAH submitted on 18 September 2001 a request to introduce changes to an aspect of the Labelling not connected to the SPC, in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive No 92/27/EEC. This change concerned an update to the contact details of the local representatives. The MAH received a positive notification from the EMEA on 19 October 2001.
- On  27  December  2001,  the  MAH  applied  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC) 542/95  as  amended,  for  two  Type  I  variations,  one  for  Prometax  hard  capsules  and  one  for Prometax oral solution. The MAH applied for an additional manufacturer, and a transfer of the manufacturer/importer for batch release in the EEA and of the site where the batch release takes place  for  the  capsules.  The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  also  applied  for  a  change  in  the name of the manufacturer of the finished product and site of manufacture, and in the name of the manufacturer/importer responsible for batch release in the EEA and site where the batch release takes place for the oral solution. The EMEA considered these variations to be acceptable and issued on 22 January 2002 a positive Notification for the each of the two Type I variations.
- On  6  February  2002,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  applied  for  an  update  to  section  5.1  of  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  and  section  1  of  the  Package  Leaflet  to  include  new  information  on  the pharmacodynamic properties of rivastigmine not only as an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, but also as a butyrylcholinesterase inhibitor. On 27 June 2002, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 17 October 2002.
- On  20  May  2002,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  applied  for  an  update  to  section  4.4,  4.9  and  4.8  of  the  Summary  of Product Characteristics and section 4 and 5 of the Package Leaflet following the assessment of the sixth PSUR and the follow up to the sixth PSUR. Furthermore the Marketing Authorisation Holder applied for inclusion of the term 'mild pancreatitis' in section 4.8 of the SPC and section 5 of the Package Leaflet. On 19 September 2002, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 18 December 2002.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Scope                                                                                            | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amended on   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Renewal of the Marketing Authorisation                                                           | R/23                 | R                        | 19/03/03                            | 26/06/03                                |
| Minor change in labelling or package leaflet not connected with the SPC (Art. 61.3 Notification) | N/24                 | N                        | 13/08/03                            | -                                       |
| New presentation(s)                                                                              | II/25                | II                       | 17/12/03                            | 04/03/04                                |
| Change in BR/QC testing - repl./add. manuf. responsible for BR - not incl. BC/testing            | I/27                 | I                        | 22/10/03                            | -                                       |
| New presentation(s)                                                                              | II/28                | II                       | 17/12/03                            | 04/03/04                                |
| Change in batch size of the finished product - up to 10-fold                                     | I/29                 | I                        | 03/03/04                            | -                                       |
| Replacement/add. of manufacturing site: Primary packaging site - Solid forms                     | I/30                 | I                        | 23/03/04                            | -                                       |

1 In accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended and after 1 October 2003 according to Commission Regulation (EC) No. 1085/03: I refers to a minor variation (Type I variation); II refers to a major variation (Type II variation); I/II refers to a minor variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application. T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996. N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 61(3) of Council Directive 2001/83/EC.

2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly.