---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:16:57
document_pages: 2
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/rilutek-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: rilutek-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 0.5244566
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 23:19:21.090592
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## Steps taken after granting the Marketing Authorisation

For procedures finalised after 1 January 2004 please refer to module 8B.

- On 13 September 1996, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted two Type I Variations in accordance  with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. These variations related to a  new analytical method for assay and determination of related substances in the active substance and the medicinal product. On 23 October 1996, the EMEA approved these variations, which do not require an amendment to the Commission Decision.
- On  25  April  1997,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. This variation concerned amendments of sections 4.2, 4.4 and 5.2 of the SPC in accordance with the recommendation of the CPMP  following evaluation of follow-up measures submitted by the Marketing Authorisation  Holder  in  December  1996.  On  18  June  1997,  the  CPMP  adopted  a  positive opinion  on  this  Type  II  variation,  and  the  respective  Commission  Decision  was  issued  on  8 October 1997. On 16 December 1997, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted a Type II Variation  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  as  amended.  This variation updated the SPC (sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.8, 8 and 9) and the PL as recommended by  the  CPMP  following  assessment  of  the  PSUR  and  data  submitted  according  to  the obligations placed on the MAH. On 25 February 1998, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The amendments included an additional paragraph on a Japanese clinical trial under the heading 'Further information on Clinical Trials' in the SPC and the addition of 'pancreatitis' as an undesirable effect. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 15 June 1998.
- On  5  July  1999,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. This variation updated the  SPC  with  respect  to  information  on  overdose  and  the  results  of  carcinogenicity  studies. (sections 4.9 overdose and 5.3 preclinical safety) The procedure started on 30 July 1999. On 23 September 1999, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 31 January 2000.
- On 23 November 1999, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted 3 Type I Variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. These variations related to a Minor change  of  manufacturing  process  of  the  active  substance  with  a  subsequent  change  in specifications  of  starting  material  or  intermediate  used  in  the  manufacture  of  the  active substance; a change in test procedure for an intermediate used in the manufacture of the active substance; and an increase in the batch size of the active substance. On 20 December 1999, the EMEA  approved  these  variations,  which  do  not  require  an  amendment  to  the  Commission Decision.
- On  19  July  2000,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  3  Type  I  Variations  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 to change the name of the Marketing Authorisation Holder  from Rhône-Poulenc Rorer S.A. to Aventis Pharma S.A.; to change the name  of  the  manufacturer  of  the  finished  medicinal  product  and  the  name  of  the  active substance  manufacturer  from  Rhône-Poulenc  Rorer  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd  to  Aventis  Pharma (Nenagh) Limited. The EMEA requested updated product literature from the applicant prior to validation and this was received on 17 August 2000. The EMEA issued a positive notification on 15 September 2000. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 29 December 2000.
- Pursuant to Article 13 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 of 22 July 1993, as amended, Aventis Pharma S.A., France submitted to the EMEA on 14 February 2001 an application for a renewal of the Marketing Authorisation. The procedure started on 2 March 2001. On 25 April 2001, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion on the Renewal. The corresponding Commission Decision was issued on 11 July 2001.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- On  9  November  2001,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  I  Variation  in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. The variation related to an extension of the shelf-life of the tablets from 2 to 3 years. The EMEA issued the Notification for this variation on 11 December 2001.
- On 10 January 2002, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted three Type I Variations in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. One variation related to an additional site  of  manufacturing, packaging  and batch release site  of the  finished product. The EMEA issued a Notification for this variation on 12 February 2002. One variation related to a minor change in the manufacture of the finished product. The EMEA issued a Notification for  this  variation  on  21  February 2002. One  variation relates to a  change in batch size of the finished product. The EMEA issued a Notification for this variation on 15 February 2002.
- On  17  June  2002,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95,  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation Holder applied for an update of section 5.2 and section 5.3 of the SPC following additional  pharmacokinetics  and  toxicity  studies.  The  company  also  used  the  opportunity  to change the ATC code following the updated ATC classification, to update names/addresses of local representatives in the PL and to correct spelling mistakes in the German SPC and PL. The CPMP considered the variation acceptable and issued on 22 August 2002 a positive Opinion. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 20 November 2002.
- On 23 September 2002, the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted a Type I Variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. The variation related to minor changes in manufacture of the medicinal product. The EMEA issued the Notification for this variation on 29 October 2002.
- On  8  January  2003,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  a  Type  II  Variation  in accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95,  as  amended.  The  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  applied  for  an  update  of  the  Summary  of  the  Product  Characteristics, Package Leaflet and labelling to comply with the current QRD template and to implement other linguistic improvements and correction of typographical errors. In addition the MAH took the opportunity  to  withdraw  Aventis  Pharma  Nenagh  Limited  (Ireland)  as  manufacturing  site  for batch  manufacture,  testing,  package  and  release  for  RILUTEK.  The  CPMP  considered  the variation  acceptable  and  issued on  19  March  2003  a  positive  Opinion.  The  respective Commission Decision was issued on 22 June 2003