---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:15:24
document_pages: 5
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/taxotere-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: taxotere-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.0886684
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 17:12:28.234111
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 February 2005 please refer to module 8B

- On 4 April 1996 the Marketing Authorisation  Holder  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  II variation to amend the section related to instruction for preparation of Taxotere and to update the safety information in the SPC, Labelling and Package Leaflet. The CPMP, during its May plenary meeting, adopted a list of questions. The company submitted the full responses to the CPMP list of questions on 6 June 1996. The CPMP, during its June plenary meeting, agreed on the amended text to be introduced into the SPC, Labelling and Package Leaflet and adopted a positive Opinion for the Type II variation. The Commission Decision for the Type II variation was issued on 7 October 1996.
- On 30 October 1996 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 relating to the addition of  an  alternative-manufacturing  site  of  docetaxel  bulk  solution.  The  EMEA  approved  the variation  on  6  December  1996.  This  variation  did  not  require  any  amendments  to  the Commission Decision.
- According to the specific obligation (quality) set out in the CPMP Opinion dated 12 July 1995; the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  was  requested  to  tighten  the  impurities  specifications  at shelf life. The proposed changes, including as a consequence the update of the test procedures of the finished medicinal product, agreed by the CPMP during its December plenary meeting were  introduced  through  two  Type  I  variations.  These  applications  were  submitted  on 27 November 1996. The EMEA approved on 23 December 1996 both variations, which were considered as consequential. Both variations did not require any amendments  to the Commission Decision.
- On  4  December  1996  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  two  applications  for  a Type I variation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95. The scope of the first variation related to the change of the name of the manufacturer of the finished medicinal product and responsible for the batch release from May &amp; Baker Ltd to Rh么ne-Poulenc Rorer. The  second  variation  related  to  the  change  of  the  name  of  the  manufacturer  of  the  active substance, docetaxel, and docetaxel solution in polysorbate from Rh么ne-Poulenc Rorer S.A. to Rh么ne-Poulenc Rorer Principe Actifs. On 12 December 1996 the EMEA approved the variation. Only the first variation required amendments to be incorporated in the relevant sections of the Commission Decision. The European Commission amended the Decision on 3 March 1997.
- On 25 February 1997 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type I variation  in  accordance  with  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  relating  to  the modification  in  the  SPC  and  Package  Leaflet  of  the  shelf  life  of  the  premix  (i.e.  10-mg/ml docetaxel solutions) and of the medicinal product after reconstitution. The EMEA approved the variation  on  2  April  1997,  which  required  amendments  to  be  incorporated  in  the  relevant sections  of  the  Commission  Decision.  The  European  Commission  amended  the  Decision  on 13 June 1997.
- Pursuant to Article 13(2) of Council Regulation (EEC) No 2309/93 and Part 4G of Annex to Council Directive 75/318/EEC, the Marketing Authorisation Holder provided throughout 1996 the  preliminary  reports  of  ongoing  clinical  studies  which  formed  the  basis  of  the  annual  reassessment  of  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Taxotere  (e.g.  clinical  studies  with  Taxotere  in monotherapy and in combination therapy, studies concerning the management of side-effects). On 8 November 1996 the Marketing Authorisation Holder provided an updated expert report summarising the different  specific  obligations  already  submitted  within  the  period  November 1995  -  November  1996.  The  procedure  started  on  25  November  1996.  During  its  December plenary  meeting,  the  CPMP  agreed  with  the  Rapporteur's  assessment  report  circulated  on 3 December 1996 that the benefit/risk profile for Taxotere remained unchanged on the basis of the additional preliminary efficacy and safety data provided and that the Marketing Authorisation  should  therefore  remain  under  exceptional  circumstances.  The  CPMP  agreed,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

however, to revise  the  list  of  specific  obligations  and  follow-up  measures  to  be  fulfilled.  An Opinion on the annual re-assessment of the specific obligations and the benefit/risk profile of a medicinal product authorised under exceptional circumstances was adopted on 19 December 1996. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 22 May 1997.

- On 21 April 1997 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation to update the safety section (addition of new undesirable effects) and the posology and method of administration  section  (fluid  retention  premedication  regimen)  of  the  Summary  of Product  Characteristics  and  consequently  the  Package  Leaflet,  based  on  post-marketing experience and new clinical data. The CPMP, during its July plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable, and issued on 23 July 1997 a favourable Opinion on the Type II variation. This Opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 10 November 1997.
- On 24 October 1997 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation for a change in the formulation of Taxotere. The CPMP, during its January plenary meeting,  considered  the  changes  acceptable,  and  issued  on  28  January  1998  a  favourable Opinion on the Type II variation. This Opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 9 June 1998.
- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  28  November  1997  the documentation that formed the basis for the annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile for Taxotere.  During  its  March  1998  plenary  meeting,  the  CPMP  agreed  with  the  Rapporteur's assessment  report  and  adopted  an  Opinion  on  the  annual  re-assessment  of  the  specific obligations and the benefit/risk ratio, stating that  no amendments of Annexes I and III to the Community  Marketing  Authorisation  are  necessary  as  part  of  the  annual  re-assessment . Furthermore the CPMP agreed that the Marketing Authorisation Holder fulfilled all the specific obligations  as  listed  in  Annex  II  C  to  the  original  Commission  Decision.  The  European Commission adopted the corresponding Decision on 7 July 1998. Therefore, the evaluation of the benefit/risk ratio has now been completed, and the conditional approval period has come to an end: the Annex II C has been modified accordingly.
- The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  submitted  to  the  EMEA  on  8  December  1997  an application  for  a  Type  II  variation  for  a  broadening  of  the  indication.  The  CPMP,  during  its March  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes  acceptable  and  issued  on  25  March  1998  a favourable  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This  Opinion  was  forwarded,  in  all  official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 17 July 1998.
- On 12 March 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in order to update the safety section of the SPC following a request of the CPMP after evaluation of Periodic Safety Update Report number 4 (addition of new undesirable effects and changes in the wording). The CPMP, during its May plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable,  and  issued  on  27  May  1998  a  favourable  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This Opinion  was  forwarded,  in  all  official  languages  of  the  European  Union,  to  the  European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 18 September 1998.
- Pursuant to article 10(3) of Council Directive No. 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992, the Marketing Authorisation Holder notified the EMEA on 3 June 1998 of their intention to introduce a change to  an  aspect  of  the  labelling  not  connected  to  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics (introduction of the text 'New storage conditions'). On 12 June 1998 the EMEA has notified the European Commission that the changes were accepted. The European Commission amended the Decision on 5 August 1998 .
- On 3 December 1998 the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted an application for a Type II variation in order to update the safety section of the SPC following a request of the CPMP after evaluation of Periodic Safety Update Report number 5 (addition of new undesirable effects and changes in the wording). The CPMP, during its February 1999 plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable, and issued on 25 February 1999 a favourable Opinion on the Type II

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

variation. This Opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 16 June 1999.

- Pursuant  to  Article  6  of  Commission  regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA on 3 December 1998 an application for a Type II variation for a for a new line extension i.e: locally advanced or metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer after failure of prior chemotherapy. The CPMP, during its October 1999 plenary meeting, considered the changes acceptable and issued on 21 October 1999 a favourable Opinion on the Type II variation. This Opinion was forwarded, in all official languages of the European Union, to the European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 20 January 2000.
- Pursuant  to  Article  6  of  Commission  regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA on 20 December 1999 an application for  a  Type  II  variation  for  a  new  line  extension  i.e:  the  treatment  of  patients  with  locally advanced or metastatic  breast  cancer  who have  not  previously received  cytotoxic  therapy  for this  condition.  The  CPMP,  during  its  May  2000  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes acceptable  and  issued  on  25  May  2000  a  favourable  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This Opinion  was  forwarded,  in  all  official  languages  of  the  European  Union,  to  the  European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 29 January 2000.
- Pursuant  to  Article  6  of  Commission  regulation  (EC)  No.  542/95  of  10  March  1995,  the Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted to the EMEA on 20 December 1999 an application for  a  Type  II  variation  for  a  new  line  extension  i.e:  the  treatment  of  patients  with  locally advanced or metastatic  breast  cancer  who have  not  previously received  cytotoxic  therapy  for this  condition.  The  CPMP,  during  its  May  2000  plenary  meeting,  considered  the  changes acceptable  and  issued  on  25  May  2000  a  favourable  Opinion  on  the  Type  II  variation.  This Opinion  was  forwarded,  in  all  official  languages  of  the  European  Union,  to  the  European Commission, which adopted the corresponding Decision on 28 August 2000.
- Pursuant  to  Article  4  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No 542/95  of  10 March 1995,  as amended, Rh么ne-Poulenc Rorer S.A. submitted to the EMEA on 8 May 2000 an application for a Type I variation to change the name of the MAH to Aventis Pharma S.A The corresponding Decision was adopted by the Commission on 15 September 2000.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Subsequent post Marketing Authorisation applications agreed upon are summarised in the table below:

| Scope                                                                                             | Application number   | Type of modification 1   | Notification/ Opinion issued on 2   | Commission Decision Issued/amended on   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Change in the batch size of finished product                                                      | I/0017               | I                        | 23.02.99                            | 11.03.99                                |
| Change in shelf-life after reconstitution                                                         | I/0018               | I                        | 05.07.99                            | 05.10.99                                |
| Extension of shelf-life as foreseen at time of authorisation                                      | I/0019               | I                        | 05.07.99                            | 05.10.99                                |
| Extension of shelf-life as foreseen at time of authorisation                                      | I/0020               | I                        | 05.07.99                            | 05.10.99                                |
| Quality changes                                                                                   | II/0022              | II                       | 23.06.99                            | 30.06.99                                |
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet                                  | II/0024              | II                       | 25.05.00                            | 28.08.00                                |
| Change in the name and/or address of the marketing authorisation holder                           | I/0026               | I                        | 30.06.00                            | -                                       |
| Quality change                                                                                    | II/0027              | II                       | 27.07.00                            | -                                       |
| Change in the name of a manufacturer of the active substance                                      | I/0028               | I                        | 19.07.00                            | -                                       |
| Renewal                                                                                           | R/0029               | R                        | 20.09.00                            | 28.12.00                                |
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics                                                      | II/0030              | II                       | 25.01.01                            | 03.05.01                                |
| Quality change                                                                                    | II/0031              | II                       | 25.07.01                            | N/A                                     |
| Change following modification(s) of the manufacturing authorisation(s)                            | I/0032               | I                        | 05.07.01                            | 13.08.01                                |
| Change in the name of a manufacturer of the active substance                                      | I/0033               | I                        | 18.07.01                            |                                         |
| Update of the SPC (point 4.8)                                                                     | II/0034              | II                       | 13.12.01                            | 16.04.02                                |
| New overfill values for the 20 mg concentrate and solvent vials                                   | II/0035              | II                       | 17.01.02                            | 23.04.02                                |
| Update of the SPC (point 4.8)                                                                     | II/0037              | II                       | 21.11.02                            | 24.01.03                                |
| Minor change in manufacture of the medicinal product                                              | I/0038               | I                        | 14.06.02                            | 21.06.02                                |
| Change in in-process controls applied during the manufacture of the product                       | I/0039               | I                        | 14.06.02                            | 21.06.02                                |
| Additional indication (metastatic breast cancer)                                                  | II/0040              | II                       | 19.09.02                            | 09.01.03                                |
| Change in the batch size of finished product                                                      | I/0041               | I                        | 05.09.02                            | 16.09.02                                |
| Batch size of active substance                                                                    | I/0042               | I                        | 16.04.03                            | 23.04.03                                |
| Change in or addition of manufacturing site(s) for part or all of the manufacturing process       | I/0043               | I                        | 08.05.03-                           | -                                       |
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics                                                      | II/0044              | II                       | 26.06.03                            | 08.10.03                                |
| Replacement of an excipient with a comparable excipient                                           | I/0045               | I                        | 23.05.03                            | 26.05.03                                |
| Change in specification of excipients in the medicinal product (excluding adjuvants for vaccines) | I/0046               | I                        | 23.05.03                            | 26.05.03                                |
| Change in specification of starting material/intermediate used in manuf. of the active substance  | I/0047               | I                        | 15.07.03                            | 23.07.03                                |
| Change in test procedure for starting material/intermediate used in manuf. of active substance    | I/0048               | I                        | 30.07.03                            | 05.09.03                                |
| Minor changes in manufacture of the medicinal product                                             | I/0049               | I                        | 30.07.03                            | 05.09.03                                |
| Change in test procedure for starting material/intermediate used in manuf. of active substance    | I/0050               | I                        | 30.07.03                            | 05.09.03                                |
| Change in or addition of manufacturing site(s) for part or all of the manufacturing process       | I/0051               | I                        | 03.09.03                            | 18.09.03                                |

1 In accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 of 10 March 1995, as amended: I refers to a minor variation (Type I variation); II refers to a major variation (Type II variation); I/II refers to a minor variation following the procedure set out in Article 6, 7 and 8 of the Regulation; X refers to an Annex II application.

T refers to a transfer of a Marketing Authorisation in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No 2141/96 of 7 November 1996.

N refers to a notification in accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992.

2 For Notifications and Type I variations, the date of entry into force of the change is the EMEA Notification date. The Commission Decision will be amended accordingly.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Extension of Indication                                                                      | II/0052   | II   | 16.09.04   | 20.10.04   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|------|------------|------------|
| Update of Summary of Product Characteristics                                                 | II/0053   | II   | 24.03.04   | 26.05.04   |
| Extension of Indication                                                                      | II/0054   | II   | 18.11.04   | 05.01.05   |
| Change(s) to the manufacturing process for the active substance                              | II/0055   | II   | 23.06.04   | 293.06.04  |
| Change in shelf-life of finished product - as packaged for sale                              | IB/0056   | IB   | 03.06.04   | -          |
| Change in shelf-life of finished product - as packaged for sale                              | IB/0057   | IB   | 03.06.04   | -          |
| Extension of Indication                                                                      | II/0058   | II   | 18.11.04   | 22.12.04   |
| Quality changes                                                                              | II/0059   | II   | 20.01.05   | 27.01.05   |
| Change in name and/or address of a manuf. of the active substance (no Ph. Eur. cert. avail.) | IA/0060   | IA   | 18.01.05   | -          |