---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:37:17
document_pages: 2
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/steps-after-cutoff/zerene-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
document_name: zerene-epar-steps-taken-after-authorisation-when-cutoff-date-has-been-used_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 0.5167889
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 11:57:22.205883
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## STEPS TAKEN AFTER GRANTING THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION

For procedures finalised after 1 September 2003 please refer to module 8B .

- On 19 March 1999 the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) submitted an application for a Type I variation relating to change the name of the manufacturer of the finished bulk capsules. The packaging and release site for the EU is the same as in the original application and is not affected  by this  variation.  The  procedure started on  25 March  1999. The EMEA on 23 April 1999  approved  this  variation,  which  did  not  require  any  amendments  to  the  Community Marketing Authorisation.
- On 10 August 2001 the MAH submitted to the EMEA an application for a Type I variation in accordance with Article 4 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95, as amended. The scope of this variation was to extend the shelf life as foreseen at time of authorisation from 2 years to 3  years.  The  procedure  started  on  30  August  2001.  The  EMEA  notified  the  European Commission  on  28  September  2001  that  the  variation  was  accepted.  Amendments  to  the Annexes  I  and  IIIB  of  the  Community  Marketing  Authorisation  were  required  and  the Commission Decision was issued on 21 November 2001.
- On 30 March 1999 the MAH submitted an application for a Type I variation relating to the modification of the registered method for measurement of degradation products and impurities. The procedure started on 6 April 1999. On 29 April 1999 the EMEA approved this variation, which did not require any amendments to the Community Marketing Authorisation. · On  17  February  2000  the  MAH  submitted  an  application  for  a  Type  I  variation  relating  to change the name of the product 'Zaleplon-Wyeth Medica Ireland' to 'Zerene'. The procedure started  on  28  February  2000.  The  EMEA  on  29  March  2000  approved  this  variation,  which required amendments to the Community Marketing Authorisation. The respective Commission Decision was issued 27 July 2000. · In accordance with Article 10(3) of Council Directive 92/27/EEC of 31 March 1992, the EMEA issued  on  29  March  2000  a  Notification  to  implement  minor  corrections  to  the  labelling  and Package Leaflet (PL). The respective Commission Decision was issued on 27 July 2000. · On 11 October 2000, the MAH submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied for an update of Section 4.5 of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC), based on new data from  an  interaction  study  between  zaleplon  and  erythromycin  etylsuccinate.  The  procedure started  on  20  October  2000.  The  CPMP  adopted  a  positive  Opinion  for  this  variation  on  14 December 2001. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 20 March 2001. · On 7 November 2000, the MAH submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Article 6  of  European  Commission Regulation (EC) No 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied for a variation to demonstrate compliance with Commission Directive 1999/82/EC and the Note for Guidance on Minimising the Risk of Transmitting Animal Spongiform Encephalopathy  Agents  via  Medicinal  Products  (CPMP/BWP/1230/98  rev.1)  and  provided scientific information, which was then supplemented by a Certificate of Suitability issued by the European  Pharmacopoeia.  The  procedure  started  on  17  November  2000  and  supplementary information was provided on 26 February 2001. The CPMP adopted a positive Opinion for this variation  on  29  March  2001,  which  did  not  require  any  amendment  to  the  Community Marketing Authorisation. · Pursuant  to  article  10(3)  of  Council  Directive  No.  92/27/EEC  of  31  March  1992,  the  MAH notified the EMEA on 22 March 2001 of their intention to introduce changes to an aspect of the PL not connected to the SPC. On 25 April 2001, the EMEA notified the European Commission that the changes were accepted. Amendments to the Annex IIIB of the Community Marketing Authorisation were required and the Commission Decision was issued on 20 June 2001. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Pursuant to article 61(3) of Council Directive No. 2001/83/EC of 6 November 2001, the MAH notified the EMEA on 4 October 2001 of their intention to introduce changes to an aspect of the PL  not  connected  to  the  SPC.  On  19  November  2001,  the  EMEA  notified  the  European Commission that the changes were accepted. Amendments to the Annex III of the Community Marketing Authorisation were required and the Commission Decision was issued on 28 January 2002.
- On 11 April 2002 the MAH submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Article  6  of  Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied for an update of the SPC sections 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.6 and 4.8 in order to reflect changes to the MAH's reference safety information (Core Data Sheet) and increase international labelling consistency. The  procedure  started  on  26  April  2002.  The  CPMP  adopted  a  positive  Opinion  for  this variation on 27 June 2002. The respective Commission Decision was issued on 10 September 2002.
- Pursuant to article 61(3) of Council Directive No. 2001/83/EC of 6 November 2001, the MAH notified the EMEA on 3 February 2003 of their intention to introduce changes to an aspect of the  PL  not  connected  to  the  SPC.  On  17  February  2003,  the  EMEA  notified  the  European Commission that the changes were accepted. Amendments to the Annex III of the Community Marketing Authorisation were required and the Commission Decision was issued on 17 March 2003. · On 12 March 2003 the MAH submitted an application for a Type II variation in accordance with Article 6 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 542/95 as amended. The MAH applied for an update of the section 4.8 the SPC in order to include information on anaphylactic reactions and  section  4.4  to  reword  the  sentence  on  psycho-motor  coordination.  The  corresponding sections of the PL were also amended. The procedure started on 21 March 2003. The CPMP adopted  a  positive  Opinion  for  this  variation  on  22  May  2003.  The  respective  Commission Decision was issued on 16 September 2003. Medicinal product no longer authorised