---
document_datetime: 2024-10-08 16:25:25
document_pages: 11
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/referral/oxbryta-article-20-procedure-assessment-report-temporary-measures_en.pdf
document_name: oxbryta-article-20-procedure-assessment-report-temporary-measures_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.874678
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-14 13:32:52.97929
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

26 September 2024 EMA/460760/2024 Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) Assessment report on temporary measures Procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 Oxbryta EMEA/H/A-20/1538/C/004869/0014 INN/active substance: voxelotor Note: Assessment report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted. Medicinal product temporarily sus

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Table of contents

| Table of contents.........................................................................................2                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. Information on the procedure .................................................................3                          |
| 2. Scientific discussion ................................................................................3                  |
| 2.1. Introduction.........................................................................................................3 |
| 2.2. Clinical aspects ....................................................................................................5 |
| 2.3. Emerging data on safety .......................................................................................5       |
| 2.3.1. Updated safety data - vaso-occlusive crisis in registry studies .................................5                   |
| 2.3.2. Updated safety data - deaths in clinical trials........................................................8             |
| 2.4. Efficacy of voxelotor in the approved indication ........................................................9             |
| 2.4.1. Data from the pivotal study in the marketing authorisation application.....................9                         |
| 2.5. Data from the registry studies................................................................................9        |
| 3. Benefit-risk balance ..............................................................................10                    |
| 4. Summary of new activities and measures .............................................11                                   |
| 4.1. Temporary measures..........................................................................................11         |
| 4.2. Direct Healthcare Professional Communications and Communication plan..................11                               |
| 5. Grounds for Opinion ..............................................................................11                     |

2. Scientific discussion ................................................................................  3 2.1. Introduction.........................................................................................................  3 2.2. Clinical aspects ....................................................................................................  5 2.3. Emerging data on safety .......................................................................................  5 2.3.1. Updated safety data - vaso-occlusive crisis in registry studies  .................................  5 2.3.2. Updated safety data - deaths in clinical trials  ........................................................  8 2.4. Efficacy of voxelotor in the approved indication  ........................................................  9 2.4.1. Data from the pivotal study in the marketing authorisation application  .....................  9 2.5. Data from the registry studies................................................................................  9 3. Benefit-risk balance ..............................................................................  10 4. Summary of new activities and measures .............................................  11 4.1. Temporary measures ..........................................................................................  11 4.2. Direct Healthcare Professional Communications and Communication plan  ..................  11 5. Grounds for Opinion ..............................................................................  11 Medicinal product temporarily suspe

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Information on the procedure

In May 2024, dosing was paused in two clinical studies due to a potential safety concern observed in said studies. The concern related to an imbalance of deaths between voxelotor and placebo in one of the studies (GBT 440-032, also known as C5341021), whilst in the other (GBT440- 042, also known as C5341026) the total number of deaths was higher than anticipated. Most fatal cases describe incidence of infection. Given that concerns due to possible immunosuppressive effects of voxelotor were raised at time of the MA, and the study population in those studies partially overlap with the intended population based on the authorised indication, the findings from these emerging safety data needed to be further reviewed, taking into account all available data, to determine whether there is an impact on the benefit-risk balance of Oxbryta in the authorised indication.

At time of marketing authorisation, voxelotor was shown to decrease the humoral immune response to antigens in both rats and monkeys. Further, exposure-dependent decrease in white blood cells (WBC) within the normal range was observed in clinical studies, whereas no evident increase in infection rates was observed during the pivotal study in the 1500 mg group. The effects observed in animals were reflected under warnings and precautions in the product information, together with a statement that

On 26 July 2024 the EC therefore triggered a procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, and requested the CHMP to assess the impact of the above concerns on the benefit-risk balance of the centrally authorised medicinal product Oxbryta (voxelotor) and to issue a recommendation on whether the relevant marketing authorisations should be maintained, varied, suspended or revoked. In addition, the European Commission requested the Agency to give its opinion, as to whether temporary measures were necessary to protect public health. The current report relates only to temporary measures recommended by the CHMP based on the data available at this time. These temporary measures are without prejudice to the outcome of the ongoing review under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. 2. Scientific discussion 2.1. Introduction Voxelotor is a Haemoglobin S (HbS) polymerization inhibitor that binds to HbS with a 1:1 stoichiometry and exhibits preferential partitioning to Red Blood Cells (RBCs). By increasing the affinity of haemoglobin (Hb) for oxygen, voxelotor demonstrates dose-dependent inhibition of HbS polymerization. Voxelotor inhibits RBC sickling and improves RBC deformability. On 14 February 2022, Oxbryta was granted a marketing authorisation in the EU. It is authorised as an orphan medicinal product, for the treatment of haemolytic anaemia due to sickle cell disease (SCD) in adults and paediatric patients 12 years of age and older as monotherapy or in combination with hydroxycarbamide. The recommended dosage is 1500 mg taken orally once daily. The efficacy was demonstrated on Hb response rate (defined as a Hb increase of &gt; 1 g/dL (0.62 mmol/L) from baseline to Week 24). The response rate for voxelotor 1 500 mg was 51.1% (46/90) compared to 6.5% (6/92) in the placebo group indicating a difference of 45.0 (33.4, 56.7; p &lt; 0.001). The safety and efficacy of Oxbryta in paediatric patients below the age of 12 years have not been established yet. No data are available. Medicinal product temporarily suspe

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the clinical relevance in already immunocompromised patients or in patients treated with immunosuppressive drugs cannot be excluded.

In May 2024, the sponsor decided to pause dosing in two ongoing global clinical studies due to a potential safety concern observed in said studies. The concern related to an imbalance of deaths between voxelotor and placebo in one of the studies (GBT 440-032, also known as C5341021), whilst in the other (GBT440- 042, also known as C5341026) the total number of deaths was higher than anticipated. Dosing was also paused for participants of those two studies who enrolled in the open label extension (GBT440-038, also known as C5341023) while an evaluation was conducted to determine the reason for the observations. Study GBT440-032 intended to assess the effect of voxelotor on the transcranial doppler ultrasound measurements in SCD participants in children 2 to &lt;15 years of age with sickle cell disease and at risk for stroke. It is a global study, in which the majority of study participants were enrolled in sub-Saharan Africa. In this study, 8 deaths had been reported in the treatment arm, compared to 2 in the placebo arm (all in Sub-Saharan Africa). Most of fatal cases in the voxelotor group describe incidence of infection, including 5/8 patients who developed (fatal) malaria or sepsis. Study GBT440-042 intended to assess the effect of voxelotor and standard of care (SOC) compared to placebo and SOC on leg ulcer healing in participants ≥ 12 years of age with SCD. It is conducted in Kenya, Nigeria, and Brazil. Concomitant treatment with hydroxyurea/hydroxycarbamide (HU/HC) was allowed. A higher number of fatal events than anticipated in study participants receiving voxelotor was observed. The study had not yet been unblinded, but most of these deaths (8/9 fatal cases) occurred in patients who entered the open-label part of this study. In 4 cases, malaria was identified either the cause or contributing factor of the death. At the time of notification of the studies pauses, overall information was limited and some case narratives from study GBT440-032 were still not available, nor those from study GBT440-042. However, given the fact that concerns due to possible immunosuppressive effects of voxelotor were raised at time of the MA (with immunosuppressive effects observed in animal studies and decrease in WBC in clinical studies), and the study population in those studies partially overlap with the intended population based on the authorised indication, the findings from these emerging safety data needed to be further reviewed, taking into account all available data, to determine whether there is an impact on the benefit-risk balance of Oxbryta in the authorised indication, and the present procedure was initiated. After submission of their responses to CHMP list of questions in the Article 20 referral, on 23 September 2024, the MAH informed the EMA of their intention to cease the marketing of Oxbryta, and to initiate a recall of all batches worldwide. The MAH also informed the EMA that it was discontinuing all ongoing active voxelotor clinical trials and expanded access programs worldwide. The MAH indicated that their decision was based on a review and analysis of the data currently available from ongoing clinical trials and from registry studies, in particular emerging data regarding a safety signal of vasoocclusive crisis (VOC). The studies data collection and analysis is continuing. On 24 September 2024, the MAH submitted an addendum to their responses to CHMP list of questions in the context of the ongoing procedure including: 1. new safety data regarding vaso-occlusive crises from two registry-based studies (see below), and two recently reported deaths in clinical trials (GBT440-042 and GBT440-034): Medicinal product temporarily suspe

- RETRO (Retrospective Real-World Oxbryta Data Collection and Analysis Study [Study GBT4404R1, C5341018]

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- PROSPECT (Study GBT440-4R2, C5341019]), a prospective, open-label, multicentre, registry study
2. an updated benefit-risk assessment; and

<!-- image -->

3. information regarding an ongoing evaluation of clinical study conduct. CHMP discussed this matter at an extraordinary meeting on 26 September 2024 and considered that, in view of the data available at this point, temporary measures were necessary in order to protect public health while the Article 20 review is still ongoing. 2.2. Clinical aspects 2.3. Emerging data on safety 2.3.1. Updated safety data - vaso-occlusive crisis in registry studies Two registry studies provide data on sickle cell disease (SCD) patients in the US treated with Oxbryta in a real-world setting, RETRO and PROSPECT. 2.3.1.1. Design RETRO The Retrospective Real-World Oxbryta Data Collection and Analysis Study (RETRO, GBT4404R1[C5341018]) is a post marketing, retrospective, multicentre study conducted at 9 clinical sites in the US. The study examined the realworld data of patients with SCD (all genotypes) aged ≥12 years receiving voxelotor as part of their usual care. The study design is illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 1. Study Schema, RETRO study Data collected 1 year before and up to 1 year after initiation of voxelotor were analysed in 216 patients aged 12 to 71 years who received voxelotor for ≥2 consecutive weeks; mean (SD) age 33.8 years (14.3), 56.0% female, 92.1% HbSS genotype, 62% receiving concurrent HU. The mean (SD) Hb level at baseline was 7.8 (1.5) g/dL. The mean (SD) duration of voxelotor treatment was 36.7 (15.66) weeks. Medicinal product temporarily suspe

## PROSPECT

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The PROSPECT study (GBT440-4R2 [C5341019]) is a prospective, open-label, multicentre, registry study. The study collects data that are recorded in the participants' medical records. Any participant who was taking voxelotor, or who has been prescribed and will initiate treatment with voxelotor, is eligible to participate. Eligible participants receive treatment with voxelotor as prescribed by their physician, as part of their usual care. Participants are treated and evaluated per standard of care (SOC) and at the physician's discretion. The study design is illustrated in Figure 2.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Study Schema, PROSPECT Study In PROSPECT, by the interim data cut on 05 April 2024, a total of 214 patients with SCD (all genotypes) aged ≥4 years (N=214) were enrolled and 162 patients were included in the demographic and laboratory analysis. Fifty-two (52) participants were not included as the data entry deadline was not met at data cutoff. One hundred sixty-one (161) patients were included in the treatment administration and safety analysis (one patient did not receive study treatment). One hundred and four (104) patients received voxelotor as part of their usual care at initial daily doses 1500 mg (64.6%), 1000 mg (5.6%), 900 mg (8.7%), 600 mg (2.5%), or 500 mg (1.2%). The studied population (N=162) had a mean (SD) age of 28.6 years (14.9), 41% were male, 90% had HbSS genotype and 74.1% receiving concurrent HU (Study GBT440-4R2 Table 1). The mean (SD) duration of treatment was 128.9 (65.2) weeks. The mean Hb level at baseline was 7.76 g/dL. 2.3.1.2. Safety results 2.3.1.2.1.1. Non-SCD-Related AEs In the RETRO study, 37.5% (81/216) of patients experienced non-SCD-related TEAEs. Among the most common (≥3%) AEs were diarrhoea (16.2%), headache (12.0%), abdominal pain (3.2%), and rash (6.5%). In the PROSPECT study, 44.7% (72/161) of patients experienced non-SCD-related TEAEs. The most common non-SCD-related TEAEs (&gt;10%) included abdominal pain (13.0%), diarrhoea (20.5%), nausea (16.1%), and headache (21.7%). 2.3.1.2.1.2. SCD-Related AEs Medicinal product temporarily suspe

SCD-related (SCD complications) TEAEs in the RWE studies were defined more broadly than SCDrelated TEAEs in the clinical studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In RETRO, SCD complications included: acute chest syndrome, acute pain crisis, cerebral infarct, transient ischemic attack, leg ulcer, priapism, cardiac malfunction and pulmonary hypertension, iron overload, retinopathy.

|                                                | Participants(N=140)   | Participants(N=140)   |
|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
|                                                | Pre-Oxbryta (%)       | Post-Oxbryta (%)      |
| Any SCD Complications                          | 45.0                  | 106.7                 |
| SCD Complications                              |                       |                       |
| Acute Chest Syndrome                           | 2.9                   | 8.8                   |
| Acute Pain Crisis                              | 33.6                  | 68.7                  |
| Cardiac Malfunction and Pulmonary Hypertension | 1.4                   | 2.8                   |

|   Number of VOCs Pre-Oxbryta |   Patient- Years Pre-Oxbryta |   Number of VOCs Pre-Oxbryta per Patient- Year |   Number of VOCs Post-Oxbryta |   Patient- Years Post-Oxbryta |   Number of VOCs Post-Oxbryta per Patient- Year |
|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|                           67 |                          138 |                                           0.49 |                          1022 |                        377.81 |                                            2.71 |

In PROSPECT, SCD complications included: events related to VOCs, ACS, priapism, stroke, transient ischemic attack, leg ulcers, cardiac malfunction, pulmonary hypertension, sickle cell anaemia, splenomegaly/splenectomy, dactylitis, cholelithiasis/cholecystectomy, aplastic crisis, chronic or end stage kidney disease, pneumonia, retinopathy, avascular necrosis, deep vein thrombosis, and chronic/acute pain. In the RETRO study, of the 216 patients, 68.1% (n=147) experienced SCD complication TEAEs. Among the most common (&gt;10%) TEAEs deemed were sickle cell anaemia with crisis (58.3%) and acute chest syndrome (10.6%). In the PROSPECT study, of the 161 patients included, 68.3% (n=110) experienced SCD complication TEAEs. Among the most common (&gt;10%) TEAEs deemed were sickle cell anaemia with crisis (60.9%) and acute chest syndrome (24.8%). In the RETRO study, based on an exploratory interim analysis performed before enrolment was completed including 140 patients, the annualized incidence of acute pain crisis pre-Oxbryta and postOxbryta were 33.6% and 68.7%, respectively (Table 1). Table 1. Annualized Incidence of SCD Complications, Enrolled Population, RETRO Study (Interim Analysis) In the PROSPECT study, based on an exploratory analysis performed on an interim data cutoff with 161 patients, the number of VOCs pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 67 and 1022, respectively; the total patient-years pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 138 and 377.81, respectively. The resulting number of VOCs per patient-year pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 0.49 and 2.71, respectively (Table 2). Table 2. VOC Rate by Patient-Years, Subgroup Analysis - Sickle cell anaemia with crisis, Enrolled Population, PROSPECT Study Note: VOC = Vaso -Occlusive Crisis Medicinal product temporarily suspe

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.3.1.3. Limitations

Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the above results:

Firstly, the studies were not designed to accurately assess VOCs. The VOC events were entered by site staff into the electronic data capture system based on what had been reported in the participants' medical records. Events that occurred in other settings (e.g., hospital, other SCD clinics, emergency room, home) may not have been recorded in the medical record and, therefore, not captured in the study database. Additionally, there is no adjudication of the events. Secondly, the data collection method used until Q1 2023 for the 12 months pre-Oxbryta period may have resulted in underreporting of pre-Oxbryta VOCs in both studies. Thirdly, in both studies, following the initiation of Oxbryta treatment, participants may be followed more closely by healthcare providers, which could have resulted in more reported events than the preOxbryta period. This bias is expected to be larger with PROSPECT, where participants are followed prospectively. Fourthly, changes in healthcare utilisation during the COVID-19 pandemic may have caused temporal changes in VOC-related healthcare interactions, which may have resulted in under-reporting of VOCs during the pre-Oxbryta period. The enrolment period for RETRO was from March 2021 to January 2022, and PROSPECT began enrolling patients in March 2022. Therefore, the pre-Oxbryta observation period in both studies overlaps with the peak period of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lastly, for observational studies, investigators provide standard of care, and there is no close monitoring of the participants' drug compliance or changes in medications. Therefore, poor compliance with Oxbryta or other SCD medications such as hydroxyurea are potential confounders. 2.3.1.4. Discussion In the PROSPECT study, based on an exploratory analysis performed on an interim data cutoff 161 patients, the number of VOC pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 67 and 1022, respectively; the total patient-years pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 138 and 377.81, respectively. The resulting number of VOCs per patient-year pre-Oxbryta and post-Oxbryta were 0.49 and 2.71, respectively. In the RETRO study, based on an exploratory interim analysis performed before enrolment was completed including 140 patients, the annualized incidence of acute pain crisis pre-Oxbryta and postOxbryta were 33.6% and 68.7%, respectively. These additional results strongly suggest an increase in VOCs in comparison to the incidence of VOCs prior to voxelotor treatment. Although the data collected from these registry studies have several limitations, and uncertainties are noted, the observations raise serious concerns and need thorough investigation. Further a summary of deaths from the registry studies is not yet available. 2.3.2. Updated safety data - deaths in clinical trials The MAH provided an update on fatal cases in study GBT440-042, bringing the total number to 11 treatment-emergent fatal cases. Medicinal product temporarily suspe

An update on the fatal cases in Study GBT440-034 was also provided. This study is an ongoing, openlabel, multicentre extension study conducted globally for adult and paediatric participants with SCD who completed 72 weeks of treatment in Study GBT440-031. All subjects who enrolled in Study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

GBT440-034, regardless of treatment received in Study GBT440-031 (i.e. voxelotor 1500 mg, voxelotor 900 mg, or placebo), receive voxelotor 1500 mg once daily.

## 2.4. Efficacy of voxelotor in the approved indication

2.4.1. Data from the pivotal study in the marketing authorisation application The efficacy and safety of voxelotor in patients with SCD was primarily evaluated in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre study (EudraCT2016-003370-40). In this study, 274 patients were randomised to daily oral administration of voxe lotor 1500 mg (N=90), voxelotor 900 mg (N=92), or placebo (N=92). Patients were included if they had baseline Hb ≥ 5.5 g/dL (3.41 mmol/L) to ≤ 10.5 g/dL (6.52 mmol/L) and 1 to 10 vaso-occlusive crisis (VOC) events within 12 months prior to enrolment. Otherwise eligible patients on stable doses of hydroxycarbamide for at least 90 days were allowed to continue hydroxycarbamide therapy throughout the study. Randomization was stratified by patients already receiving hydroxycarbamide (yes, no), geographic region (North America, Europe, Other), and age (12 to &lt; 18 years, 18 to 65 years). Key exclusion criteria included patients who (1) were receiving regular RBC transfusions, (2) received RBC transfusions within 60 days, (3) received erythropoietin within 28 days of enrolment, (4) had known active hepatitis A, B, or C or who were known to be human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive (5) had severe renal insufficiency, (6) had uncontrolled liver disease, (7) were pregnant, or (8) were breast-feeding. Of the patients, 75% had HbSS genotype, 15% had HbS/β 0 -thalassemia, 4% HbS/β + -thalassemia, 3% HbSC, and 3% other sickle cell variants. The majority were receiving hydroxycarbamide therapy (65%). The median age was 24 years (range: 12 to 64 years); 46 (17%) patients were 12 to &lt; 18 years of age. Median baseline Hb was 8.5 g/dL (5.28 mmol/L) (5.9 to 10.8 g/dL [3.66 to 6.70 mmol/L]). Within 12 months prior to enrolment, 115 (42%) had 1 VOC event and 159 (58%) had 2 to 10 events. Of the 274 patients, 75 (27.4%) discontinued the study early. The main reasons for discontinuation were withdrawal of consent (10.2%) and adverse events (8.4%). Efficacy was based on the following primary endpoint: Hb response rate defined as a Hb increase of &gt; 1 g/dL (0.62 mmol/L) from baseline to Week 24 in patients treated with voxelotor 1500 mg versus placebo. The response rate for voxelotor 1500 mg was 51.1% (46/90) compared to 6.5% (6/92) in the placebo group (p &lt; 0.001). No outlier subgroups were observed. The increase in Hb was observed beginning at Week 2 and maintained through Week 72. 2.5. Data from the registry studies Medicinal product temporarily suspe

Consistent with the clinical trial results, the RETRO and PROSPECT studies showed increases in haemoglobin and improvements in haemolysis markers in the real-world setting:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In PROSPECT, the mean (SD) peak of Hb value was 9.8 (1.95) g/dL and increased from baseline by 2.0 (1.83) g/dL (n=154). Markers of haemolysis nadir decreased from baseline by 5.3% (6.44%) in reticulocyte count (n=133) and 1.6 (2.11) mg/dL in total bilirubin (n=145). The mean (SD) nadir decrease from baseline for LDH was 134.3 (206.6) U/L (n=75).

In the RETRO study, the mean (SD) Hb peak post-treatment increased from baseline by 1.4 (1.60) g/dL (n=201) (from 7.8 [1.54] g/dL to 9.2 [2.03] g/dL). Voxelotor treatment decreased haemolytic markers. Mean (SD) reticulocyte percentage and mean indirect bilirubin nadir decreased from baseline by 4.0% (6.16) and 1.2 (1.95) mg/dL, respectively, and remained decreased over the 12-month treatment period. 3. Benefit-risk balance The CHMP is of the view that the newly submitted data indicating a disbalance in the number of VOCs before and after initiation of treatment with Oxbryta in both registry-based studies raises serious safety concerns. The limitations to the interpretation of these data are acknowledged. It is noted that a summary of deaths from the registry studies is not yet available. In general, the studies data collection and analysis is continuing. Overall, in the context of the imbalance of deaths between voxelotor and placebo in study GBT 440032, and of the higher number of deaths than anticipated in study GBT440-042, the emerging information increase the concerns on the risks associated with Oxbryta. Incomplete information is available at this stage and the impact of the emerging data still needs to be assessed in detail. However, given the growing concerns on the risks associated to Oxbryta, the CHMP temporarily recommends, as a precaution while the review continues, that patients should no longer be treated with Oxbryta. Therefore, the CHMP recommends, as a temporary measure, the suspension of the marketing authorisation for Oxbryta. The CHMP also recommends that the marketing and the supply of Oxbryta (voxelotor) be suspended in all concerned EU Member States as well as the recall of all batches available on the EU market up to the level of pharmacies and hospital. Physicians should continue to monitor patients for adverse events after their treatment with Oxbryta is discontinued and ensure appropriate follow-up as needed as possible complications when treatment is interrupted abruptly cannot be excluded, but neither efficacy nor a dose for gradual discontinuation have been established. The MAH should liaise with the concerned MS to discuss modalities of the batch recall and management of patients currently on treatment. The above temporary measures should be communicated to HCPs via a dedicated letter. These temporary measures are without prejudice to the final conclusions of the ongoing procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. Medicinal product temporarily suspe

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## 4. Summary of new activities and measures

## 4.1. Temporary measures

Given the new available information on 24 September 2024, the CHMP considered that temporary measures are needed and recommended that the marketing authorisation of Oxbryta be suspended forthwith in the EU awaiting the adoption of the final measures. 4.2. Direct Healthcare Professional Communications and Communication plan The Committee adopted the wording of a DHPC, to inform HCP of the temporary suspension of the marketing authorisation of Oxbryta. The Committee also agreed on a communication plan. 5. Grounds for Opinion Whereas, · The CHMP considered the procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, in particular regarding the need for provisional measures in accordance with Article 20(3) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 for Oxbryta (voxelotor) taking into account the grounds set out in Articles 116 of Directive 2001/83/EC. · The CHMP considered the newly available data submitted by the MAH, including results from two registry-based studies suggesting an imbalance in the number of vaso-occlusive crisis before and after initiation of treatment with Oxbryta. · In the context of the imbalance of deaths between voxelotor and placebo in study GBT 440032, and of the higher number of death than anticipated in study GBT440- 042, the CHMP considered that overall, the newly emerging data raise serious safety concerns and increase the concerns on the risks associated Oxbryta. · Therefore, given the growing concerns on the risks associated to Oxbryta, the CHMP temporarily recommends, as a precaution while the review continues, that patients should no longer be treated with Oxbryta. The Committee, as a consequence of the above described uncertainty, considers that the benefit-risk balance of Oxbryta (voxelotor) is currently not favourable. The Committee therefore recommends, as a temporary measure, the suspension of the marketing authorisation for Oxbryta (voxelotor) until a definitive decision is adopted in the context of this Article 20 procedure. Therefore, pursuant to Article 117 of Directive 2001/83/EC, the Committee also recommends that the marketing and the supply of Oxbryta (voxelotor) be suspended in all concerned EU Member States as well as the recall of all batches available on the EU market up to the level of pharmacies and hospital. This recommendation is without prejudice to the final conclusions of the ongoing procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. Medicinal product temporarily suspe