---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:50:29
document_pages: 41
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/acomplia-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: acomplia-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 20.4576074
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-30 02:00:51.875076
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1/41 © EMEA 2006 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION 1. Introduction Obesity  is  a  chronic  and  highly  prevalent  illness  which  is  frequently  associated  with  numerous  and sometimes  fatal  diseases.  It  is  a  complex  disease  of  multifaceted  aetiology  (including  environmental factors and genetic predisposition), with its own disabling capacities, pathophysiology and comorbidities. Some  of  the  complications  of  obesity  include  type  2  diabetes  mellitus,  dyslipidaemia,  cardiovascular disease, arthritis and cancer. Non-pharmacological options for treatment include nutritional education and modification (usually caloric restriction), behaviour modification, and increased exercise. In severe obesity, very low caloric diets and surgery  may  be  used.  Pharmacological  options  are  only  considered  as  an  adjunct  to  dietary  measures. There are a few antiobesity agents available. They can be divided into centrally acting anoretic agents and drugs that inhibit the absorption of nutrients. There are numerous symptomatic treatments of the metabolic complications of obesity (antihypertensive drugs, hypolipedemic agents, antidiabetic drugs). Smoking is a well-known risk factor for the development of cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and lung-cancer and therefore represents a major public health concern. Approximately 1.3 billion people currently smoke worldwide and smoking is estimated to be responsible for 4.9 million premature deaths each year, a figure expected to nearly double by 2020. Many people have difficulty with quitting, nicotine dependency being strong. In addition to counselling programs, there are several options for pharmacotherapeutic intervention: nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), and bupropion (Zyban®). The latter, originally developed as antidepressant, is a noradrenalin, dopamine, serotonin reuptake  inhibitor  and  a  non-competitive  nicotine  receptor  antagonist.  Both  are  marketed  as  an  aid  to smoking  cessation,  and  have  an  efficacy  rate  of  approximately  20-30%  abstinence  at  an  average  of  3 months treatment. Rimonabant  is  a  selective  antagonist  of  cannabinoid  type  1  (CB1)  receptor.  Rimonabant  is  the  first member  of  a  new  class  of  compounds  that  target  a  novel  physiological  system,  the  endocannabinoid system (ECS). The cannabinoid system has been shown to be involved in the central regulation of food intake and the central nervous system (CNS) reward system. CB1 receptors were first found in the brain, and later in several human tissues, including adipocytes. The  proposed  indications  for  rimonabant  were:  Management  of  multiple  cardiovascular  risk  factors, weight management, type 2 diabetes, dyslipidaemia, smoking cessation and maintenance of abstinence. In adults, the recommended dosage is one rimonabant 20 mg tablet daily to be taken in the morning before breakfast. Rimonabant has not been studied in patients less than 18 years old. This application was a complete and independent application concerning a new active substance according to article 8.3 (i) of Directive 2001/83/EC. 2. Quality aspects Introduction ACOMPLIA  is  presented  as  film-coated  tablets  containing  20mg  rimonabant  INN.  The  product  is packaged  in  PVC-aluminium  blisters  and  in  HPDE  bottles  closed  with  a  child-resistant  tamper-proof polypropylene screw cap. Active Substance

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2/41 © EMEA 2006 Rimonabant is a fine powder, white to practically white. Two different polymorphic forms (1 and 2) have been  identified  during  development.  Form  1  has  been  used  from  the  beginning  of  the  pharmaceutical development to the end of Phase 3 clinical studies. Form 2, identified after the start of Phase 3 studies, was selected for product development. The two forms have very similar physico-chemical characteristics. As  rimonabant  is  practically  insoluble  in  water,  the  drug  substance  has  been  micronized  to  increase particle surface area and thus, facilitate dissolution, and to ensure blend homogeneity during drug product manufacture. · Manufacture The  quality  information  in  Module  3  of  the  dossier  has  been  supplemented  by  detailed  confidential information  on  the  synthesis  of  rimonabant  in  the  Restricted  Part  of  an  active  substance  master  file (EDMF, ASMF ). Acceptable specifications on starting materials, intermediate, solvent and reagents have been presented (in the restricted part). The submitted data are considered to be acceptable. Process impurities originating from each of the starting materials and from synthesis have been adequately discussed. Organic impurities have been synthesised and characterised by spectroscopy. The presence or absence of impurities has been examined by spectroscopy and/or chromatography in all batches, including those used in toxicology and clinical studies. Crystallisation studies confirm that polymorphic form 2 is routinely produced by the synthesis. · Specification The specification includes relevant tests for assay (HPLC) related impurities, residual solvents, etc. In addition, the particle size distribution is also specified (laser granulometry). The final  specification  for  rimonabant  is  based  on  batch  analyses  for  three  consecutive  industrial  scale batches, several toxicological and clinical batches, and stability data. The analytical methodology has been validated to meet the requirements of the ICH guideline Q2B, Validation of Analytical Procedures. · Stability Data from primary stability studies in the solid state demonstrate that under stress condition, rimonabant is stable  to  high  temperature  and/or  humidity,  but  is  very  slightly  sensitive  to  intense  light.  In  hydroalcoholic mixture, rimonabant is stable at 80 ºC, but is sensitive to light and to oxidants. Three pilot scaled batches of form 2 have been stored in the proposed packaging for routine storage for at least 12 months at 30°C/65% RH and 6 months at 40°C/75% RH. No significant changes in the results of the routine tests for appearance, water content, related substance, assay and polymorphic form were observed for any of the batches for the reported duration of storage up to 12 months and 6 months respectively. There is no significant formation of impurities The assay results remain within specification and X-Ray studies indicate there is no change of the polymorphic form. The proposed re-test period of 24 months is considered to be acceptable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3/41 © EMEA 2006 Medicinal Product · Pharmaceutical Development The development of the finished product has been well performed and explained and is satisfactory. The permeability of the drug substance has been determined in Caco-2 cells at pH 6.5 and is found to be high.  Rimonabant is  therefore  classified  as  a  Class  2  substance  considering  solubility  and  permeability properties, according to the Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS). However, considering the low solubility, both particle size and physical form are controlled. The excipients are commonly used in medicinal products for oral use. Also the packagings are usual and suitable for the product. The  phase  2B  and  phase  3  clinical  studies  were  performed  with  capsules  containing  Rimonabant polymorphic form 1, whereas the commercial product is a tablet containing rimonabant polymorphic form 2.  These  differences  in  dosage  form  and  polymorphic  form  have  been  explained  and  justified  with 'bridging' bioequivalence studies. The bioequivalence studies demonstrated that there is bioequivalence between  the  film-coated  tablets  intended  for  marketing  and  the  hard  capsules  used  in  Phase  3  studies, independent of polymorphic form or solid dosage form when the dissolution profiles in pH 6.2 are similar. In addition, during further development the colour of the coating changed from blue (indigotoxin) to white (titanium dioxide). The tablets cores remained identical and, except for the dye, the coating formulation also remained the same. These differences are considered to be minor and of no clinical significance in the satisfactory performance of the marketed product. · Manufacture of the Product A standard process of wet granulation is used. This has been validated and optimised with regard to a number of variables. · Product Specification The  release  specification  includes  relevant  tests  with  validated  methods  and  limits  for  appearance  and identification, assay ( HPLC ), uniformity of content, degradation products, dissolution, microbiological purity etc. The shelflife specification is identical with regard to assay ( no change ). Batch analyses confirm the satisfactory uniformity of the product and indicate the manufacturing process is under control. · Stability of the Product The tablets intended to be marketed have been studied at 30°C/65 % RH and 40°C/75 % RH. In addition, results from studies on prototype formulations not intended for the market have been used as supportive data. No significant changes in the results of the routine tests for characters, dissolution, assay and degradation products were observed for any of the batches for the reported duration of storage. The tablets were also evaluated for their photostability according to ICH Q1B. The results of this study conducted under intense light demonstrate that the product is stable: No degradation products are formed, and dissolution is unaffected. In general the results support the shelflife and storage conditions as defined in the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 4/41 © EMEA 2006 Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects In  general  satisfactory  documentation  has  been  provided  to  confirm  the  acceptable  quality  of  this medicinal  product,  and  no  major  objections  have  been  raised  during  evaluation.  The  drug  substance  is adequately  characterized  and  the  specification  is  acceptable  in  view  of  the  route  of  synthesis  and  the various ICH guidelines. The solid drug substance is stable with respect to degradation. Concerning  the  finished  product,  the  release  specification  and  in-process  controls  guarantee  consistent control of the product quality. The drug product is stable with respect to degradation. 3. Non-clinical aspects Introduction Pivotal toxicology studies were performed according to GLP. External reviews of histopathological data were  not  always  performed  according  to  GLP.  The  safety  pharmacology  studies  (conducted  prior  to guideline publication) were not conducted under formal GLP guidelines; the supplemental studies on vital functions were conducted according to GLP regulations. Pharmacology Rimonabant is a selective CB1 antagonist. At  present,  two  types  of  cannabinoid  receptors  have  been  characterized,  CB1  and  CB2.  CB1  is  widely distributed in the CNS with high concentrations in the basal ganglia, hippocampus, cerebellum, and parts of the limbic system. CB1 is believed to modulate the 'motivation/reward' system in the brain and to be involved  in  the  regulation  of  appetite  and  drug  addiction.  There  is  evidence  that  CB1  is  expressed peripherally, particularly on adipocytes, and that this receptor subtype may be involved in the regulation of lipolysis. Much less is known about CB2; this receptor subtype is expressed in lymphoid tissues but its function is currently unknown. Interaction of cannabinoids with other receptor types than CB1/CB2 have also been reported and it has been speculated that such 'non-classical' cannabinoid receptors may play a role for the physiological effects of endocannabinoids and other cannabinoid derivatives. · Primary pharmacodynamics Binding studies demonstrated that rimonabant is a potent (pKi 8.4) and selective ligand for CB1 receptors. It  had  a  weak  affinity  to  Galanin 2,  MC5,  opioid κ ,  and  PCP  receptors.  Similarly,  in  enzyme  interaction experiments with a variety of enzymes, rimonabant was found to activate COX1 at 10 µM; no activation was seen at 1 µM. Functional in vitro studies confirmed its potent (pA2 7.98 - 8.85) and selective CB1 receptor antagonistic activity. Intraperitoneal administration of rimonabant reversed the inhibition of the isoniazid-induced increase in cerebral cGMP levels produced by cannabinoid agonist WIN55212-2 (ID50 value of 0.3 mg/kg), without affecting  basal  cGMP  levels.  Turning  behaviour  in  mice  induced  by  unilateral  intrastriatal  injection  of WIN55212-2 was dose-dependently antagonized by rimonabant after oral or intraperitoneal administration (ID50  values  of  0.22  mg/kg  and  0.12  mg/kg,  respectively).  WIN55212-2-induced  hypothermia  and psychomotor effects in mice and rats, including ring-immobility and \"pop-corn\" effects in mice and barrel rotation in rats, were potently and dose-dependently antagonized by rimonabant (administered either i.p. or  p.o.;  with  ID50  values  ranging  from  0.2  to  1.7  mg/kg).  The  antagonism  of  WIN55212-2-induced hypothermia in mice by rimonabant (2.78 mg/kg, p.o.) was long-lasting.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised 5/41 © EMEA 2006 In  models  for  obesity,  oral  administration  of  rimonabant  (1  and  3  mg/kg)  caused  a  long-lasting  and selective inhibition in sucrose drinking (75 and 70 %, respectively) and eating of a cane-sugar enriched (carbohydrate) diet. Repeated oral administration of rimonabant (3 mg/kg/day; for 12 days) also reduced the  intake  of  the  preferred  high-fat  diet  (37  %)  and  the  total  energy  intake  in  obese  rats  (by  30%).  A marked decrease in body weight gain (93 %) was found in obese rats after 3 mg/kg/day of rimonabant. Similar (but less marked) effects were found in lean rats. The weight reducing effect of rimonabant (72 % after  10  mg/kg/day  for  4  weeks  in  obese  rats)  was  partly  dependent  on  peripheral  metabolic  effects, possibly  mediated  by  an  increase  in  adiponectin  secretion  from  the  adipocytes.  Rimonabant  (10 mg/kg/day) also reduced known risk factors associated with obesity, including reduction of elevated levels of  serum  leptin  (81  %),  insulin  (78  %),  glucose  (67  %)  and  restoring  the  lipid  profiles  (triglycerides, cholesterol, HDLc / LDLc ratio). Rimonabant  reduced  nicotine  self-administration  at  0.3  mg/kg  and  cue-induced  nicotine  seeking  at  1 mg/kg  in  the  self-administration  paradigm  and  at  3  mg/kg  in  the  conditioned  place  preference  test  in several animal models. · Secondary pharmacodynamics The anxiolytic and antidepressant effects of rimonabant were assessed after a single oral administration at doses ranging from 10 to 100 mg/kg in male mice, using a battery of five tests. Rimonabant increased significantly the number of shocks (0.3 mg/kg) in the punished drinking test, as did diazepam (3 mg/kg). Rimonabant significantly increased percentage of time spent into open arms at 10 mg/kg in the elevated plus-maze test  and  did  not  affect  the  number  of  entries  into  closed  arms;  diazepam  produced  a  similar effect at 3 mg/kg. Rimonabant significantly decreased immobility time from 3 mg/kg, p.o. in the forcedswimming test; fluoxetine produced a similar effect at 30 mg/kg. Finally, rimonabant slightly enhanced the sexual motivation of sexually naïve male rats but did not globally modify the copulatory behaviour of sexually experienced male rats. · Safety pharmacology programme Effects on the CNS (mouse, single oral dose) were particularly noted at dose levels ≥ 30 mg/kg. Single oral  administration  of  rimonabant  produced  an  increase  in  global  activity  followed  by  sedation  and decreased body weight. These effects were more marked at 100 mg/kg, and associated at this dose level with  decreased  muscle  tone  and  impaired  motor  coordination.  A  decrease  in  body  temperature  and  in spontaneous motor activity was also observed at 30 mg/kg. Rimonabant  did  not  modify  the  threshold  dose  of  pentylenetetrazole  required  to  produce  clonic convulsions,  but  showed  a  non-dose  related  propensity  to  potentiate  tonic  convulsive  activity  at  dose levels ≥ 10 mg/kg in mice and increased mortality from 30 mg/kg. In view of these findings and of the convulsions observed in the toxicology studies with mice, rats and monkeys, the applicant was requested to study more in depth the proconvulsive activity of rimonabant. The results described in the literature and obtained by the applicant indicated a proconvulsant potential for rimonabant in animals when combined with  physical  or  chemical  seizures  inducers,  or  with  stressful  conditions.  Rimonabant  had  no  effect  on neuronal excitability in animals when administered alone. According to literature data, this proconvulsant effect was likely to be related to the blockade of an existing endogenous cannabinoid tone. EEG-data did not indicate any abnormality. Other safety pharmacology studies suggested that at the dose-levels tested, rimonabant did not produce any major  adverse effects on the cardiovascular, respiratory, renal and  gastrointestinal systems. Electrophysiology  findings  included  inhibition  of  the  I Kr  channel  in  CHO  cells  transfected  with  hERG (IC50 = 2.79 µM) and a prolongation of the action potential in isolated rabbit Purkinje fibres at 3 µM and higher. However, no QT prolongation or other ECG changes were seen in anaesthetised dogs after doses up to 100 mg/kg, i.d.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 6/41 © EMEA 2006 · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No non-clinical studies on pharmacodynamic drug interactions were carried out. Pharmacokinetics The metabolic fate and disposition of rimonabant were assessed in five animal species, i.e., mouse, rat, rabbit,  dog,  and  macaque.  Rimonabant  was  rapidly  absorbed  following  oral  administration,  with  peak concentrations  occurring  generally  within  1  to  3  h  after  dosing  in  rats,  dogs,  and  macaques.  Oral bioavailability was low to moderate (12% in male rats, 46% in female rats, 18% in male macaques); this was due to extensive first pass metabolism. Rimonabant exposure increased in a dose-related manner in animals. A sex related difference in rats was noted; where female rats had higher rimonabant plasma levels than males, which was attributed to higher metabolism in males. Steady state pharmacokinetics generally occurred within 1 week during once-daily dosing. The apparent volume of distribution of rimonabant following intravenous administration was larger than the total body water (0.7 L/kg) in rats (11.5 L/kg) and macaques (24.4 L/kg). Extensive tissue distribution of radioactivity was noted in rats, with transfer of radioactivity across the blood-brain barrier and also to the  embryo and fetus across the placenta. The tissues with the greatest uptake were the liver, adrenals, brown fat,  kidneys,  lymph  nodes;  more  than  3-  fold  accumulation  following  repeated  once-daily  doses was noted in the thyroid, spleen, plasma, thymus, liver, and brain. There was no uptake or retention in pigmented tissue (eye-melanin) of rats. Rimonabant was bound very extensively (up to 100%) to animal and human plasma proteins in vitro and did not distribute extensively into red blood cells. The extensive distribution  in  vivo  in  spite  of  the  high  plasma  protein  binding  indicated  a  higher  affinity  of  the  drugrelated material to tissues compared to plasma. In  all  species,  the  metabolic  pathways  for  rimonabant  involved  amidohydrolysis,  multistep  oxidative metabolism  on  the  piperidine  moiety,  and  further  glucuronidation  of  the  acid  and  hydroxy  phase  1 metabolites. In plasma, SR141715-metabolite was the predominant metabolite in humans, mice, rats, and macaques. Since the formation of this metabolite was accompanied by the formation of N-aminopiperidine (NAP), a metabolite with genotoxic structural alert, further clarification on the formation and metabolism of this compound was requested by the CHMP during the procedure. In summary, the NAP-exposure after a  therapeutic  dose  of  rimonabant  (20  mg/day)  was  estimated  to  be  about  240  µg  of  NAP  per  day;  the estimated exposures to NAP in rats and mice suggested that there were large margins to human exposure in  the  carcinogenicity  studies  (about  140-5000  in  rats  and  150-780  in  mice,  depending  on  gender  and dose);  there  were  no  liver  tumours  in  the  mouse  carcinogenicity  study  or  in  male  rats,  and  the  liver adenomas found in female rats could be explained by other mechanisms. These findings were reassuring. The  applicant  committed  to  further  clarify  the  metabolic  fate  of  NAP  as  a  post-approval  follow-up measure. Rimonabant had a long terminal half-life in rats (7.3 h) and macaques (20 h) and a medium clearance in both species (~1 L/h/kg). Rimonabant and its metabolites were mainly excreted in the faeces (&gt;70% of the radioactive dose) via bile, with only a small amount eliminated in urine in mice (&lt;2%), rats (&lt;1%), rabbits (7%), dogs (&lt;1%), and macaques (&lt;5%) after oral dosing. Rimonabant and/or its metabolite(s) were also excreted in the milk of the rats. Repeated administration of rimonabant resulted in an increased CYP2B (and to a lesser extent CYP1A, 2C, 2E and 3A) activity in mice and rats, but not in macaques. In vitro studies with human hepatocytes did not demonstrate induction of CYPIA1, IA2, IIA, IIIA. Toxicology

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 7/41 © EMEA 2006 · Single dose toxicity Acute toxicity studies were performed in both rats and mice using oral and intraperitoneal routes. In mice and rats, mortality occurred from day 4 or day 2 after oral or intraperitoneal administration, respectively. By the oral route, the observed maximum non-lethal doses were 1000 mg/kg in rats and female mice and 500  mg/kg  in  male  mice.  By  the  intraperitoneal  route,  the  observed  maximum  non-lethal  dose  was  60 mg/kg  in  both  species.  Both  mice  and  rats  showed  clinical  signs  evocative  of  health  deterioration (decubitus, prostration, decreased activity, weakness, piloerection, soiled urogenital area, nasal discharge); mice had clonic convulsions in the highest dose groups. · Repeat dose toxicity Repeat-dose toxicity studies were conducted orally by gavage in mice up to 13 weeks (maximum dose varying  from  60  to  500  mg/kg/day),  rats  up  to  6  months  (maximum  dose  varying  from  15  to  500 mg/kg/day),  dogs  up  to  3  months  (maximum  dose  varying  from  15  to  60  mg/kg/day)  and  cynomolgus monkey (macaque, Macaca fascicularis ) up to 1 year (maximum dose varying from 12 to 45 mg/kg/day). Following rimonabant administration, adverse clinical signs, which varied by species, were observed from 60  mg/kg/day in the  mouse (piloerection,  hunched  posture,  lethargy  with  partially  closed  eyes,  cold  to touch,  prostration,  convulsions),  from  6  and  40  mg/kg/day  in  the  female  and  male  rat,  respectively (thinness, dried blood on the muzzle, reddening and/or swelling around eyes and red exudates/lacrimation from  the  eyes,  soiled  urogenital  area,  piloerection,  dehydration,  hypotonia,  weakness,  loss  of  balance, prostration,  hyperesthesia,  hyperexcitability  and  clonic  convulsions),  from  1  mg/kg/day  in  the  rabbit (decreased defecation and urination), from 10 to 15 mg/kg/day in the dog (ptyalism from 5 mg/kg/day upwards;  tremors,  red  conjunctiva,  ataxia,  hypomotility,  aggressiveness  and  startling  movements)  and from 12 mg/kg/day in the macaque (decreased activity, weakness, somnolence, loss of balance, ataxia, prostration, decubitus, coma, tremors and clonic convulsions). Recovery from the adverse effects (clinical signs,  body  weight  changes  and  severely  decreased  food  consumption)  was  generally  observed  despite continuation of treatment. Mortality occurred at the highest doses tested and within the first few days or weeks of dosing. In rats, it occurred in males at dose levels ≥ 120 mg/kg/day or ≥ 250 mg/kg/day and in females from 60 mg/kg/day. In mice, treatment-related mortality was seen from 120 mg/kg/day. In rabbits, mortality occurred from 5 mg/kg/day. No deaths occurred in the 3-month study conducted in the dog at doses up to 15 mg/kg/day. In the  4-week  macaque study, 1 female treated at 45 mg/kg/day was found dead on day 7; the remaining macaques treated at this dose level were euthanized early in the study period due to their poor general health condition. No treatment-related mortality was observed in the 6-month and 1-year chronic studies conducted at dose levels up to 16 mg/kg/day or 12 mg/kg/day. CNS effects \"Hyperexcitability\"  was  reported  in  rodents  from  30  mg/kg/day:  hyperesthesia,  tactile  hyperesthesia  or hypersensitivity to touch, excessive scratching, hyperexcitability, hyperactivity, hypermotility, aggressiveness  and  combative  behaviour.  In  dogs,  at  15  mg/kg/day,  aggressiveness  and  startling movements were noted. Convulsions lasting a few minutes were seen in mice, rats and monkeys. In mice, convulsions  were  observed  from  60  mg/kg/day,  in  rats  from  6  mg/kg/day  in  females  and  from  40 mg/kg/day in males, in macaques from 12 mg/kg/day. Rimonabant exhibited a non dose-related propensity to  potentiate  pentylenetetrazole-induced  tonic  convulsions  in  mice  at  dose  levels ≥ 10  mg/kg.  Thus, rimonabant  may  have  some  potential  to  produce  adverse  neurological  effects;  convulsions  occurred  at systemic exposures below (male rat), similar (female rat) or 2-3 fold (mouse, monkey) human therapeutic systemic exposure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 8/41 © EMEA 2006 In  CD-1  mice  treatment  with  rimonabant  was  dose-dependently  associated  with  neuropil  vacuolation, most  notably  in  cortical  areas,  the  hippocampus  and  septal  nuclei.  This  was  not  observed  in  rats  or cynomolgus  monkeys,  and  in  dogs  the  finding  was  not  clear.  In  mice,  neuropil  vacuolation  was accompanied  by  dose-related  increased  glial  fibrillary  acidic  protein  (GFAP)  immunoreactivity  (i.e. reactive  astrocytes  indicative  of  neuronal  damage)  immunostaining.  Applicant  was  requested  by  the CHMP to further clarify this issue during the procedure; however, the finding remained unexplained. Yet, the  lack  of  any  other  signs  indicating  a  neuropathological process in rats, dogs and monkeys, despite a reasonable effort to investigate this, largely diminished the concern regarding the GFAP signal in mice. Skin abnormalities An increased incidence of depilated skin areas, variously recorded as hair loss or alopecia, was observed in treated rats. In the one-year cynomolgus monkey study an increased incidence of hair loss was observed in the high dose males. Bone marrow and haematology In  rats,  an  increase  in  the  incidence  of  fatty  involution  of  the  bone  marrow  was  observed  from  10 mg/kg/day in the 4-week studies. In macaques, \"acute changes\" described as oedema of the bone marrow were observed in most of the animals given 15 and 45 mg/kg/day. In dogs, a slight increase in the degree of  fatty  involution  was  observed at dose levels close to the maximum tolerated dose. No changes were observed in the bone marrow in the 6-month study in rats up to 40 mg/kg/day, 6-month and 1-year studies in macaques up to 16 or 12 mg/kg/day, respectively. Immunotoxicity Despite the lack of functional changes in the immune system in a 4-week immunotoxicity study in rats and in  the  6-month  and  1-year  toxicity  studies  in  monkeys,  slight  haematological  changes,  including leucopenia  and  lymphopenia  in  monkeys  were  noted  in  various  toxicity  studies  at  clinically  relevant doses.  At  high  doses,  associated  with  health  deterioration,  other  effects  such  as  thymus  atrophy  and decreased spleen weight were also noted. Liver An  increase  in  liver  weight  and  size,  hypertrophy  of  centrilobular  hepatocytes  with  ground-glass appearance  of  the  cytoplasm  and  hyperplasia  of  the  smooth  endoplasmic  reticulum  of  hepatocytes  at electron  microscopy  were  observed  across  rodent  studies  (rats  and  mice).  These  types  of  changes  are generally  considered  to  be  indicative  of  liver  enzyme  induction.  Micro-  and  macrovesicular  hepatocyte steatosis was also observed. Focal hepatocellular necrosis occurred slightly more frequently in male rats of the 40 mg/kg dosage group. Genital tract In  male  mice  and  rats  testis,  prostate,  seminal  vesicles  and  epidydimides  were  affected,  which  was probably  related  to  the  effects  of  rimonabant  on  prolactin  and  testosterone  levels,  as  discussed  under reproductive  toxicity  below.  In  female  rats,  a  reversible  increase  in  ovarian  (dose-related)  and  uterine relative weights were observed in females at the end of the 6-month study from 10 mg/kg/day or at 40 mg/kg/day, respectively. Other hormonal changes An increase in plasma ACTH concentrations in the six-month rat study at 40 mg/kg/day in females was seen; also relative weight of adrenals and corticosterone serum levels were increased. · Genotoxicity The genotoxicity of rimonabant was evaluated in vitro in an Ames test, DNA repair test, and in a gene mutation assay on mouse lymphoma cells, and the clastogenic potential in human lymphocytes and in vivo rat  micronucleus  test.  All  of  these  studies  gave  negative  results  with  the  exception  of  the  first  gene mutation assay in mouse lymphoma cells. In that study, a weak increase in mutation frequency and small

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Dependence

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 9/41 © EMEA 2006 colonies (reflecting chromosomal aberration) was observed in the presence of metabolic activation at 30 µM. This mutagenic effect was considered as not biologically relevant. · Carcinogenicity The oncogenic potential of rimonabant was assessed in mice and rats. No treatment-related proliferative findings were observed in the mouse with doses up to 60 mg/kg/day (maximum tested dose), or in the male rat up to 240 mg/kg/day. In female rat treatment-related neoplastic findings were observed from 20 mg/kg/day (mid-dose group) in the liver (increases in incidences of hepatocellular adenomas) and in the female  genital  tract  (increases  in  incidence  of  endometrial  polyps  and  endometrial  carcinomas  in  the uterus and squamous cell carcinomas in the cervix and uterus). The genital tract changes were most likely related  to  the  decreased  prolactin  levels  in  these  animals.  The  increased  incidences  of  hepatocellular hypertrophy, foci of cellular alteration and benign liver tumours in rats were considered to be adaptive changes  secondary  to  detoxification  and  metabolism  and  excretion  of  rimonabant.  With  respect  to  the occurrence  of  liver  adenomas,  there  was  no  safety  margin  for  human  therapeutic  exposure.  Adenomas might have been a consequence of enzyme induction and the subsequent liver hypertrophy as well, and were regarded as rodent-specific. Several other tumour and non-tumour findings supported the probability of a hormonal imbalance. · Reproduction Toxicity The effect of rimonabant on fertility and early embryonic development was assessed in male and female rats  and in  female rabbits. In male rats, fertility was not affected up to 50 mg/kg/day. At higher doses, there was a decrease in the weight of the testis, prostate, seminal vesicles and epididymal fat pad and a decrease  in  the  motility  of  the  spermatozoa.  These  changes  on  the  male  reproduction  system  were attributed  to  reversible  decreases  in  testosterone  and  prolactin  concentrations  in  serum,  since  both hormones  play  a  major  role  on  spermatogenesis.  These  changes  fully  or  partially  recovered  despite continuation of dosing by day 91, and were completely reversed 2 weeks or 4 months after cessation of treatment.  In  rabbits  no  adverse  effects  on  the  female  reproductive  system  were  seen.  In  female  rats (dosing  for  2  weeks  prior  to  mating),  rimonabant  decreased  the  number  of  corpora  lutea  and  fertility index, and caused abnormal oestrous cyclicity. The effects on female fertility were attributed to decrease in prolactin concentration in serum due to rimonabant treatment. In pre/postnatal studies, there was no evidence of rimonabant-induced developmental toxicity at doses up to 20 mg/kg/day in rats and up to 5 mg/kg/day in rabbits. In rats, increases in litter loss were seen at 10 mg/kg/day and an increased number of pups found dead before weaning was seen at maternal doses of 3 and 10 mg/kg/day. In the developmental toxicity studies in rabbits, maternal toxicity was seen at doses 5 and  10mg/kg/day;  developmental  toxicity  was  seen  at  10  mg/kg/day  as  decreased  litter  size,  increased post-implantation loss, decreased foetal body weight, and increased malformations (anencephaly, microophthalmia and widened ventricles, omphalocele). Rimonabant was transferred across the placenta and secreted in  milk in rats;  it  may  have  inhibited  the suckling reflex. Use of rimonabant is contraindicated during lactation (SPC 4.3 and 4.6); it should not be used during pregnancy (SPC 4.6). · Local tolerance Rimonabant was not irritating to the skin and eye in the rabbit and was not phototoxic or photoallergic in the guinea pig. · Other toxicity studies Rimonabant  did  not  display  reinforcing  properties,  but  rather  interfered  with  the  establishment  and maintenance  of  the  reinforcing  process  of  compounds  with  dependence  potential.  Besides  studies demonstrating precipitation of cannabinoid withdrawal, no specific studies on withdrawal were performed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised 10/41 © EMEA 2006 The absence of appearance of clinical signs in toxicology studies with a recovery period indicated that rimonabant had no potential to produce a withdrawal syndrome. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment Rimonabant is poorly soluble in water but is, nevertheless, expected to partition into the organic phase of waste  water  and  migrate  to  the  aquatic  part  of  the  environment.  Environmental  effects  testing  for rimonabant was performed using established models in algae ( Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata ), zooplankton  ( Daphnia  magna ),  rainbow  trout  ( Oncorhynchus  mykiss ),  and  activated  sludge  respiration inhibition. Using the results from most sensitive organism (rainbow trout), a PNEC-value of 0.048 µg/litre was calculated. Using the forecast estimates by the applicant, the PECsurface water was calculated to be 0.026 µg/litre. The applicant was requested to carry out additional studies to further characterise the impact of rimonabant on the environment; these will be done as post-approval follow-up measures. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects The pharmacological studies adequately characterised the properties and principal primary and secondary effects of rimonabant, as well as potential harmful effects on essential organ systems. Receptor binding and functional studies in several in vitro and in vivo models demonstrated that rimonabant is a selective CB1  antagonist.  Several  animal  models  demonstrated  the  potential  usefulness  of  rimonabant  for  the treatment  of  obesity-related  conditions  (and  nicotine  addiction).  The  safety  pharmacology  studies identified  the  CNS  and  cardiac  electrophysiology  as  possible  targets  for  rimonabant  with  regard  to potential  adverse  effects  in  man.  Effects  on  the  CNS  after  a  single  oral  dose  comprised  sedation  and decreased  muscle  tone.  A  proconvulsant  potential  for  rimonabant  was  seen  in  animals  when  combined with  physical  or  chemical  seizure  inducers,  or  with  stressful  conditions;  this  proconvulsant  effect  was likely  to  be  related  to  the  blockade  of  an  existing  endogenous  cannabinoid  tone.  Despite  some electrophysiological findings, the non-clinical results raised no concerns that rimonabant could increase the risk of torsade-de-points or other cardiac arrhythmias at therapeutic doses in humans. The  results  of  the  pharmacokinetic  studies  revealed  a  consistent  picture  across  the  species  of  the absorption,  distribution,  metabolism,  and  excretion  of  rimonabant:  rapid  oral  absorption,  a  low  to moderate  bioavailability,  wide  distribution  (passes  the  blood-brain  barrier  and  placenta),  high  protein binding, extensive metabolism (major metabolites are the same in all studied species, including humans), all metabolites observed in humans were present in at least one animal species, long terminal half-life with bile/ faeces being the major excretory pathway, excreted in milk. One of the major metabolic pathways was hydrolysis of the amide bond that binds the piperidine ring to the  rest  of  the  rimonabant  molecule,  producing  the  metabolite  SR141715,  which  could,  theoretically, release  the  piperidyl  radical  as  N-aminopiperidine  (NAP)  in  equimolar  amounts.  This  compound  is mutagenic in bacteria and may have other genotoxic properties. The applicant calculated that appreciable amounts of NAP was expected to be produced; no additional data about the metabolic fate of NAP was presented. Thus, precise estimate of the risk for humans could not be made but the risk was most likely very low, due to the large exposure margins and absence of tumour findings in the mouse and male rat. The applicant committed to provide additional data on the issue as a post-approval follow-up measure. The results of the toxicology studies were consistent across species. Reduced weight gain or weight loss and sometimes decreased food consumption were seen at low doses of rimonabant in all species. These findings were likely to be due to a combination of the compound's pharmacological effect and a general health  deterioration.  At  higher  doses,  detrimental  effects  on  the  CNS,  with  clonic  convulsions  as  a hallmark,  was  the  dominant  clinical  finding.  Particularly  in  the  macaques,  this  clinical  picture  was aggravated by fulminant stress reactions that could be lethal. These serious clinical symptoms prompted a reduction of the dose levels in the later studies, especially for the monkeys. There were no apparent signs of  a  worsening  with  longer  treatment  times;  on  the  contrary  the  clinical  symptoms  tended  to  be  worst

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 11/41 © EMEA 2006 during  the  first  few  weeks  and  declined  thereafter.  Mortality,  generally  in  conjunction  with  signs  of overall  health  deterioration,  malnutrition  and  stress,  occurred  at  higher  doses  (mice  and  rats ≥ 120 mg/kg/d, macaques ≥ 45 mg/kg/d). In contrast, 'classical' toxicological findings were sparse. There were signs of involvement of the liver, kidneys and bone marrow, but none of these provided clear-cut evidence of a direct toxicity of rimonabant. The toxic profile of rimonabant was not fully characterized as the highest exposures to rimonabant in the non-clinical safety studies were similar to the expected exposure in humans after the therapeutic dose. The highest doses used in the long-term studies corresponded to about 2-3 times higher exposures in rats and 1.5  times  in  macaques;  testing  of  higher  doses  was  not  feasible.  Thus,  the  non-clinical  studies  could provide  no  reassurance  regarding  margins  to  the  clinical  exposure.  Consequently,  the  safe  use  of rimonabant  has  to  rely  more  on  the  clinical  safety  data  and  on  the  post-approval  pharmacovigilance programme. No signs of genotoxicity were observed in a standard in vitro package or in a mouse micronucleus test. However, the applicant committed to further clarify the bioactivation of N-aminopiperidine. The tumour findings in the liver and female genital tract found in the long term rat study were considered to  be  species  specific  and  due  to  enzyme  induction  and  chronic  hormonal  imbalance  with  oestrogen stimulation, respectively. Consequently, these tumours should not imply an increased risk for humans. The most remarkable effects in the reproductive toxicity package were decreased viability index and pup growth  pre-weaning,  in  conjunction  with  an  increased  incidence  of  no  milk  in  the  stomach;  the mechanism(s) of these effects was not clear, but could be related to an effect on the suckling reflex. There were  malformations  in  the  rabbit  embryo-foetal  development  studies  (omphalocele  and  various  CNSmalformations) that could be due to rimonabant. Moreover, it is known that CB1 is expressed in many parts of the developing brain and that the pattern changes during development. These findings resulted in a warning against the use of rimonabant during pregnancy and in a contraindication during lactation (SPC 4.3 and 4.6). The finding of neuropil vacuolation and increased GFAP staining in rimonabant treated mice, which could be a signal of underlying neuropathology, was diminished by the lack of other signs. Finally,  the  environmental  impact  of  rimonabant  needed  further  evaluation  and  additional  studies;  the applicant committed to carry out such studies as a post-approval follow-up measure. 4. Clinical aspects Introduction The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. Further, at the request of the CHMP, a GCP-inspection was carried out at two of the 60 investigational sites of study 'RIO-Europe' (at one investigator's site in Netherlands and one in Sweden). The results of the inspection of both investigator sites demonstrated, that the data produced by these sites were verifiable and reliable and in line with the data reported to the CHMP. The applicant has provided a statement to the effect that clinical trials conducted outside the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. Pharmacokinetics The Phase 1 clinical pharmacology program included 36 studies. In addition, two population PK analyses were  performed  using  sparse  data  from  a  large  number  of  patients  included  in  the  phase  III  studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 12/41 © EMEA 2006 Rimonabant  plasma  concentration  was  determined  by  a  LC/MS/MS  methods  in  main  PK  studies. Pharmacokinetic parameters were determined using non-compartmental models. Population pharmacokinetics analyses were conducted using WinNonmix and NONMEM. · Absorption Rimonabant was rapidly absorbed upon oral administration. The absorption rate was dose dependent and decreased  with  increased  dose.  Peak  plasma  concentration  (Cmax)  was  reached  about  2  hours  after administration  of  a  20  mg  dose.  The  absolute  bioavailability  was  not  determined.  Rimonabant  had  low solubility and high permeability. Rimonabant was not a substrate or inhibitor of P-gp. The pharmacokinetics were roughly dose proportional up to about 20 mg; the exposure thereafter increased less than in proportion to dose. During concomitant food intake Cmax increased by about 70% and AUC by 50%; the SPC recommends intake with breakfast in line with the conducted phase III studies. Steady state was reached after a median time of 13 days in healthy normal-weight volunteers. In obese patients median time to steady state was estimated to be 39 days, as a consequence of their higher volume of distribution and longer half-life. Bioequivalence  between  the  20  mg  tablet  applied  for  and  the  capsule  formulation  used  during  clinical development was demonstrated. · Distribution Rimonabant has not been administered intravenously to humans, and Vss was not determined. Data on V/F suggest extensive distribution. Rimonabant exhibited very high binding to plasma proteins (mean = 99.94%), mainly albumin. Due to the large volume of distribution, little impact was expected on interaction caused by protein displacement, in spite of the high protein binding of rimonabant. · Elimination Rimonabant  is  mainly  eliminated  by  metabolism  and  subsequent  biliary  excretion  of  metabolites.  The mean  terminal  half-life  of  rimonabant  was  about  10 days  in  healthy  (normal  weight)  subjects  but  was higher in obese subjects (16 days). The clearance (Cl/F) was approximately 5 L/h. Approximately 32% of administered  rimonabant  was  excreted  as  unchanged  drug  in  faeces,  probably  representing  unabsorbed drug. No unchanged rimonabant was found in urine. Approximately 3% of a 20 mg rimonabant dose was excreted in urine and about 61% of the dose was eliminated in faeces over 312 hours. When extrapolated to infinity about 90% of the total administered dose could be accounted for (86 % and 4% in faeces and urine,  respectively). In  vitro data  indicated  that  rimonabant  was  metabolized  by  CYP3A4  and in lesser extent amidohydrolase (predominantly hepatic) pathways with the fraction metabolized varying between 25% to 63%. The following metabolites of rimonabant were identified in humans: SR141715 (carboxylic acid  derivative  of  rimonabant),  SR142923  (hydroxy  derivative  on  the  piperidine  ring),  SR90161 (propionic  acid  derivative  of  SR142923),  glucuronidated  SR141715  (H3)  and  SR90161,  hydroxy unsaturated  or  lactam  derivative  of  rimonabant.  The  metabolites  identified  in  plasma  (SR141715, SR142923, and SR90161, representing 11%, 5%, and 8% of total plasma radioactivity, respectively) were inactive against human cloned CB1 receptors. No consequences of genetic polymorphism were expected, as rimonabant was not metabolized by CYP2D6, CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 isoenzymes. · Variability Inter-individual  variability  in  CL/F  was  44-46%  in  the  population  PK  studies.  Residual  variability (representing intra-individual variability) was 24% in POH0045. In crossover studies in healthy subjects, the inter-individual variability was 41% for Cmax and 53% for AUC and the within-subject variability was 29% for Cmax and 17% for AUC. · Special populations Two large population pharmacokinetic analyses and specific phase I studies were conducted evaluating the effect of age, gender, race, body size (body weight, body mass index, height), hepatic function, renal function and dose on rimonabant pharmacokinetics (PK).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 13/41 © EMEA 2006 The main factor influencing rimonabant exposure was race with Afro-Americans having higher clearance and hence lower exposure than Caucasians (43% lower AUC); this is reflected in SPC (5.2). Volume of distribution increases with weight resulting in longer half-life and subsequently longer time to steady state and  lower  fluctuations  at  steady  state.  Race,  other  than  Afro-Americans  or  gender  had  no  clinically relevant influence on rimonabant PK. AUC was estimated to be 27% higher in a 75 year old than in a 44 year  old.  However,  this  difference  is  of  limited  clinical  relevance.  There  were  no  data  in  children  or adolescents. The population pharmacokinetic analyses indicated that rimonabant pharmacokinetics were similar  between  healthy  non-smoking  subjects,  patients  who  smoke,  and  obese  patients.  The  applicant committed to provide additional safety data on other ethnic groups than Afro-Americans (in Japanese and Asiatic patients) as a post-approval follow-up measure. The influence of renal function on the PK of rimonabant was not evaluated in a specific study. Based on data  from  phase  III  studies,  AUC  was  estimated  to  be  40%  higher  in  patients  with  moderate  renal impairment  than  in  patients  with  normal  renal  function.  Data  were  too  sparse  to  draw  conclusions  in patients with severe renal impairment. Rimonabant should be used with caution in patients with moderate renal impairment and use is not recommended in patients with severe renal impairment (see SPC 4.4). The applicant committed to study PK in patients with severe renal impairment as a post-approval follow-up measure. A specific study  was conducted in subjects with mild and moderate hepatic impairment. There was no significant  difference  in  total  or  unbound  AUC  between  subjects  with  impaired  hepatic  function  and control subjects. A prolongation of half-life was observed, caused by an increased volume of distribution. There were no data in severe hepatic impairment. Rimonabant should be used with caution in moderate hepatic impairment. Use is not recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment (see SPC 4.4). · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies In vitro The  in  vitro  studies  suggested  a  low  potential  for  inhibition  or  induction  of  CYP450  isoenzymes  by rimonabant. It had mild inhibitory effect on CYP2C8. In vivo No  effect  of  rimonabant  (40  mg  o.d.  for  8  days)  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  the  CYP3A4  substrate midazolam (0.03 mg/kg single oral dose) was observed in study INT5006. No effect of rimonabant (40 mg o.d. for 8 days and 6 days continued after warfarin administration) on the pharmacokinetics of warfarin (30  mg  single  dose),  a  narrow  therapeutic  index  drug  and  a  CYP2C9  substrate,  was  observed  in  study INT3787. No effect of rimonabant (40 mg o.d. for 8 days) on the pharmacokinetics of digoxin (0.50 mg loading dose + 0.25 mg once-daily), a narrow therapeutic index drug and a P-gp substrate was observed in study  INT3786.  Study  INT4478  showed  that  rimonabant  (40  mg  o.d.  for  8  days)  did  not  affect  the pharmacokinetics of nicotine (21 mg once-daily). Study INT4738 showed that rimonabant (40 mg o.d. for 8  days)  did  not  affect  the  pharmacokinetics  of  oral  contraceptives  (0.03  mg  ethinylestradiol  +  0.15  mg levonorgestrel once-daily). Seven  days  of  treatment  with  a  daily  oral  dose  of  200  mg  ketoconazole  increased  Cmax,  AUC0-24h,  and AUCinf  of  rimonabant by 1.42 (90% C.I.: 1.18, 1.70), 1.55 (90% C.I.: 1.43, 1.68), and 2.04 (90% C.I.: 1.89, 2.23)-fold, respectively (study INT3785). A small but statistically significant difference between the t 1/2 values  of  rimonabant  with  and  without  ketoconazole  treatment  was  observed.  No  differences  were observed for the tmax after both treatments. Thus, caution is advised during combined treatment with potent CYP3A4 inhibitors (ketoconazole, itraconazole, ritonavir, telithromycin, clarithromycin and nefazodone). (See SPC 4.5).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

1

2

3

4

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 14/41 © EMEA 2006 In study INT3802 coadministration of 120 mg TID for 6 days of orlistat, a drug used in the management of obesity but no substrate or inhibitor of CYP enzymes, had a significant, but small, effect on mean Cmax (0.72-fold) of rimonabant (40 mg). None of the other pharmacokinetic parameters were affected. Coadministration of 500 mg TID of famciclovir, an antiviral drug, had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of  rimonabant  (40  mg)  (study  INT5501).  Famciclovir  is  metabolized  in  the  liver,  but  the  P450 cytochrome system is not involved. Pharmacodynamics · Mechanism of action Rimonabant is a selective antagonist of the cannabinoid type 1 (CB1) receptors in the CNS. At the level of the CNS, and in particular the mesolimbic system, the majority of data with regard to the cannabinoid receptors is derived from the therapeutic and recreational use of its primary ligand, cannabis. Cannabis induces psychotic features and psychosis at chronic use, and may even facilitate the first onset of schizophrenia 1 .  Cannabis  may  induce  anxiety  and  depression 2 ,  and  cognitive  impairment,  especially  of attention and memory 3 . On the contrary, decrease in the availability of dopamine in the CNS may cause depression,  and  is  one  of  the  basic  principles  behind  the  use  of  antidepressants.  Rimonabant  indirectly decreases dopamine release in different brain areas by blocking the CB1 receptor. The mode of action of rimonabant with regard to obesity is interference with feelings of hunger and satiety in the hypothalamic region. In addition it has effect on the peripheral adipocytes. The applicant suggested that in smoking cessation its mode of action is based on antagonism of CB1 receptors expressed in the mesolimbic dopamine system, a brain circuit that is involved in addictive behaviour; rimonabant would antagonize  nicotine-seeking  behaviour  in  animals,  through  blockade  of  dopamine  release  in  this  area, which is also referred to as the CNS reward system 4 . · Primary and Secondary pharmacology The pharmacodynamics of rimonabant was investigated in numerous separate studies (s ome examples are reported below). Study in obesity The  effects  of  7-day  repeated  doses  of  20  mg  rimonabant  on  hunger,  satiation,  satiety,  and  food consumption, compared with placebo, to explore the effect of rimonabant on hedonic ratings of sucrose alone  and  in  food  vehicle,  and  the  effects  of  rimonabant  on  food  consumption  were  studied.  Visual Analoque Scale (VAS) scores for hunger, recorded before self-selected meals, and cumulated over one week, were statistically significantly reduced with rimonabant when compared with placebo (p=0.0355). The  daily  caloric  intake  was  consistently  lower  (although  not  statistically  significant)  with  rimonabant compared  with  placebo.  A  reduction  in  subjects'  mean  body  weight  was  observed  following  7-day treatment  with  rimonabant  (-620  g);  the  difference  versus  placebo  (-720  g)  was  statistically  significant (p=0.008). There was no treatment effect observed on eating disorder inventory or Beck depression score. Antagonism of cannabis effects In  a  study  the  90  mg  dose  of  rimonabant  produced  inhibition  of  cannabis-induced  effects,  being statistically  significant  for  VAS  composite  score.  In  a  second  study,  rimonabant  at  both  doses  (90  mg Maki P et al. Predictors of schizophrenia-a review. Br Med Bull 2005; 73: 1-15. Raphael B et al. Comorbidity: cannabis and complexity. J Psychiatr Pract 2005; 11 (3): 161-176) Lundqvist T. Cognitive consequences of cannabis use: comparison with abuse of stimulants and heroin with regard to attention, memory and executive functions. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2005; 81: 319-330. Adinoff B. Neurobiologic processes in drug reward and addiction. Harv Rev Psychiatry 2004; 12: 305-320.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 15/41 © EMEA 2006 single doses, 40 mg repeated doses) inhibited cannabis induced heart rate increase. The results suggested that  rimonabant  could  attenuate  the  effects  of  smoked  cannabis;  since  rimonabant  did  not  affect  the pharmacokinetics  of  cannabis,  this  effect  was  considered  to  be  due  to  its  antagonistic  effects  on  CB1 receptors. Effects on cognitive functions The impact of rimonabant on cognitive function was assessed in various clinical pharmacology studies. The  overall  analysis  of  this  large  database  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  rimonabant  is  devoid  of  any significant  effect  on  cognitive  abilities,  and  in  particular  does  not  show  any  sedative  or  stimulant properties, even at high doses (300 mg single doses, 60 mg 21-day repeated doses) Electrophysiological effects Results from studies investigating effects on EEG showed that there were unspecific changes showing that rimonabant crossed the blood-brain barrier. The  effect  on  ECG  parameters  of  rimonabant  20  mg  and  60  mg  compared  to  placebo  and  with moxifloxacin 400 mg as a positive control was studied. There was no evidence that rimonabant prolonged ventricular repolarisation. There was no significant relationship between the QT changes from baseline as measured by the Holter method or from extracted ECGs and rimonabant plasma concentrations. PK/PD A relationship between weight decrease and concentration was shown. The variability in weight reduction was very large. The relationship between exposure and weight reduction was analysed in different PK/PD models. With a Hill model, Emax was estimated to be about 6.5 kg and AUC50 1530 ng·h/ml. With the exposure obtained with 20 mg q.d. (AUC 3800 ng·h/ml) a large part of the patients were at the flat part of the concentration response curve supporting the chosen dose. Clinical efficacy The  clinical  dossier  comprised  of  two  parts,  one  concerning  obesity  and  related  disorders  (Obesity program), and one concerning smoking cessation. These will be discussed separately. OBESITY In support of the efficacy of rimonabant in the treatment of obesity and related disorders six studies were submitted: 1 dose-ranging study (DRI3388; based on the results of this study the 5 mg and 20 mg doses were  selected  for  Phase  III  studies);  1  study  investigating  the  effect  of  40  mg  of  rimonabant  versus placebo  on  energy  expenditure  and  food  intake  (PDY3796);  4  adequate  and  well-controlled  Phase  III studies,  RIO-North  America  (EFC4743),  RIO-Europe  (EFC4733),  RIO-Lipids  (EFC4735),  and  RIODiabetes (EFC4736) were conducted to demonstrate the efficacy and safety of 2 doses of rimonabant 5 mg and  20  mg  versus  placebo.  This  clinical  development  program  was  designed  in  accordance  with  the clinical development guidelines of drugs in obesity, both in Europe and in the USA. · Dose response studies The PDY3796 study was as a double-blind, parallel group, placebo-controlled exploratory study of the effects  of  4-week  of  rimonabant  40  mg  daily  on  energy  expenditure  (primary  endpoint)  and  food consumption in 45 obese volunteers. The patients were not on a restrictive diet, and the pharmacodynamic activity  of  rimonabant  was  assessed  primarily  by  measuring  total  energy  expenditure  in  a  calorimetric chamber. Energy intake was measured at baseline and endpoint in buffet sessions and the amount of food consumed by the patients who were offered a cold buffet-like meal at noon. Compared with placebo, 40 mg rimonabant reduced the mean total energy intake and the mean energy intake from carbohydrate and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                  |                 | Placebo N, mean, (SD)   | SR 5 mg N, mean, (SD) SR 10 N,   | mg mean, (SD)   | SR 20 mg N, mean, (SD)   |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------|
| Mean Change (kg) | Week 16, EE pop | 40, -1.1 (2.7)          | 45, -3.4 (4.2)                   | 39, -3.7 (3.4)  | 51, -4.5 (3.6)           |
|                  | LOCF, ITT       | 70, -0.5 (3.7)          | 61, -2.5 (4.2)                   | 66, -2.7 (3.3)  | 68, -3.8 (3.7)           |
| Percent change   | Week 16, EE pop | 40, -1.2 (2.8)          | 45, -3.6 (4.2)                   | 39, -4.0 (3.5)  | 51, -4.8 (4.1)           |
|                  | LOCF, ITT       | 70, -0.6 (3.5)          | 61, -2.6 (4.3)                   | 66, -2.8 (3.3)  | 68, -4.0 (4.1)           |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 16/41 © EMEA 2006 fat. Body weight decreased by -4.3 ± 1.8 kg in the 40 mg group versus -1.7 ± 1.7 kg in the placebo group at week 6 follow-up visit. No significant difference in energy expenditure was seen between the treatment groups. The  DRI3388  study  was  the  principal  clinical  dose  ranging  study  in  treatment  of  obesity  and  was performed as  a  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study  evaluating  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  3  doses  of rimonabant  in  287  obese  patients  (30  kg/m 2 ≤ BMI ≤ 40  kg/m 2 )  over  16  weeks.  Patients  were  randomly allocated to 5, 10 or 20 mg/day of rimonabant or placebo after a 2-week single-blind placebo run-in period and a modest hypocaloric (-500 kcal/day) diet. The primary efficacy outcome was assessed by the mean change in body weight in both the intention-to-treat (ITT; 265 patients) and efficacy evaluable (EE) (175 patients) populations. The ITT corresponded to all patients who were randomised and took at least 1 dose of  study  medication:  The  EE  population  excluded  ITT  patients  who  had  1  or  more  major  protocol violations and those who failed to complete their prescribed dosing. A significant treatment effect of all doses of rimonabant was observed with 20-34% of patients on rimonabant losing ≥ 5% of their baseline body weight, compared with 7% in the placebo group (p = 0.0395 for 5 mg, 0.0045 for 10 mg, and p = 0.0001 for 20 mg, respectively); see Table 1 below. Table 1: Study DRI3388, weight reduction after 16 weeks of treatment, (rimonabant=SR) · Main studies METHODS Four  phase  III  clinical  trials  were  conducted  in  the  treatment  of  obesity  and  obesity-related  metabolic disorders. (See Table 2 below.) The studies  were  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  with  3  parallel  treatment  groups  (20  mg  or  5  mg  of rimonabant or placebo); they had the same primary endpoint and similar secondary endpoints (adapted to the  specific  population  recruited  in  a  given  study  and  the  tests  performed);  the  same  inclusion  and exclusion criteria were used (except for those to define specific populations); the scheduled visits were planned at the same time points.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Study                                                                      | Number of study centers                                                                          | Treatment arms                                                                                       | Number of patients entered/ completed         | Treatment Duration   | Diagnosis, Inclusion criteria                                                                                                                   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| EFC4743 RIO-North America Year 1                                           | 72 USA, Canada                                                                                   | Rimonabant 5 mg Rimonabant 20 mg Placebo                                                             | 1214/620 1219/673 607/309                     | 52 weeks             | BMI ≥ 30 kg/m² or BMI>27 kg/m² with hypertension a and/or dyslipidaemia b . Stable body weight. Dietary restrictions. Type 2 diabetes excluded. |
| Year 2 Re-randomisation of active treatment groups to same dose or placebo | Year 2 Re-randomisation of active treatment groups to same dose or placebo                       | Rimonabant 5 mg/Placebo Rimonabant 5/5 mg Rimonabant20mg/Placebo Rimonabant 20/20 mg Placebo/Placebo | 300/210 300/215 326/225 333/257 298/214       | 52 weeks             | Patients from Year 1 who achieved 1 year of treatment.                                                                                          |
| EFC4733 RIO-Europe                                                         | 60 Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands Sweden, USA                                    | Rimonabant 5 mg Rimonabant 20 mg Placebo                                                             | no longer 603/379/288 599/363/268 305/178/128 | 104 weeks            | BMI ≥ 30 kg/m² or BMI>27 kg/m² with hypertension a and/or dyslipidaemia b. Stable body weight. Dietary restrictions. Type 2 diabetes excluded.  |
| EFC4735 RIO-Lipids                                                         | 67 Australia Finland, Italy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland Canada, USA                              | Rimonabant 5 mg Rimonabant 20 mg Placebo                                                             | 345/208 346/221 342/214                       | 52 weeks             | BMI >27 kg/m² and ≤ 40 kg/m². Untreated Dyslipidaemia c . Stable body weight. Dietary restrictions. Type 2 diabetes excluded.                   |
| EFC4736 RIO- Diabetes                                                      | 159 Belgium, Czech Rep., France, Poland, Germany, Netherlands Finland, UK, USA, Canada Argentina | product Rimonabant 5 mg Rimonabant 20 mg Placebo                                                     | 358/232 339/229 348/231                       | 52 weeks             | BMI >27 kg/m² and ≤ 40 kg/m². Treated type 2 Diabetes d . Stable body weight. Dietary restrictions.                                             |

Medicinal product no longer authorised 17/41 © EMEA 2006 Study participants, treatments Table 2: Summary of the four main studies in the obesity-related indications a drug-treated for hypertension and/or BP ≥ 140 and/or 90 mmHg b drug-treated for dyslipidaemia and/orLDL-cholesterol ≥ 3.36 mmol/L and/or HDL-cholesterol &lt;1.03 mmol/L and/or triglyceridemia ≥ 1.69 mmol/L c low  HDL-C  defined  by  the  total-C/HDL-C  ratio  &gt;4.5  in  women  or  &gt;5  in  men  and/or  elevated  TG  (TG  &gt;1.69 mmol/L), and who were not receiving drug treatment for their abnormal lipid profile. d treatment with biguanides or sulfonylureas

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Efficacy parameters   | EFC4743 RIO-North America                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | EFC4733 RIO-Europe                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | EFC4735 RIO-Lipids                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | EFC4736 RIO-Diabetes                                                                                                                |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Primary               | Weight loss and weight maintenance over a period of one year Prevention of weight regain during a second year of treatment in obese patients with or without comorbidities                                                                         | Weight loss and weight maintenance over a period of one year.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | longer Weight loss and weight maintenance over a period of one year.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Weight loss and weight maintenance over a period of one year.                                                                       |
| Secondary             | The effect over a period of 2 years on: -Weight maintenance -Hypertension -Dyslipidaemia -Quality of life -Safety and tolerability -Withdrawal- emergent disorders in obese patients who are re-randomized to placebo after one year of treatment. | product no The effect over a period of 2 years on: -Weight loss and weight maintenance - Hypertension - Dyslipidaemia -Glucose tolerance status (OGTT): rate of deterioration of glucose tolerance status, rate of improvement of glucose tolerance status -Fasting blood glucose and insulin -Quality of life, satisfaction, food behaviour -Food intake and compliance to dietary prescription. | The effect over a period of 1 year on: -Dyslipidaemia (triglycerides, HDL- C, LDL-C, small dense LDL particles and other lipid parameters) -Hypertension, -Glucose tolerance status (OGTT): rate of progression to the development of impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes, rate of improvement of glucose tolerance status. -Fasting glycemia and insulinemia -Quality of life, satisfaction, hunger scale. -Food intake and compliance to dietary prescription. | The effect over a period of 1 year on: -Glycemic control -Hypertension -Dyslipidaemia -Quality of life -The safety and tolerability |

Medicinal product no longer authorised 18/41 © EMEA 2006 The  main  exclusion  criteria  were  standard  for  phase  III  studies,  i.e.  any  severe  medical  condition  that would  interfere  with  the  participation  of  the  patient  in  long-term  studies  (including  presence  of  any clinically significant cardiovascular or pulmonary disease according to the investigator, history of stroke within  six  months  prior  to  screening  visit,  presence  of  treated  epilepsy,  presence  of  any  clinically significant hepatic or gastrointestinal disease according to the investigator, creatininemia &gt; 150 µmol/L), concomitant  drugs  that  would  have  any  impact  on  body  weight,  patients  with  DSM-IV  defined  eating disorders, patients with a history of severe depression. Outcomes and endpoints The primary and secondary efficacy parameters are summarised in Table 3 below. Table 3: Summary of primary and secondary efficacy parameters, main studies

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 19/41 © EMEA 2006 In the CHMP guideline on drugs used in weight control a weight loss of 10 % is considered to be a valid primary efficacy criterion. Such responder analyses were included as secondary efficacy parameters in the RIO-programme. Sleep apnoea episodes were not recorded. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was analysed in the pooled population from the four studies. The criteria recommended by the National Cholesterol Education Program- Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEPATPIII)  were  used  (ie,  waist  circumference  &gt;88  cm  in  females  or  &gt;102  cm  in  males,  HDL-C&lt;1.295 mmol/L in females or &lt;1.036 mmol/L in males, TG ≥ 1.69 mmol/L, systolic blood pressure (SBP) ≥ 130 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) ≥ 85 mmHg, fasting glucose ≥ 6.11 mmol/L) and the percentages of patients having at least 3 out of the 5 criteria of the metabolic syndrome at endpoint were compared. Objectives Objective of all 4 studies was to establish the long-term efficacy and safety of rimonabant in the treatment of obesity and obesity-related metabolic disorders. Sample size In  order  to  have  sufficient  power  to  detect  a  statistical  significant  difference  between  placebo  and rimonabant, the total number of subjects needed was 1400 subjects in RIO-Europe (difference in weight loss between rimonabant and placebo after one year 3 kg, SD= 10 kg, α = 0.025, power = 0.96, 30% dropout  rate),  990  subjects  in  RIO-Lipids  and  RIO-Diabetes  (difference  in  weight  loss  between  rimonabant placebo after one year 3 kg, SD= 10 kg, α = 0.025, power = 0.96, 30% drop-out rate), and 2800 subjects in  RIO-North-America  (first  year  analysis:  560  subjects  in  the  placebo  arm  and  1120  subjects  in  the rimonabant arms; difference in weight after one year between rimonabant and placebo 3 kg, SD = 10 kg, two-sided α =  0.025,  power  =  0.99,  34%  drop-out  rate;  second  year  analysis  740  subjects  in  each  rerandomised arm; difference in weight gain after 2 years 2.5 kg, SD = 10 kg, two-sided α = 0.025, power = 0.88). Randomisation, Blinding (masking) After  a  4-week  run-in  period  on  diet,  subjects  compliant  to  dietary  instruction  and  treatment  were randomised  to  placebo,  rimonabant  5  mg  or  rimonabant  20  mg.  Blinding  was  ensured  by  identical capsules and standard operational procedures. Duration of the double-blind period was 1 or 2 years. In RIO-North-America subjects were re-randomised after one year. Randomisation was performed centrally. In RIO-North-America and RIO-Europe randomisation ratio was 1:2:2 for the placebo, 5 mg and 20 mg arm respectively. In RIO-/Lipids/Diabetes the randomisation ratio was 1:1:1. Randomisation was stratified by degree of weight loss in the screening phase on diet alone (less that 2 kg weight loss versus more than 2 kg weight loss). Additional stratification factors were TG-status ( ≤ 4.0 g/l versus &gt;4.0 g/l) in RIO-Lipids and anti-diabetic treatment (biguanides vs. sulfonylureas) in RIODiabetes. In RIO-North-America subjects in the rimonabant arms were re-randomised to placebo or to the same dose of  rimonabant  after  one  year.  Patients  initially  randomised  in  the  placebo  group  remained  on  placebo. After re-randomisation there were 5 groups with an equal number of patients: placeboyear 1-placeboyear 2, 5 mg rimonabantyear  1-placeboyear  2 ,  5  mg  rimonabantyear  1 -5  mg  rimonabantyear  2 ,  20  mg  rimonabantyear  1 -placeboyear 2 and 20 mg rimonabantyear 1-20 mg rimonabantyear 2. Weight change between 1-2 years was to be used to support the claim of reduction in weight regain after prior weight loss. Statistical methods The primary analysis dataset was the intention-to-treat (ITT) population defined as all randomised subjects who received at least one dose of double-blind study drug, had at least one post-baseline assessment and a baseline assessment. For RIO-North-America the ITT-population was defined for 3 periods i.e. the oneyear  intent-to-treat population  (ITT1),  the  year  two  intent-to-treat population  including  the  subjects  rerandomised for the efficacy analysis in week 52 through 104 (ITT2) and the intent-to-treat population for

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

|                         | RIO-North-America                                                                            | RIO-Europe                                                                                                                             | RIO-Lipids                                                                                                          | RIO-Diabetes                                                                      |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Confirmative end points |                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                     |                                                                                   |
| Primary                 | Body weight at 1 y Body weight regain at 2 y                                                 | Body weight at 1 y                                                                                                                     | Body weight at 1 y                                                                                                  | Body weight at 1y                                                                 |
| Secondary               | %change in HDL-C %with metabolic syndrome                                                    | %change in HDL-C %change in TG %with improved OGTT at 1 year %with metabolic syndrome                                                  | longer %change in HDL-C %change in TG %with improved OGTT %with metabolic syndrome                                  | Absolute change in HbA 1c %change in HDL-C %change in TG %with metabolic syndrome |
| Supportive endpoints    | At 2 years: Weight loss / - maintenance / Metabolic syndrome at 2 years Waist circumference; | no At 2 years: Weight loss / -maintenance / OGTT / Improved OGTT / Metabolic syndrome Triglycerides, Total cholesterol/HDL-cholesterol | TG by baseline TG levels HDL-cholesterol by baseline HDL- cholesterol levels OGTT at 1 year ratio, Fasting glucose, | Reduction in anti-diabetic medication Fasting insulin, OGTT                       |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 20/41 © EMEA 2006 the whole two year study period (week 0-104). A last observation carried forward procedure was followed for post baseline missing values. For  the  primary  endpoint,  weight  loss  at  one  year,  an  ANOVA  was  performed  with  treatment  and randomisation  strata  as  fixed  effects.  Prevention  of  weight  regain  during  the  second  year,  the  other primary endpoint of RIO-North-America, was analysed by ANCOVA  with  treatment  after rerandomisation,  randomisation  strata  as  fixed  effects.  Each  re-randomised  group  was  compared  to  their corresponding placebo group. For the secondary endpoints an ANOVA was used for continuous variables and a Chi-square or Fisher's exact test for categorical secondary variables. Table 4: Endpoints / analysis / subgroups The  confirmatory  secondary  endpoints  were  intended  'to  be  used  as  part  of  a  formal  decision  making process to determine a regulatory claim'. A hierarchical testing strategy was implemented in each study to ensure a global type 1 error rate of 5%. If significance was reached for weight loss at 1 year then the next confirmatory endpoint was to be tested for the corresponding dose at a 5% level. If both doses reached significance for weight loss at 1 year the modified Bonferroni procedure (Hochberg) was to be applied for that endpoint. To evaluate the relationship between weight loss and secondary endpoints an analysis of covariance was performed  for  continuous  parameters  and  a  logistic  regression  model  for  categorical  parameters.  The model included weight loss as an additional covariate. For  the  intent-to-treat  population,  weight  loss  at  one  year  and  weight  re-gain  were  examined  using  a number of covariates (including age, gender, race, BMI, smoking status, education status, socio-economic status, concomitant medications, waist circumference, history of diabetes, history of hypertension, history of  dyslipidaemia,  caloric  intake  at  baseline)  to  examine  their  potential  effects.  To  investigate  the relationship  between  treatment  and  covariate,  each  factor  was  analysed  statistically  using  a  two-way analysis  of  variance  model  with  terms  for  treatment,  the  covariate,  and  the  treatment  by  covariate interaction.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 21/41 © EMEA 2006 Baseline data Table 5 below describes some baseline characteristics of the study populations. Table 5: Some baseline characteristics of the obesity study populations Approximately  55-60%  of  the  included  patients  had  dyslipidaemia  at  baseline  in  the  different  studies (100%  in  the  RIO-lipids).  Prevalence  of  hypertension  was  between  27  and  61  %  with  the  highest prevalence in the RIO-diabetes study; the number of patients treated for hypertension varied from 55% in RIO-Europe to 93% in RIO diabetes and was approximately 68% in the RIO-North America and RIOLipids studies. Mean BMI varied between 33.3 and 37.6 kg/m 2 .  Forty-six per-cents of the patients were either current or former smokers. Overall, 46.5% of the patients included in the RIO studies had metabolic syndrome with prevalences of 35, 41, 54 and 79% in the RIO-North America, RIO-Europe, RIO-Lipids and RIO-Diabetes, respectively. No imbalances  between  treatment  groups  within  the  studies  with  regard  to  demographics,  BMI  or  comorbidities were seen. The low proportion of men in the RIO-Europe and RIO North America was noted. Elderly patients (&gt;75 years of age) were poorly represented, which is reflected in the SPC (4.4). Overall,  the  percentages  of  patients  who  completed  1  year  of  treatment  were  52.5%  in  RIO-North America, 60.8% in RIO-Europe, 62.1% in RIO-Lipids and 66.1% in RIO-Diabetes. The total dropout rates were rather similar in the different treatment groups but generally higher due to adverse events in the 20 mg group and higher due to patients' request in the placebo and 5 mg groups. The high withdrawal rates were noted but not unexpected in this kind of studies and they are essentially similar to those observed in earlier similar trials with weight reducing agents. Outcomes and estimation Body weight and related endpoints The effect of rimonabant 20 mg on body weight was similar in the 3 RIO studies including non-diabetic patients.  A  mean  body  weight  loss  of  6.3  to  6.9  kg  from  baseline  was  observed  at  1  year  in  the  ITT population (LOCF). The weight reduction in the placebo groups was similar across these 3 studies with body weight loss of 1.5 to 1.8 kg. The mean body weight loss difference of the 20 mg dose over placebo ranged from 4.7 kg in RIO-North America and RIO-Europe to 5.4 kg in RIO-Lipids (p&lt;0.001). In RIODiabetes  the  body  weight  loss  from  baseline  was  slightly  lower  in  both  groups,  rimonabant  20  mg (-5.3 kg) and placebo (-1.4 kg), but with a significant difference between the 2 groups (-3.9 kg, p&lt;0.001). (See Table 6.)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 22/41 © EMEA 2006 The effects demonstrated by the 5 mg dose were consistently lower than the effect of the 20 mg dose with a  mean  difference  of  -1.4  kg  (p&lt;0.01)  and  -0.8  kg  (p=0.013)  vs.  placebo  in  non-diabetic  and  diabetic patients, respectively. Table 6: Body weight results in the four pivotal studies, change in kg from baseline and responder rates The  ITT  analyses  were  supported  by  the  analyses  performed  on  patients  completing  treatment  where weight reduction generally appeared somewhat more pronounced. The weight effects over time were very similar in the four studies and are presented in Figure 1 below with the RIO-Europe results. The weight reduction reached a plateau after approximately 36 weeks. Figure 1: Weight reduction over time in the RIO-Europe study The decrease in the waist circumference in the rimonabant treated patients paralleled the decrease in body weight with mean decreases (relative to placebo) varying between 3.3 and 4.7 cm (p&lt;0.001 in all studies) with absolute decreases from baseline between 5.2 and 7.1 cm.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 23/41 © EMEA 2006 Body composition was measured in a subgroup of patients and a decrease in the total body fat mass was demonstrated in the 20 mg group. The effects on body weight and related criteria appeared to be consistent among men and women (mean weight reductions 5.1 and 4.8 kg, respectively), in different geographic regions, in different age groups and among smokers/non-smokers. The effects also appeared essentially consistent in the subgroup of patients with severe obesitas (BMI ≥ 40 kg/m²), as in those not losing significant body weight with diet and exercise alone during the initial one month run-in. However, in the limited number of Afro-American patients in the RIO studies (74 and 169 patients  randomised  to  placebo  and  rimonabant  20  mg  groups,  respectively)  weight  loss  was  less pronounced (mean difference as compared to placebo was -2.9 kg). Effect of rimonabant on dyslipidaemia The patients included in the four studies could be considered to be representative for a broad population of obese  patients  with  concurrent  treated  or  untreated  dyslipidaemia  of  the  kind  typically  associated  with overweight (low HDL-C and elevated triglycerides [TG]). Mean HDL-C levels increased in all treatment groups, but in all studies the increase was greater in the rimonabant 20 mg group (mean differences 7.2 - 8.4% at one year, p&lt;0.001) than in the placebo group. The  differences  between  treatment  groups  were  consistent  in  men  and  women.  There  was,  however,  a significantly less pronounced mean increase in Afro-Americans. In the 4 RIO studies, the absolute TG levels decreased in the 20mg rimonabant group by -5.3 to -12.6%. In the placebo groups the mean triglyceride levels increased (by 7.3-8.3% in the RIO-Europe, Rio-NA and Rio-Diabetes  studies)  or  remained  stable  (-0.2%  in  the  RIO-lipids  study).  The  decreases  in  the  20  mg group, when compared with placebo, were similar across the studies, with differences being 12.4 to 15.1% in  non-diabetic  patients  in  the  ITT  population  (LOCF)  (p&lt;0.001).  In  diabetic  patients  the  difference, compared with placebo, was 16.4%. The results were consistent in patients with elevated or normal TG at baseline.  Generally  the  effects  of  rimonabant  on  HDL-C  and  triglycerides  reached  a  plateau  after approximately 36 week's of treatment. The total-C  and  LDL-C  remained  unchanged  in  all  groups  in  the  RIO  studies,  taking  into  account  the initial  small  drop  in  LDL-C  observed  during  the  run-in  period.  In  RIO-Lipids  LDL  particle  size  was evaluated and a shift towards larger particles was noted. The effects of rimonabant on glucose/insulin homeostasis In the overall type 2 diabetes obese population (RIO-diabetes), with a mean HbA1c of 7.3% at baseline, the HbA1c decreased in the rimonabant 20 mg group by 0.6% compared with an increase of 0.1% in the placebo  group,  resulting  in  0.7%  improvement  (p&lt;0.01).  The  effects  were  similar  in  the  metformin  or sulfonylurea treated patients. A majority of patients were inadequately controlled at baseline. The 5 mg dose decreased HbA1c to a less pronounced extent. Fasting glucose was decreased by rimonabant 20 mg compared  with  placebo  (mean  difference  -0.97  mmol/L;  95%  CI;  -1.30,  -0.64).  Insulin  resistance  as measured  by  HOMA  (homeostasis  model  assessment,  calculated  from  fasting  glucose  and  insulin) decreased significantly in the rimonabant 20 mg group as compared to placebo. In  the  3  studies  of  non-diabetic  patients  there  were  774  patients  with  impaired  fasting  glycaemia,  i.e. fasting glucose (FG) ≥ 5.55 mmol/L or diabetic FG (&gt;6.99 mmol/L) at baseline. The mean difference in FG between the pooled 20 mg treatment groups and the placebo groups was -0.10 mmol/L (95% CI; -0.22, 0.03). Fasting insulin was higher than in the general population at baseline (around 16 µIU/mL). There was no change in the placebo group after one year, whereas insulin decreased by 3 µIU/mL in the pooled rimonabant 20 mg group (p = 0.002 in pooled studies). In the subgroup of 258 prediabetic patients identified in the RIO-Europe and RIO-Lipids studies by the oral glucose tolerance test the glucose level at 30 minutes after the glucose load was lower in the pooled rimonabant 20 mg groups than in the placebo groups at one year (mean difference -0.89 mmol/L, 95% CI; -1.39, -0.39, p&lt;0.001). No difference between groups was seen at 120 minutes. Mean insulin levels were

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| no   |
|------|

Medicinal product no longer authorised 24/41 © EMEA 2006 lower  in  the  rimonabant  20  mg  groups  at  30  and  120  minutes  after  the  glucose  load  compared  with placebo. In patients with normal FG at baseline no significant differences in FG between treatment groups were found at one year. However, in patients with normal FG both fasting insulin levels and HOMA levels were significantly reduced in the pooled 20 mg group as compared to placebo after one year. Effect of rimonabant on blood pressure (BP) In the subgroup of 555 patients who had elevated BP at baseline, defined as either SBP ≥ 140 mmHg or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg, decreases in SBP and DBP were observed at one year. Systolic blood pressure decreased by 8.5 mmHg in the rimonabant group and 6.9 mmHg in the placebo group. The decrease in DBP was 5.6 mmHg in the rimonabant 20 mg group versus -3.5 mmHg in the placebo group (p = 0.009). These changes were  consistent  with  the  observed  body  weight  loss.  In  patients  followed  for  two  years  no  significant difference in blood pressure was seen between the rimonabant and placebo groups. In patients with normal BP at baseline, rimonabant 20 mg had no significant effects on BP. Effects on the percentage of patients meeting the criteria for the metabolic syndrome In the 20 mg groups, the percentages of patients having metabolic syndrome at endpoint were lower than in the placebo groups in the 4 RIO studies, see table 7 below. Table 7: % of patients meeting the criteria for metabolic syndrome at baseline and at Year 1 Quality of life measurements In  the  IWQOL-Lite  (Impact  on  Weight  on  Quality  of  Life-Lite)  instrument  significantly  higher  values were  obtained  in  the  physical  functioning  and  self-esteem  domains  and  in  total  scores  in  the  20  mg rimonabant groups as compared to placebo. There were also tendencies for improvements which became significant as compared to placebo in the pooled population for the other 3 domains (Sexual life, Public distress and Work). In the SF-36 instrument significant improvements in physical functioning and general health as compared to placebo were observed. On the other hand a trend for a less favourable emotional health and a significantly worse mental health situation in the rimonabant 20 mg group, as compared to placebo, was recorded. Relationship between body weight loss and metabolic effects of rimonabant Four different methods were applied to investigate the relationship between metabolic changes and weight loss:  comparison  of  changes  in  metabolic  parameters  over  time  versus  changes  in  body  weight, comparison of effects of rimonabant on metabolic parameters across weight change categories, assessment of  metabolic  changes  in  the  population  from  the  STRATUS  development,  and  statistical  (regression) analysis  of  the  relationship  between  body  weight  loss  and  metabolic  effects.  It  is  estimated  that approximately half of the mean improvements in HbA1c, HDL-C and triglycerides in patients receiving rimonabant  20 mg  was  beyond  that  expected  from  weight  loss  alone.  In  type  2  diabetes  inadequately controlled at baseline approximately 50% of the total reduction in HbA1c levels (0.8%) was estimated to be independent of weight reduction. The magnitude of the estimated independent effects on lipids, was 3.6% change from baseline HDL-C (1.22) and 6.5% change from baseline triglycerides. Efficacy results at 2 years

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 25/41 © EMEA 2006 The body weight loss was essentially maintained in the 2 studies (RIO-Europe and RIO-North America) where patients received the treatment for up to 2 years. In RIO-North America patients on rimonabant 20 mg were re-randomised to placebo or rimonabant 20 mg after one year and followed for an additional year. The body weight increased on average to levels similar to those treated with placebo/placebo for two years (see Figure 2 below). Available data do not indicate a rebound phenomenon. Figure 2 RIO-North America: body weight change (kg) by visit at 2 years (mean ± SEM) - ITT population SMOKING CESSATION One  phase  II  study  (ACT4389) , three  short-term  (10  weeks)  phase  III  studies  (STRATUS-US/ STRATUS-EU/ STRATUS-META), and one long-term (one year) phase III study (STRATUS-WW) were carried out to demonstrate efficacy and safety of rimonabant as an aid to smoking cessation. (See below Table 8.)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Main Studies                          | Design                                                                                                                      | Treatment (QD)                                                                                                                                 | Duration          | Follow up off drug       | Assessments                                                                                                                                                  |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| STRATUS-US US, 11 centres             | Rd, Db, Pl, Parallel group (3) design                                                                                       | Placebo Rimonabant 5 mg, Rimonabant 20 mg,                                                                                                     | 10 weeks          | 40 weeks                 | Primary : Abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment (self-report) Secondary : weight gain, craving                                                     |
| STRATUS-EU BE, DK, FR, ES, SE, SW, UK | Rd, Db, Pl, Parallel group (3) design                                                                                       | Placebo Rimonabant 5 mg, Rimonabant 20 mg,                                                                                                     | 10 weeks          | 40 weeks                 | Primary : Abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment (self-report) Secondary : weight gain, craving                                                     |
| STRATUS-META USA, 10 centres          | Rd, Db, Pl, Parallel group (2) design                                                                                       | Placebo Rimonabant 20 mg,                                                                                                                      | 10 weeks          |                          | Primary: Abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment (self-report) Secondary : weight gain, craving                                                      |
| Supportive Studies                    | Design                                                                                                                      | Treatment arms                                                                                                                                 | Duration          | Follow up                | Assessments                                                                                                                                                  |
| STRATUS-WW US, Canada, Australia      | Rd, Db, Parallel group (2) design Re-randomization of responders (abstinence) at week 10, Db, Pl, Parallel group (5) design | Rimonabant 5 mg, Rimonabant 20 mg, Rimonabant (20)/20 mg, Rimonabant (20)/5 mg, Rimonabant (20 mg)/Pl Rimonabant (5)/5 mg Rimonabant (5 mg)/Pl | 10 weeks 42 weeks | longer off drug 52 weeks | Primary: Abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment (self-report) Secondary : weight gain, craving Primary: Relapse to smoking at week 32 (self report) |
| ACT4389 USA, 6 centres                | Rd, Db, Pl, Parallel group (2) design, phase II                                                                             | Pl Rimonabant 40 mg,                                                                                                                           | 10 weeks          | 4 weeks                  | Primary : Abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment (self-report)                                                                                      |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 26/41 © EMEA 2006 Table 8: Overview of submitted studies in smoking cessation Db, double-blind; Pl, placebo-controlled; Rd, randomised Dose-finding studies The clinical efficacy of rimonabant in smoking cessation was first studied in a 10-week study (ACT 4389) comparing 40 mg to placebo in 370 subjects. 116/186 in the rimonabant group and 127/184 in the placebo group completed the 10-week treatment period. The number and percentage of patients who achieved the primary efficacy endpoint (prolonged abstinence during the last 4 weeks of treatment) in the rimonabant 40 mg group was significantly higher than in the placebo group (23.5% versus 13.1%, respectively; p = 0.0146; OR = 2.035, 95% CI: 1.176 - 3.522). The higher incidence of treatment discontinuations due to adverse  events  (AEs)  observed  with  this  dose  compared  with  placebo  [38  patients  (20.8%)  versus  10 (5.5%)],  essentially  due  to  gastrointestinal  (nausea),  central  and  peripheral  nervous  system  (tremor, dizziness), and psychiatric disorder (anxiety, nervousness, depression) adverse events, led to consideration of lower doses in the following studies. Main studies A total of 7,164 patients were randomised in the three short term studies (main studies: STRATUS-US, EU and -META studies) and one long-term study (supportive study: STRATUS-WW): the programme included 3,813 patients treated with rimonabant 20 mg, 2,534 patients treated with 5 mg and 789 patients in the placebo group. (See Table 8 above for more details.)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

RESULTS

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 27/41 © EMEA 2006 METHODS Study participants, treatments In the short-term studies the main inclusion criteria were: male and female, aged 18 years and older, who had smoked a mean of at least 10 cigarettes/day for a minimum of at least 2 months prior to treatment. They needed to be motivated to quit (score &gt;6 on a 10-point visual analogue scale), and otherwise healthy as checked by physical examination, laboratory evaluation and ECG. Subjects were excluded if they were smoking other than regular nicotine containing cigarettes or marijuana at a regular base, if suffering from severe  psychiatric  illness  (e.g.  psychosis,  depression,  anxiety,  alcohol  or  substance  abuse/dependency, assessed by the MINI), or any clinically significant acute or chronic progressive somatic disease, or eating disorder. Subjects with a history of epilepsy, as well as subjects at high cardiovascular risk (uncontrolled hypertension,  post-myocardial  infarction)  were  also  excluded.  Female  subjects  were  excluded  when pregnant or lactating. Subjects were also excluded when they had used NRT, bupropion, counselling, or antidepressant  therapy  for  more  than  1  week,  within  3  months  prior  to  randomization,  or  systemic treatment on a chronic base (corticosteroids, antihistamines, or anti-obesity drugs). In the STRATUS-WW the inclusion and exclusion criteria were similar to those in the main short-term studies. In the short-term studies (STRATUS-US, -EU and -META studies) the patients were randomised while still smoking and were treated for two weeks prior to and eight weeks after the Target Quit Day (TQD); the patients were followed up for 40 weeks off drug. STRATUS-WW was a long term follow-up study: after  ten  weeks of double-blind treatment with rimonabant 5 mg/day (n=2016) or 20 mg/day (n=3023), patients  who  were  abstinent  were  re-randomised  to  the  active  treatment  or  placebo  for  42  weeks  to evaluate maintenance of abstinence. Patients initially randomised to the 20 mg arm were re-randomised to 20 mg, 5 mg, or placebo. Patients initially randomised to 5 mg were re-randomised to 5 mg or placebo. The patients were followed up for 52 weeks off drug. Outcomes/ endpoints The primary efficacy endpoint in the three short-term studies was percentage of subjects with prolonged abstinence from smoking (not even a puff) at every visit during the last 4 weeks of treatment (week 7-10), as  assessed  by  the  subject's  self-report  and  diary  consultation,  and  confirmed  by  a  CO  content  of  the exhaled breath &lt;10 ppm, and plasma cotinine &lt;8 µ g/l at 2 time points measured (week 8 and 10). Main secondary endpoints were: Change in body-weight [mean change from baseline in body-weight at the end of  treatment  in  non-obese  (BMI&lt;30  kg/m2)  subjects,  categorized  as  decrease/no  change/increase (decrease/increase defined as &gt;5% difference from baseline)], and Decrease of craving [mean change from baseline at the end of treatment of the total score of the Questionnaire of Smoking Cessation Urges Brief form (QSU Brief)]. In the STRATUS-WW, the primary efficacy endpoint was time to smoking relapse from week 10 to week 32 [relapse was defined as: any 7 or more consecutive days of smoking (even a puff), or any 2 consecutive days of smoking 5 or more cigarettes per day (even a puff)]. Secondary endpoints included abstinence related endpoints (4-week  prolonged  abstinence, continuous abstinence, weekly  point prevalence abstinence), body weight, craving, metabolic parameters. Time to relapse was also measured at week 52. STRATUS-US, STRATUS-EU and STRATUS-META studies The included subjects were middle-aged, with equivalent proportion of male and female patients. Most patients were Caucasian. Majority of the participants was enrolled in North America (84%). Approximately  25%  of  the  population  across  studies  was  obese  (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ).  Patients  had  been smoking regularly for about 24 to 27 years, and smoked an average of 23 cigarettes per day. The mean

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

|                        | STRATUS US      | STRATUS US     | STRATUS US     | STRATUS EU      | STRATUS EU             | STRATUS META               | STRATUS META   |
|------------------------|-----------------|----------------|----------------|-----------------|------------------------|----------------------------|----------------|
|                        | Placebo (N=261) | 5 mg (N=262)   | 20 mg (N=261)  | Placebo (N=260) | 5 mg 20 (N=256)        | mg Placebo (N=267) (N=268) | 20 mg (N=262)  |
| Abstinent              | 42 (16.1%)      | 41 (15.6 %)    | 72 (27.6%)     | 51 (19.6%)      | 62 (24.2%)             | 66 (24.7%) 25 (9.3%)       | 36 (13.7%)     |
| p vs placebo [a]       |                 | 0.905          | 0.002          |                 | 0.242                  | 0.174                      | 0.134          |
| Odds ratios vs placebo |                 | 0.967          | 1.986          |                 | 1.310 1.346            |                            | 1.548          |
| 95% CI                 |                 | (0.605, 1.546) | (1.296, 3.046) |                 | (0.861, 1.991) (0.890, | 2.035)                     | (0.901, 2.661) |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 28/41 © EMEA 2006 number of previous attempts to stop smoking ranged from approximately 3 in STRATUS-EU study to 6 in STRATUS-META  study.  The  group  of  subjects  above  64  years  was  small,  only  55  subjects  in  the STRATUS-US, -EU and META together. The group of Afro-American subjects was also small (6%). The efficacy of rimonabant as an aid to smoking cessation was observed in STRATUS-US, but the other two short-term studies failed to show significant differences between rimonabant and placebo (see table 9 below). Table 9: Results from STRATUS-US, -EU and -META-studies [a] p-values come from Fisher's exact test The  prespecified  pooled  analysis  of  prolonged  abstinence  data  from  these  short-term  studies  suggested that rimonabant 20 mg was associated with greater efficacy compared with placebo (rimonabant 20 mg: 22.0%, placebo: 15.0%, p = 0.0003, OR = 1.610, 95% CI: 1.241, 2.088). A total of 47% more patients achieved abstinence with rimonabant 20 mg than with placebo. The OR for smoking cessation with rimonabant was between 1.4 and 1.6, which places rimonabant at the lower end of the efficacy spectrum compared with conventional treatment modalities. During the procedure the applicant submitted results of a follow-up of about one year of subjects from the short term studies. The STRATUS-US study patients treated with rimonabant 20 mg during the initial 10 weeks  continued  to  show  a  statistically  significant  improvement  in  abstinence  at  1  year  (p=0.021); similarly, the STRATUS-EU results at 1-year remained consistent with those observed at 10 weeks, i.e. not significant. (See Tables 10 and 11 below.) Table 10: Point prevalence abstinence at end-of-treatment visit (day 70) and end-of-study visit (day 350), in the STRATUS-US-study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 29/41 © EMEA 2006 Table 11: Point prevalence abstinence at end-of-treatment visit (day 70) and end-of-study visit (day 350), in the STRATUS-EU-study Thus, the short term effects seen in the -US study were relatively well maintained over one year, with a difference  of  10.3%  after  10  weeks  compared  to  a  difference  of  7.7%  after  the  additional  40  weeks  of follow up. STRATUS-WW study The mean age of patients in STRATUS-WW-study was 44 (SD 11) years, the study included equivalent proportion of males and females, majority of the patients were Caucasian, the mean BMI was 28 kg/ m 2 , the patients had been smoking for 26 (mean) years, and smoked an average of 23 cigarettes per day. The results from STRATUS-WW-study are presented in Figure 3 and Table 12 below. Figure 3: A summary of primary endpoint time to relapse for the 20 mg dose rimonabant. Time to relapse (week) Time to relapse (week)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Non-relapse rates                       | 20 mg/PLB (N=342)   | no 20 mg/5 mg (N=335)   | 20 mg/20 mg (N=340)   |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------|
| Follow-up off-drug up to Week 102 ratio | 81 (23.7%) 97       | (29.0%)                 | 106 (31.2%)           |
| Odds                                    |                     | 1.313                   | 1.460                 |
| 95% CI                                  |                     | (0.932, 1.851)          | (1.040, 2.048)        |
| p value versus placebo                  |                     | 0.018                   | 0.005                 |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 30/41 © EMEA 2006 Table  12:  Non-relapse  rates  at  Week  32  (primary  efficacy  endpoint)  and  Week  52  (secondary  efficacy endpoint) in the STRATUS-WW-study [N (%)], stratum 20 mg A 10% difference in favour of rimonabant was observed for maintenance at Week 32 and Week 52, both for the 5 mg dose and the 20 mg dose versus placebo, in patients initially treated with rimonabant 20 mg. This  corresponds  for  the  20  mg  dose  to  a  reduction  in  odds  of  relapse  by  approximately  30%.  Both rimonabant 20 mg and 5 mg showed similar effects regarding maintenance of abstinence versus placebo in patients who initially stopped smoking with the 20 mg dose. In addition, results after 102 weeks (off drug) are given in Table 13. Table 13: Non-relapse rates at Week 102 in the STRATUS-WW-study [N (%)], stratum 20 mg · Discussion on clinical efficacy OBESITY The demonstrated body weight reduction in overweight patients with additional cardiovascular risk factors and in obese patients and the effects on body weight related parameters obtained with rimonabant 20 mg were clinically relevant and maintained over time. Obese patients with type 2 diabetes and dyslipidaemia were specifically studied in separate studies and clinically relevant weight reductions were demonstrated also in these patient groups. The CHMP does not currently accept metabolic syndrome as an instrument to identify a target population for  pharmacological  therapy.  No  generally  accepted  definition  of  the  metabolic  syndrome  exists.  No proper benefit/risk evaluation could be made for the long-term rimonabant treatment of patients with the proposed risk factor complex, as no outcome data with regard to clinically relevant events existed. Thus, the  claim  for  pharmacological  intervention  based  on  a  demonstrated  reduction  of  the  incidence  of  the metabolic syndrome (or of a general reduction of the incidence of the individual risk factor components) could not be accepted with current knowledge. The effects of rimonabant on HDL-C, its subfractions and on triglycerides were interesting and they may indicate that rimonabant could reduce the risk for cardiovascular complications, which, however, remains to  be  shown,  as  outcome  data  demonstrating  a  reduction  of  clinically  relevant  events  were  lacking.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised 31/41 © EMEA 2006 Furthermore,  no  comparative  data  with  an  active  comparator  product  were  available.  Thus,  a  specific claim for treatment of dyslipidaemia could not be accepted; these effects were, however, considered of importance and are thus described in the SPC (5.1). The indication as an adjunct treatment to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control in treated type 2 diabetes patients suggested that in these patients with overweight there was more to gain than weight loss only, i.e. substantial glycaemic control. The total reduction of HbA1c in type 2 diabetes already treated with an oral anti-diabetic was 0.7% with rimonabant (as compared to placebo), which was judged to be a clinically relevant reduction. However, the significant interaction between weight loss and treatment with respect  to  HbA1c  (%)  allowed  no  straight  forward  interpretation  of  the  main  effect,  i.e.  reduction  of HbA1c(%)  corrected  for  weight  loss;  hence  the  independent  effect  of  rimonabant  on  HbA1c  was questioned by the CHMP. Therefore the applicant carried out extensive analyses, which demonstrated that there  was,  indeed,  an  effect  on  HbA1c  that  was  independent  of  weight  loss.  It  was  difficult  to  exactly define the size of this effect (and will be the same also in larger studies), but it was agreed that the over-all HbA1c  reducing  effect  was  the  most  relevant  effect  from  clinical  perspective.  Overall,  the  beneficial effects  of  combined weight reduction and improved glucose regulation (which is difficult to achieve in patients failing on metformin treatment with the treatment alternatives available today) could be expected to be greater in type 2 diabetes patients than in a general overweight population. However, no prospective confirmatory  trial  focusing  on  patients  failing  on  OAD  was  performed.  Also,  no  study  on  rimonabant monotherapy in type 2 diabetes patients was carried out. Thus, a separate indication for treatment of type 2 diabetes was not currently justified. Furthermore, treatment of overweight in patients with type 2 diabetes was already included in an indication for treatment of overweight patients with additional risk factors. It was agreed with the applicant that rimonabant could not be directly compared with classical OAD agents. A short description of the RIO-diabetes study results are described in the SPC (5.1). Further,  in  the  major  dose-finding  study  the  high  withdrawal  rate  in  combination  with  the  rather  small efficacy difference between the 10 and 20 mg groups, together with a tendency for a higher incidence of adverse  reactions  in  the  20  mg  group  (nausea,  diarrhoea,  dizziness),  resulted  in  remaining  uncertainty whether  20  mg  is  the  most  optimal  dose.  The  Applicant  committed  to  further  investigate  (as  a  postapproval follow-up measure) the efficacy and safety of a 10 mg dose in patients not tolerating 20 mg due to side effects or as a long-term treatment to maintain the effects initially obtained with a 20 mg dose. SMOKING CESSATION The selection of doses (5, 20, and 40mg/day of rimonabant) for the different smoking studies was based on  pharmacokinetic,  safety  and  tolerability  data  of  rimonabant  in  healthy  volunteers.  The  maximal tolerated  dose  in  those  studies  was  60  mg/day  of  rimonabant.  Subsequently,  the  dose  of  40  mg/day  of rimonabant  was  chosen  for  the  phase  II  smoking  cessation  study  (ACT4389).  No  other  doses  were included in the phase II study, indicating that no formal phase II dose-finding studies were performed in the  target  population.  Subsequently,  based  on  efficacy  and  tolerability  of  rimonabant  40  mg/day  in  the ACT4389 study, and experience with the 20 mg/day dose in the obesity studies, the 5 and 20 mg doses were selected for the confirmatory phase III trials. Only  one  of  the  three  short-term  phase  III  studies  (STRATUS-US)  was  positive  on  all  conditions,  i.e. prolonged abstinence after 10 weeks treatment, and sustained abstinence at 1 year off drug. The other two studies were negative and thereby raised the question which study(ies) should be regarded as outlier(s). The pooled analysis of the short-term studies, as well as data from the study with 40 mg dose provided evidence that rimonabant had, indeed, positive effect in smoking cessation. The randomized withdrawal study was also positive with regard to maintenance treatment; however, the data could be regarded only as supportive. Overall, based on the totality of data it was concluded that an effect on smoking cessation had been demonstrated. The magnitude of the effect on smoking cessation was, however, difficult to estimate. The variability in the results from the short-term studies indicated that the effect size may be marginal. Furthermore,  there  were  remaining  uncertainties  regarding  the  optimal  dose,  duration  of  treatment  and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

|                                                                                                                    | N studies   | N exposed to rimonabant    | Dose of rimonabant                        | Duration                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Phase 1 studies Single dose studies Repeated dose studies Sub-total                                                | 21 15 36    | 579 449 1028               | 1 to 300 mg 1 to 90 mg                    | - Up to 4 weeks                             |
| Phase II studies Obesity/energy expenditure Aid to smoking cessation Relapse in alcoholism Schizophrenia Sub-total | 2 1 1 1 5   | no 227 183 131 72 613      | 5, 10, 20 or 40 mg 40 mg 20 mg 20 mg      | Up to 16 weeks 10 weeks 12 weeks 6 weeks    |
| Phase III studies RIO studies STRATUS studies (short-term) STRATUS study (medium-term) Sub-total Total             | 4 3 1 8 49  | 5023 1308 5039 11370 13011 | 5 mg or 20 mg 5 mg or 20 mg 5 mg or 20 mg | Up to 2 years Up to 10 weeks Up to 52 weeks |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 32/41 © EMEA 2006 whether the dose could be decreased after an initial treatment period in cases where longer treatment is considered justified. Clinical safety · Patient exposure The rimonabant clinical development program included 49 completed clinical studies, involving a total of 16,120 subjects or patients. There were 36 phase I studies and five phase II studies, in addition to a large phase III program, composed of two major sets of studies (four RIO studies and four STRATUS studies), which  was  carried  out  in  the  indications  of  body  weight  management  and  related  metabolic  disorders (6,625 patients), and aid to and maintenance of smoking cessation (7,136 patients), respectively (see Table 14 below). These studies were designed for assessing drug safety, i.e., randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled  and  parallel  group  studies,  and  a  substantial  number  of  rimonabant-treated  patients  were exposed to either rimonabant 5 mg or 20 mg for one year or up to two years (in RIO studies) or for ten weeks or up to 32 weeks (in STRATUS studies; safety data between week 33 and week 52 were submitted during the procedure). Table 14: Safety population exposed to rimonabant · Adverse events The overall safety review of the combined phase III RIO + STRATUS programs showed that treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs)  were  comparably  reported  across the three treatment groups (rimonabant  5mg,  rimonabant  20mg,  placebo).  TEAEs  commonly  reported  ( ≥ 2%  of  patients)  during rimonabant  administration  were  mostly  of  gastrointestinal  (nausea,  diarrhoea,  vomiting,  loose  stools), nervous system (dizziness, disturbance in attention, somnolence) or psychiatric origin (insomnia, anxiety, depressive disorders, mood alterations, irritability). The following Table 15 shows all treatment-emergent adverse reactions from the four placebo-controlled studies in patients treated for weight loss and related metabolic disorders that occurred at a rate of ≥ 1%, when  these  incidences  were  statistically  significantly  greater  than  the  corresponding  placebo  rate  or considered  clinically  relevant.  They  are  listed  by  treatment  group  and  by  first-  and  second-year  study periods.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                         | Year 1 (4 studies)                                      | Year 1 (4 studies)                                      | Year 2 (2 studies)                                      | Year 2 (2 studies)                                      |
|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| SYSTEM ORGAN CLASS Adverse events                       | ACOMPLIA 20 mg %of patients (N = 2503)                  | Placebo %of patients (N = 1602)                         | ACOMPLIA 20 mg %of patients (N = 688)                   | Placebo %of patients (N = 466)                          |
| INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS                             | INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS                             | INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS                             | INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS                             | INFECTIONS AND INFESTATIONS                             |
| Upper Respiratory tract Infection                       | 12.4                                                    | 11.4                                                    | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Gastroenteritis viral                                   | 3.6                                                     | 2.9                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Nasopharyngitis                                         | -                                                       | -                                                       | 10.3                                                    | 8.8                                                     |
| Urinary tract infection                                 | -                                                       | -                                                       | 2.8                                                     | 2.1                                                     |
| Gastroenteritis                                         | -                                                       | -                                                       | 2.5                                                     | 1.1                                                     |
| PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS                                   | PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS                                   | PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS                                   | PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS                                   | PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS                                   |
| Anxiety                                                 | 5.6                                                     | 2.4                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Insomnia                                                | 5.4                                                     | 3.2                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Mood alterations with depressive symptoms               | 4.8                                                     | 3.1                                                     | longer -                                                | -                                                       |
| Depressive disorders                                    | 3.2                                                     | 1.6                                                     | 1.6                                                     | 0.4                                                     |
| Irritability                                            | 1.9                                                     | 0.6                                                     |                                                         |                                                         |
| Parasomnia                                              | 1.5                                                     | 0.2                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Nervousness                                             | 1.2                                                     | 0.2                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Sleep disorders                                         | 1.0                                                     | 0.4                                                     |                                                         |                                                         |
| NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS                                | NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS                                | NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS                                | NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS                                | NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS                                |
| Dizziness                                               | 7.5                                                     | 4.9                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Memory loss                                             | 1.6                                                     | 0.9                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Hypoesthesia                                            | 1.6                                                     | 0.6                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Sciatica                                                | 1.0                                                     | 0.4                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| no VASCULAR DISORDERS                                   | no VASCULAR DISORDERS                                   | no VASCULAR DISORDERS                                   | no VASCULAR DISORDERS                                   | no VASCULAR DISORDERS                                   |
| Hot flush                                               | 1.9                                                     | 0.7                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS                              | GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS                              | GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS                              | GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS                              | GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS                              |
| Nausea                                                  | 11.9                                                    | 4.9                                                     | 2.8                                                     | 1.7                                                     |
| Diarrhoea                                               | 6.3                                                     | 4.8                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Vomiting                                                | 4.0                                                     | 2.2                                                     | 2.0                                                     | 1.3                                                     |
| SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS                  | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS                  | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS                  | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS                  | SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS                  |
| Pruritus                                                | 1.2                                                     | 0.5                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Hyperhydrosis                                           | 1.2                                                     | 0.5                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| product MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS | product MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS | product MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS | product MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS | product MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS |
| Tendonitis                                              | 2.1                                                     | 1.0                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Muscle cramp                                            | 1.4                                                     | 1.0                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Muscle spasms                                           | 1.0                                                     | 0.5                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Back pain                                               | -                                                       | -                                                       | 7.3                                                     | 5.2                                                     |
| GENERAL DISORDERS                                       | GENERAL DISORDERS                                       | GENERAL DISORDERS                                       | GENERAL DISORDERS                                       | GENERAL DISORDERS                                       |
| Influenza                                               | 8.9                                                     | 8.6                                                     | 9.2                                                     | 7.5                                                     |
| Asthenia/Fatigue                                        | 6.0                                                     | 5.0                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS          | INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS          | INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS          | INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS          | INJURY, POISONING AND PROCEDURAL COMPLICATIONS          |
| Joint sprain                                            | 3.0                                                     | 2.1                                                     | -                                                       | -                                                       |
| Contusion                                               | 2.2                                                     | 0.6                                                     | 2.2                                                     | 0.6                                                     |
| Fall                                                    | 1.9                                                     | 1.4                                                     |                                                         |                                                         |

Medicinal product no longer authorised 33/41 © EMEA 2006 Table 15: Adverse Reactions ≥ 1% from Four Studies that Examined ACOMPLIA 20 mg in Overweight and Obese Patients. Depressive disorders reported with rimonabant 20 mg were usually mild or moderate in severity. Most of the  cases  resolved  with  the  corrective  measures  undertaken,  either  discontinuation  or  anti-depressant treatment.  Overall,  psychiatric  adverse  events  or  adverse  symptoms  from  the  CNS were more  common among  rimonabant  treated  patients  than  among  placebo  treated.  These  adverse  events  were  dose

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 34/41 © EMEA 2006 dependent, where the 5 mg dose showed adverse event frequencies comparable to placebo, but the 20 mg and 40 mg dose showing a considerably higher frequency. TEAEs related to cognitive impairment such as sedation, somnolence and disturbance in attention were reported and were comparable across the 3 treatment groups (rimonabant 5 mg, 20 mg and placebo) in the 1-year  pooled  RIO  data  and  in  the  2-year  pooled  RIO  data.  In  the  placebo-controlled  period  of  the STRATUS program (10-week pooled data and STRATUS-WW week 11 to week 32) there were no signs of sedative effects. In clinical studies on smoking cessation, also the following adverse reactions were commonly reported: sinusitis/upper respiratory tract infection, decreased appetite, anorexia, asthenia/fatigue, dizziness, disturbance in attention, anxiety, insomnia, nervousness, nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, dry mouth, stomach discomfort. · Serious adverse event/ deaths/ other significant events Deaths A total of 13 deaths were reported out of the 16 120 subjects or patients involved in the 49 completed studies: 11 in the RIO program, equally distributed across groups (four in the rimonabant 20 mg group, three in the rimonabant 5 mg group and four in the placebo group), and two in the STRATUS program (both in the rimonabant 20 mg group). Fatal events were mostly of an intercurrent origin (seven cases) or of a cardiac origin in patients with heavy cardiovascular risk factors (four cases). The origin of the two remaining  cases  remained  doubtful:  a  completed  suicide  in  unclear  circumstances  and  a  cardiac  arrest, with no cardiac lesions on autopsy, possibly linked to a long QT syndrome, pre-existing prior to any study drug intake. In addition, there was a cardiac related death, occurring three weeks post-completion of study treatment (10 week of rimonabant 5 mg then 42 weeks of placebo) in the 1-year data of STRATUS-WW. Obesity In the RIO program, serious adverse events (SAEs) were reported with similar incidence in the placebo group and rimonabant groups: 5.9% in the rimonabant 20mg group, 5.4% in the rimonabant 5mg group and 4.2% in the placebo group. In each treatment group, similar SAEs in similar System Organ Classes (SOCs) were reported. The following SAEs were more frequently reported in the rimonabant 20 mg group than in the placebo group: · 12  cases  of  psychiatric  disorders  (6  serious  depressive  disorder)  in  the  rimonabant  20  mg  group (0.5%), versus 2 cases in the placebo group (0.1%); · 12 cases of cardiac disorders in the rimonabant 20 mg group (0.5%) versus 4 cases in the placebo group (0.2%); 2 cases resulted in death; · 9 cases of urinary disorders in the rimonabant 20 mg group (0.4%) versus 2 cases in the placebo group (0.1%) · 6 cases of road traffic accident in the rimonabant 20 mg group versus zero in the placebo group; 2 cases occurred in the context of sleepiness. · 4 cases of fall in the rimonabant 20 mg group. In the 2-year pooled data, new SAEs during the second-year exposure were occasionally reported in the rimonabant 20 mg group (1 or 2 patients each) and were less or comparably reported than during Year 1; two cases had a fatal outcome. Smoking cessation Only  few  serious  TEAEs  were  observed  throughout  the  short-term  STRATUS  studies  (pooled  data), percentages being 2.2% for the placebo group, 1.2% for the rimonabant 5 mg group, and 2.0% for the rimonabant 20 mg group. No serious events were of cardiovascular origin in the rimonabant treatment

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 35/41 © EMEA 2006 arms  (high  risk  subjects  were  excluded  from  participation).  The  cases  that  were  considered  of  clinical relevance and related to the study-drug were severe fatigue, major depression and gastroenteritis. · Laboratory findings In  the  combined  RIO  +  STRATUS  data,  no  laboratory  safety  concerns  were  detected  in  the  main biological  functions  (liver,  renal,  hematology,  electrolytes,  metabolism)  over  time  during  the  whole rimonabant treatment period (up to two years), and were comparable with placebo. Effects on ECG PKD 5237 was a single-centre, randomised, double-dummy, placebo controlled, four parallel group study in 128 male or female subjects assessing the effect on ECG parameters of rimonabant 20 mg and 60 mg compared to placebo and with moxifloxacin 400 mg as a positive control. Moxifloxacin produced clear and consistent QT/QTc interval increases compared with placebo. There was no evidence for a potential of rimonabant to prolong ventricular repolarisation. There was no significant relationship between the QT changes from baseline as measured by the Holter method or from extracted ECGs (with Bazett, Fridericia, or population-specific correction) and rimonabant plasma concentrations. There was some suggestion that the 60 mg dose may be associated with a slight increase (+6 bpm) in heart rate (HR), in healthy subjects. Vital signs The review of vital signs, including supine blood pressure (BP) and HR from phase I and II studies did not reveal any safety issues. When combining all phase III studies, there was a trend towards a decrease in supine BP in the rimonabant 20 mg group compared with placebo. · Safety in special populations No marked differences in terms of clinical safety were observed for elderly compared to younger patients, but  elderly  obese  patients  appeared  to  be  more  prone  to  develop  dizziness  or  diarrhoea  compared  with either young or middle-aged obese patients in the rimonabant 20 mg group. There  were  no  marked  differences  in  terms  of  safety  between  the  two  prominent  ethnic  sub-groups (Caucasian and Afro-American patients), apart from a lower incidence of nausea or somnolence observed in Afro-American patients. · Discontinuation due to adverse events The overall safety review of the combined phase III RIO + STRATUS programs showed that there was a higher rate of treatment discontinuations due to AE in the rimonabant 20 mg group (15.7%) compared to placebo (7.8%) (also observed in the individual RIO and STRATUS programs). In the RIO 1-year pooled data, the main TEAEs leading to discontinuations in the rimonabant 20 mg treated patients, reported in at least 0.5%, were: nausea, mood alterations with depressive symptoms, irritability, anxiety, insomnia and dizziness (see Table 16 below).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                           | Placebo   | Rimonabant    | Rimonabant     |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------|---------------|----------------|
|                                           | (N=1602)  | 5 mg (N=2520) | 20 mg (N=2503) |
| Any event                                 | 7.2%      | 8.8%          | 13.8%          |
| Depressive disorders                      | 0.8%      | 1.0%          | 1.9%           |
| Nausea                                    | 0.1%      | 0.2%          | 1.4%           |
| Mood alterations with depressive symptoms | 0.6%      | 0.9%          | 1.0%           |
| Anxiety                                   | 0.3%      | 0.3%          | 1.0%           |
| Dizziness                                 | <0.1%     | 0.2%          | 0.7%           |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 36/41 © EMEA 2006 Table 16: Percentage of patients with TEAE leading to permanent treatment discontinuation - randomised and exposed patients - 1-year pooled RIO data · Discussion on clinical safety The  main  safety  issue  was  the  psychiatric  AEs,  which  caused  concerns,  especially  since  patients  with current depressions were excluded from the clinical studies. The safety data in Table 16 above shows that there  was  a  dose-response  relation  between  the  frequency  of  certain  psychiatric  adverse  events  and  the dose of rimonabant. The findings from the RIO-programme showed that half of depressive disorders were reported during the first 3 months of the studies, when weight loss was maximum. The number of events was increased in the body  weight  responder  patients  compared  to  the  non-responders.  In  the  STRATUS  program  (10-week pooled data), the probability of occurrence of e.g. anxiety peaked after the target quit day; however, this could be expected in the context of the nicotine withdrawal. The SPC contains warnings (4.4) related to use in patients  with  uncontrolled serious psychiatric illness such as a major depression, and in patients with ongoing antidepressant treatment. The effects on the central nervous system, including psychiatric events, are also one of the main issues in the risk management plan. 5. Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The  CHMP  considered  that  the  Pharmacovigilance  system  as  described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements. Risk Management Plan The applicant submitted a risk management plan (see Table 17 below).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Safety issue                                                                  | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                 | Proposed risk minimization activities                                                                                                                                        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Missing or limited information                                                | Missing or limited information                                                                                        | Missing or limited information                                                                                                                                               |
| Children under the age of 18                                                  | Monitoring of rimonabant prescriptions                                                                                | SPC 4.2: Not recommended for those <18 years of age. Customer care program                                                                                                   |
| Pregnancy                                                                     |                                                                                                                       | SPC 4.6: Use in pregnancy not recommended. Non- clinical findings described in 5.3. Customer care program                                                                    |
| Lactation                                                                     |                                                                                                                       | SPC 4.3 and 4.6: Contraindication in lactation. Non-clinical findings described in 5.3. Customer care program                                                                |
| Elderly patients                                                              | THIN and ARIC databases, disease registry Further clinical trials, Monitoring of rimonabant prescriptions             | SPC 4.2, 4.4: Use with caution in those >75 years of age. Mentioned also in 5.1-5.2. Customer care program                                                                   |
| Black, Afro- Americans and Asiatic patients                                   | ARIC databases, Further clinical trials                                                                               | longer SPC 4.4: Warning of lower exposure in blacks. 5.1- 5.2: Description of PK/PD-effects in blacks and Japanese. Customer care program                                    |
| Patients with hepatic impairment                                              | no                                                                                                                    | SPC 4.2, 4.4: Caution of use in patients with moderate hepatic impairment; use in severe hepatic impairment not recommended. PK-data described in 5.2. Customer care program |
| Patients with renal impairment                                                | Further clinical trial                                                                                                | SPC 4.2, 4.4: Use in severe renal impairment not recommended. PK-data described in 5.2. Customer care program                                                                |
| Use of concomitant medications: antidepressants and potent CYP 3A4 inhibitors | product Monitoring of rimonabant prescriptions                                                                        | SPC 4.4, 4.5: Warning of use with CYP 3A4- inhibitors and with anti-depressants. Customer care program                                                                       |
| Potential and identified risks                                                | Potential and identified risks                                                                                        | Potential and identified risks                                                                                                                                               |
| Depressive disorders                                                          | Specific reporting forms THIN and ARIC databases, disease registry Further clinical trials Special reporting in PSURs | SPC: Described as an adverse effect in 4.8. Customer care program                                                                                                            |
| Convulsions                                                                   | Specific reporting forms, disease registry Further clinical trials                                                    | SPC 4.4: Warning of use in patients treated for epilepsy. Non-clinical findings described in 5.3. Customer care program                                                      |
| Medicinal Anxiety                                                             | THIN and ARIC databases, disease registry Further clinical trials Special reporting in PSURs                          | SPC: Described as an adverse effect in 4.8. Customer care program                                                                                                            |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Insomnia                                 | Further clinical trials                                                          | SPC: Described as an adverse effect in 4.8. Customer care program   |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Dizziness                                | Further clinical trials                                                          | SPC: Described as an adverse effect in 4.8. Customer care program   |
| Neurological sensory disturbance of skin | Further clinical trials                                                          | SPC: Described as an adverse effect in 4.8. Customer care program   |
| Withdrawal syndrome                      | Further clinical trials                                                          |                                                                     |
| Off-label use                            | THIN and ARIC databases, disease registry Monitoring of rimonabant prescriptions | Customer care program                                               |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 38/41 © EMEA 2006 THIN and  ARIC  databases,  disease  registry:  THIN  (The  Health  Improvement  Network  Database)  is  a computerised database of medical records from general practices in the UK; it will be used to evaluate incidence rates of e.g. cardiovascular diseases and depression, and to address any new safety issues. The applicant  also  committed  to  perform  a  full  periodic  follow-up  study  of  the  outcomes  of  rimonabant exposed and non-exposed patients. ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities database) is a prospective cohort study of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease conducted in 4 US communities; it will be used to  evaluate  e.g.  cardiovascular  diseases  and  depression.  Disease  registry:  the  applicant  will  establish  a disease  registry  in  the  US  population  to  assess  e.g.  background  incidence  rates  of  adverse  events,  to describe concomitant drug use/ co-morbidities, and to compare adverse events among rimonabant users and non-users. Customer Care program: To encourage that rimonabant is used in patients at risk for health reason while avoiding use for cosmetic reasons: a specific training for company representatives will be implemented in order  to  provide  healthcare  professionals  with  the  appropriate  information  (e.g.  by  offering  physicians simple ways to educate patients on the clinical benefits of therapy while setting treatment expectations; providing physicians and other healthcare professionals with regular, ongoing educational support tools that can assist their patients in reaching the goals they have established for them; integrating practical diet and exercise information and programmes for healthcare professionals and their patients for when they prescribe rimonabant, that is consistent with local treatment guidelines). This customer care program will include  education  for  example  on  the  use  of  rimonabant  in  pregnancy,  lactation,  elderly,  blacks,  AfroAmericans, Asiatic, patients  with  hepatic  or  renal  impairment,  and  with  concomitant antidepressants or potent CYP3A4 inhibitors; education will be provided also on depressive disorders, convulsions, anxiety, insomnia, dizziness and neurological sensory disturbances of the skin. Monitoring  rimonabant  prescriptions:  Specific  surveys  will  be  put  in  place  in  order  to  monitor  the prescriptions of rimonabant especially to detect any misuse / off-label use of the drug, by analyzing data such  as  drug  prescriptions,  diagnosis  information,  demographic  parameters  (weight,  height,  waist circumference, medical history). Further clinical trials: These will be carried out as part of the large life-cycle management clinical trial programme  of  rimonabant.  Special  focus  will  be  given  on  neurological  and  psychiatric  adverse  events through scripted neuropsychiatric questions obtained at every visit or intermediate phone calls. Separate studies  will  be  carried  out  in  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  and  some  other  ethnic  groups  than blacks. Special  reporting  in  PSURs:  Post-marketing  cases  of  depression  and  anxiety  in  patients  concomitantly using antidepressants will be presented separately in PSURs. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the application is of the opinion that some additional pharmacovigilance  activities  are  needed  apart  from  routine  pharmacovigilance  activities  (see  table  17 above).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Efficacy

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 39/41 © EMEA 2006 6. Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality Quality  aspects  are  satisfactory.  There  are  no  unresolved  quality  issues  which  could  have  a  negative impact on the benefit/risk balance of the product. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Rimonabant is a selective CB1 antagonist. It showed activity in several animal models for obesity and nicotine addiction. The safety pharmacology studies identified CNS (sedation, decreased muscle tone, a proconvulsant  potential  when  combined  with  physical  or  chemical  seizure  inducers,  or  with  stressful conditions) as a possible target for rimonabant. The results of the pharmacokinetic studies revealed a consistent picture across the species with rapid oral absorption, a low  to moderate  bioavailability, wide  distribution, high protein binding, extensive metabolism, long terminal half-life with bile/ faeces as the major excretory pathway. One of the major metabolic  pathways  was  hydrolysis  of  the  amide  bond  that  binds  the  piperidine  ring  to  the  rest  of  the rimonabant molecule, producing a metabolite SR141715, which could, theoretically, release the piperidyl radical  as  N-aminopiperidine  (NAP);  this  compound  is  mutagenic  in  bacteria  and  may  have  other genotoxic properties. Precise estimate of the risk  for humans could not be made but the risk was most likely very low; the applicant committed to provide additional data on the issue as a post-approval followup  measure.  No  signs  of  genotoxicity  were  observed  in  a  standard in  vitro package  or  in  a  mouse micronucleus test. The results  of  the  toxicology  studies  were  consistent  across  species,  with  reduced  weight  gain,  weight loss,  and/or decreased food consumption. CNS-effects including clonic convulsions were seen at higher doses; these symptoms prompted a reduction of the dose levels in the later studies. There were signs of involvement of the liver, kidneys and bone marrow, but none of these provided clear-cut evidence of a direct toxicity of rimonabant. The tumour findings in the liver and female genital tract found in the longterm rat study were considered to be species specific and due to enzyme induction and a chronic hormonal imbalance  with  oestrogen  stimulation,  respectively.  The  finding  of  neuropil  vacuolation  and  increased GFAP staining in rimonabant treated mice, which could be a signal of underlying neuropathology, was diminished by the lack of other signs of neuropathology. The toxic profile of rimonabant was not fully characterised as the highest exposures to rimonabant in the non-clinical  safety  studies  were  similar  to  the  expected  exposure  in  humans  after  the  therapeutic  dose. Thus, the non-clinical studies could provide no reassurance regarding margins to the clinical exposure at present. Consequently, the safe use of rimonabant has to rely more on the clinical safety data and on the post-approval pharmacovigilance programme. The most remarkable effects in the reproductive toxicity package were decreased viability index and pup growth  pre-weaning.  There  were  malformations  in  the  rabbit  embryo-foetal  development  studies (omphalocele and various CNS-malformations) that could be due to rimonabant. These findings resulted in a warning against the use of rimonabant during pregnancy, and in a contraindication during lactation. Finally,  the  environmental  impact  of  rimonabant  needed  further  evaluation  and  additional  studies;  the applicant committed to carry out such studies as a follow-up measure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 40/41 © EMEA 2006 More than 6800 patients were included in the Phase II and Phase III clinical studies. The patients included in the Phase III trials followed a mildly reduced diet during the trial prescribed by a dietician and they were advised to increase their physical activity. Significant mean weight reductions from baseline to one year  for  rimonabant  20  mg  versus  placebo  were  demonstrated  in  the  three  studies  conducted  in  nondiabetic patients, and in one study with type 2 diabetics. Rimonabant was effective in maintaining weight loss for up to two years. Most of the observed weight reduction was obtained within the first nine months of  treatment. Rimonabant reduced the risk of weight regain. Treatment with rimonabant was associated with  reductions  in  waist  circumference,  and  with  an  increase  in  HDL-C  and  decrease  in  triglycerides; generally  no  significant  effect  on  Total-C  or  LDL-C  levels  were  seen.  In  the  trial  in  type  2  diabetic patients who were overweight or obese treated with metformin or sulfonylurea an improvement in HbA1c was observed. Smoking cessation One of the three short-term Phase III studies was positive on all conditions, i.e. prolonged abstinence after 10 weeks treatment, and sustained abstinence at 1 year off drug. The other two studies were negative. The pooled analysis of these short-term studies, as well as data from the Phase II study with 40 mg dose and the  randomized  withdrawal  study  on  maintenance  treatment  provided  evidence  that  rimonabant  had positive effect in smoking cessation. Overall, based on the totality of data it was concluded that an effect on  smoking  cessation  had  been  demonstrated;  however,  the  magnitude  of  this  effect  was  difficult  to estimate, and possibly marginal. Safety The main safety issue was the psychiatric AEs, which were considered to have important implications for the use of rimonabant, especially since patients with current depressions were excluded from the clinical studies. There was a dose-response relation between different depressive AEs and rimonabant treatment. Most of the patients with various kinds of depressive symptoms did eventually recover with or without anti-depressants drugs. All this is addressed in the SPC and risk management plan. The  most  common  side  effects  were  anxiety,  insomnia,  mood  alterations  with  depressive  symptoms, depressive disorders, dizziness nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, asthenia/ fatigue. Having  considered  the  safety  concerns  in  the  risk  management  plan,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. · User consultation The applicant provided results of assessments carried out in cooperation with target patient groups on the package leaflet ('user consultation'), and the package leaflet was modified accordingly. Risk-benefit assessment Management of multiple cardiovascular risk factors in patients with metabolic syndrome: The  CHMP  does  not  currently  accept  the  metabolic  syndrome  as  an  instrument  to  identify  a  target population for pharmacological therapy. Even  if diabetes, hyperlipidaemia and hypertension are recognised as factors that, especially in patients with abdominal  obesity, increase the risk for cardiovascular diseases, no generally accepted definition of the metabolic syndrome exists. A claim for pharmacological intervention based on a demonstrated reduction of the incidence of individual risk factor components commonly included in different definitions of the metabolic  syndrome cannot be accepted with current knowledge. There are several effective options for the treatment of diabetes, hyperlipidaemia and  hypertension  available  today;  therefore  the  existence  of  an  unmet  medical  need  is  questioned.  On these grounds the benefit-risk assessment regarding an indication of 'Management  of  multiple cardiovascular risk factors in patients with metabolic syndrome' is negative. Weight reduction in obesity/ overweight:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

5

Medicinal product no longer authorised 41/41 © EMEA 2006 The demonstrated body weight reduction in overweight patients with additional risk factors and in obese patients has been sufficiently demonstrated and the magnitude of these effects is clinically relevant and appears to be maintained over time. The benefit-risk assessment for this indication in overweight/obese patients is positive, also in light of the psychiatric AEs that may develop over time and the pre-clinical uncertainties that still exist. Type 2 diabetes: Extensive  analyses  performed  by  the  applicant  demonstrated  that  rimonabant  had  an  effect  on  HbA1c independent of weight loss. The size of this effect remained uncertain, although it was large enough to be clinically relevant. The beneficial effects of a combined weight reduction and improved glucose regulation could be expected to be greater in patients with type 2 diabetes than in a general overweight population. The treatment alternatives in overweight type 2 diabetes patients failing on oral anti-diabetics are limited and the weight gain that almost inevitably occurs when these patients are given insulin is a common and important  clinical  problem.  However,  it  is  recognised  that  a  prospective  confirmatory  trial  with rimonabant focusing on patients failing on oral anti-diabetics is  lacking.  Also,  no  study  on  rimonabant monotherapy  in  type  2  diabetes  was  performed.  Therefore,  the  benefit-risk  assessment  was  currently negative for diabetes type 2-indication. However, these effects are described in 5.1 of the SPC. Dyslipidaemia: The effects of rimonabant on HDL-C, its subfractions and on triglycerides are interesting and they may indicate that rimonabant could reduce the risk for cardiovascular complications, which, however, has not been shown (no outcome data available). Furthermore, no comparative data with an active product were available. Therefore, the benefit-risk assessment for the treatment of dyslipidaemia is negative. However, these effects are described in 5.1 of the SPC. Smoking cessation: An  effect  on  smoking  cessation  of  rimonabant  has  been  demonstrated,  but  based  on  current  data  the magnitude of this effect is difficult to assess. In addition, uncertainties in relation to posology remained; in light of the psychiatric AEs that may develop with time and the pre-clinical uncertainties, it is important to establish the optimal duration of treatment and optimal dose. In conclusion, the uncertainties regarding the magnitude  of  the  effect  and  posology  result  in  a  negative  benefit/risk  assessment  for  this  indication. Additional efficacy data, in particular during short-term treatment, would be needed to establish a positive benefit-risk  ratio.  The  Applicant  withdrew  the  claim  for  a  smoking  cessation  indication  before  the  oral explanation. Risk management plan: A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that some further pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns (see 3.5). Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of ACOMPLIA 'as an adjunct to diet and exercise for the treatment of obese patients (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m 2 ), or overweight patients (BMI &gt; 27 kg/m 2 ) with associated risk factor(s), such as type 2 diabetes or dyslipidaemia (see SPC section 5.1 of the Summary of Product Characteristics 5 ).' was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Italic text added for clarity