---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:56:35
document_pages: 27
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/agenerase-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: agenerase-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 13.7002727
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 15:55:36.649846
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Agenerase.  This  scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2004. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Chemical pharmaceutical and biological aspects

## Composition

## Soft capsules

The  synthesis  of  the  active  substance  has  been  adequately  described.  The  control  of  the  starting materials  and  the  intermediates  of  synthesis  enables  a  reproducible  quality  of  the  active  substance, especially with regard to its chiral purity. The specifications, including identification of amprenavir Form V, and the routine tests performed are adequate to ensure the quality of the active substance. The potential impurities have been toxicologically qualified. Batch analyses for five batches of amprenavir,  including  two  production  scale  size,  manufactured  in  accordance  with  the  proposed commercial process meet the proposed specifications.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The two strengths of Agenerase soft capsules (50 mg or 150 mg of amprenavir) have the same relative composition and are identified by different imprints. Amprenavir free base is dissolved in a vehicle containing d-alpha tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate (TPGS, a derivative and source of vitamin E), macrogol 400 and propylene glycol. The capsules are contained in white opaque HDPE bottles  with  child-resistant  closure.  The  packaging  system  for  the  150  mg  soft  capsules  has  been reinforced  through  addition  of  LDPE  foam  filler.    Satisfactory  certificates  have  been  provided  for gelatine to confirm the absence of risk of transmission of TSE. Oral solution To  provide  an  acceptable  dosage  form  for  the  paediatric  population,  an  oral  solution  containing 15  mg/ml  amprenavir  has  also  been  developed.  The  oral  solution,  which  has  a  grape  flavour,  is provided in white opaque HDPE bottle with polypropylene child-resistant closure. Amprenavir free base  is  dissolved  in  the  same  solubilising  excipients  as  used  in  the  soft  capsules.  A  20-ml polypropylene dosing cup is supplied in each pack. As  further  discussed  in  part  4  of  this  document,  the  soft  capsules  and  the  oral  solution  are  not bioequivalent and therefore can not be interchangeable on a milligram per milligram basis. Active substance Amprenavir  contains  three  stereogenic  centers  and  is  a  single  enantiomer  with  the  (3S),  (1S,  2R) configuration. The absolute configuration is ensured by control tests of the starting materials and the synthetic process retains this configuration. Different polymorphs of amprenavir free base have been identified, but Form V is thermodynamically the most stable at normal temperatures and is not hygroscopic. This polymorph is therefore used for the product intended for marketing. The route of synthesis of amprenavir has been modified along the development of the product with respect to the use of solvents at different steps of the process in order to ensure the production of Form V. Considering that the differences are minor, no impact on the impurity profile and/or stability of amprenavir is expected. Potential drug-related impurities arising from the route of synthesishave been adequately discussed.

A retest period of 24 months for the active substance at or below 30  C is supported by the stability data provided up to 18 months (3 production scale batches manufactured with an early synthetic route) and 12 months (3 production scale batches produced according to the commercial route).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Other ingredients

Most  of  the  ingredients  entering  in  the  composition  of  the  soft  capsule  or  oral  solution  meet pharmacopoeial  requirements.  TPGS  has  a  GRAS  status.  The  tolerance  of  the  vehicle  has  been evaluated in the toxicological studies and it was not excluded that immunological reactions could be induced by PEG 400.

The packaging material is standard. The accuracy and reproducibility of the dosing device, a 20 ml measuring cup, have been adequately shown.

## Product development and finished product

## Soft capsules

Medicinal product no longer authorised Amprenavir  has  a  low  solubility  in  water  and  a  low  bioavailability. During  the  development,  the choice  of  the  form  and  of  the  vehicle  used  was  optimised  with  respect  to  bioavailability  and  rapid absorption by the body.  Initially, the only available crystalline form of amprenavir was the mesylate salt,  used  during  the  early  clinical  trials.  With  the  discovery  of  the  polymorph  V,  which  is thermodynamically more stable but has a lower solubility, a reformulation was necessary. The final formulation including the selection of each excipient, the fill solution and capsule shell development, as well as the process development, has been adequately justified. A hard capsule formulation containing amprenavir mesylate and different soft capsule formulations, containing various amounts of TPGS, have also been used during the clinical trials. The  manufacturing  process  of  the  capsules,  which  uses  standard  soft  capsules  manufacturing technology, has been adequately described. In-process controls are sufficient to ensure a reproducible quality.  Validation  data  on  three  production  scale  batches,  of  each  strength  of  the  soft  capsules, showed  that  the  manufacturing  process  produces  a  uniform  and  homogeneous  product  that  will consistently  meet  the  specifications  proposed  for  the  finished  product.  The  acceptance  limits established for the degradation product in the finished product are supported by toxicological studies. Oral solution The formulation including the selection of each excipient, artificial sweeteners as well as the process development, has been adequately justified. There was some concerns, however, with the high amount of propylene glycol used in the oral solution (550 mg/ml), resulting in a daily intake of this excipient in excess to the acceptable limit defined by FAO/WHO, especially since the oral solution is intended to be used in children. The issue has therefore been further addressed from a toxicological and clinical point of view. The lack of a preservative in the formulation has been adequately justified. Two different formulations of the oral solution, which slightly differ with respect to flavour and pH have been used during the clinical trials. The manufacturing of the oral solution is under control. The following key steps have been identified: solubilisation of amprenavir, pH adjustment, filtering and filling. Data from three batches manufactured using the commercial process meet the specifications. The acceptance limits established for the degradation product in the finished product are supported by toxicological studies. Stability of the product Soft capsules

Stability  data  have  been  provided  up  to  18  months  (25  C/60  %  RH)  for  the  two  strengths    (three batches  of  each  strength  containing  the  active  substance  synthesised  with  an  earlier  process).  No crystal  formation  has  been  observed  during  storage.  The  results  are  within  the  specifications  and therefore 24 months shelf life is acceptable when the soft capsules are stored below 30  C. The shelf life was subsequently extended to 3 years.

## Oral solution

Stability data are provided up to 12 months with three production scale batches.  Supportive data up to 18 months obtained with an earlier formulation, which differed in terms of pH and flavours have also

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

been provided.The three production scale batches contain amprenavir synthesised with the commercial process and the supportive batches contain amprenavir synthesised with an early process.  The results are  within  the  specifications  and  therefore  24  months  shelf  life  is  acceptable.  The  shelf  life  was subsequently extended to 3 years.

## 2. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

Amprenavir is a non-peptidic, competitive inhibitor of the HIV protease. It blocks the ability of the viral  protease  to  cleave  precursor  polyproteins  necessary  for  viral  replication.  Amprenavir  is  a selective inhibitor of HIV-1 and HIV-2 replication.

In vitro variants resistant to amprenavir were still very sensitive to saquinavir, indinavir and nelfinavir but  showed  3  to  5-fold  reduced  susceptibility  to  ritonavir.  Further in  vitro studies  suggested  that concomitant  therapy  with  amprenavir  and  saquinavir  or  indinavir  may  delay  the  acquisition  of mutationsassociated  with  resistance  to  amprenavir.  Conversely  the  combination  of  ritonavir  and amprenavir  produced  dual  resistance.  Many  PI  resistant  variants  were  still  sensitive  to  amprenavir. Little  cross-resistance  has  been  observed  with  amprenavir  selected  resistant  variants  and  other  PIs suggesting a potential PI salvage therapy following amprenavir failure. The clinical consequences of these results are currently unclear.

Medicinal product no longer authorised  Antiviral activity The in  vitro investigation  of  the  antiviral  activity  is  limited  but  reveals  that  amprenavir  is  active against a broad range of HIV-1 strains, including clinical strains. The concentration that inhibits 50 % of  replication  of  HIV-1 IIIB (IC50  value)  ranged  between  0.012  M  and  0.08  M.  In  subsequent clinical  studies,  68  clinical  isolates  from  geographically  different  regionswere  tested  at  baseline  for susceptibility  to  amprenavir  with  a  range  of  IC50  values  between0.003  -  0.204  µM  (0.001  -  0.09  g/ml). Amprenavir was shown to inhibit the protease with the respective inhibition constants (Ki) of 0.6 nM for HIV-1 and 19 nM for HIV-2. The IC50 values of amprenavir for human aspartyl protease have not been determined but for pepsine and cathepsin D the Kis were 1000-fold higher and for renin 90-fold higher than the respective  values for HIV-1 and HIV-2.  Amprenavir has a therapeutic index of &gt; 500 based on in vitro assays. The antiviral activity of amprenavir is influenced by protein binding and inhibitory levels increase by 2 to 5 fold in the presence of plasma proteins, especially alpha-1-acid glycoprotein.  The major metabolites of amprenavir have no antiviral activity. The antiviral activity of amprenavir has not been evaluated in vivo in animal studies. In vitro data  indicated  a  synergistic  activity  of  amprenavir  in  combination  with  zidovudine, didanosine, abacavir and saquinavir and an additive activity with indinavir, ritonavir and nelfinavir. Amprenavir did not inhibit any other human pathogens at concentrations up to 100  M.  Resistance profile In vitro the key protease mutation associated with resistance to amprenavir was at position 50 (I50V, isoleucine to valine) that resulted in 3-fold reduction in susceptibility. On continued passage in the presence of amprenavir, further mutations arose within the active site flap region, first at residue 46 (M46I/L, methionine to isoleucine/leucine) which produced a double mutant and, second, a mutation at residue 47 (I47V, isoleucine to valine) which produced a triple mutant. The double and the triple mutations  resulted  in  a  3  to  7-fold  and  10  to  20-fold  reductions  in  sensitivity  to  amprenavir, respectively.  This  triple  mutant  has  not  been  observed  with  any  of  the  other  protease  inhibitors available.

##  General and safety pharmacology programme

There was no evidence of any marked effects of amprenavir on the major organ systems in mice, rats and dogs at doses up to 1000 mg/kg. Amprenavir showed a weak  -1 antagonistic activity. In addition, at concentrations of 10  M, amprenavir had significant negative chronotropic and inotropic effects in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

spontaneously beating guinea-pig atria. These effects have not been observed in other in vitro , in vivo and clinical studies and therefore are considered of no clinical relevance.

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetic profile of amprenavir has been determined using validated testing methods in several  species  (mouse,  rat,  rabbit,  dog  and  cynomolgous  monkey  in  early  studies)  after  single  and multiple dose administration.

## Absorption and distribution

Medicinal product no longer authorised Amprenavir,  when  appropriately  formulated,  was  rapidly  and  well  absorbed  after  single  oral administration with T max values of approximately 1 hour in rats and dogs. Bioavailability estimates for amprenavir were calculated in rats and dogs with formulations similar to the soft capsule formulation used in clinical  studies.  With  single  doses  (11  mg/kg  in  rats  and  25  mg/kg  in  dogs)  similar  to  that following single administration in humans (24 mg/kg based on a dose of 1200 mg to a 50 kg human), the estimated bioavailability was 40 % in rats and 98 % in dogs. At doses of 65 and 175 mg/kg in dogs,  bioavailability  decreased  to  66%  and  35%  respectively.  The  proportion  of  the  dose  in  rat  or human faeces, excreted as the parent compound after administration of radiolabelled amprenavir, was less than 13 % suggesting that oral bioavailability was limited by pre-systemic clearance and not by absorption. Estimates  of  C max and  AUC  generally  increased  in  a  dose-dependent,  but  not  dose-proportional manner after administration of amprenavir to rats and dogs.  After multiple oral dose administration of amprenavir to rats with doses ranging from 50 to 1000 mg/kg/day, AUC values in dose groups greater than 50 mg/kg/day decreased by 30% to 70% after day 1, and remained generally stable thereafter. After multiple oral dose administration of greater than 50 mg/kg/day amprenavir to dogs, however, AUC values increased after the first dose, and remained generally stable with continued dosing. Protein  binding at  the  therapeutic  concentration  of  10  g/ml  was  81  %  and  82  %  in  rat  and  dog respectively, compared with greater than 90 % in humans. Protein binding decreased with increasing amprenavir  concentrations.  The  partitioning  of  amprenavir  into  erythrocytes  was  low  but  increased with increasing  amprenavir concentrations, reflecting the higher amount of unbound drug. In wholebody autoradiography studies in rats, amprenavir was widely distributed with high levels found in the gastrointestinal tract and in the bile duct. However the ability of amprenavir to penetrate the bloodbrain barrier appeared to be minimal in this species. Amprenavir crossed the placenta and distributed into milk, a finding which has been adequately addressed in Section 4.6 of the Summary of Product Characteristics. Metabolism and elimination

In rats and dogs, the mean percentages of administered dose recovered in faeces were 104 % and 84 % respectively.  Amprenavir  was  extensively  metabolised,  with  the  cytochrome  P450  isozyme  CYP3A sub-family  primarily  responsible  for  the  production  of  the  oxidative  metabolites.  Twenty-four metabolites  of  amprenavir  have  been  characterised  in  rats  and  dogs.  Excretion  of  unchanged amprenavir accounted approximately for 13 % of the dose in rats, and 52 % of the dose in dogs. The major radiolabelled component excreted in the faeces of rats (51 % of the radiocarbon) and humans (62 % of the radiocarbon) was a metabolite resulting from di-oxidation of the tetrahydrofuran moiety. A second metabolite (6 % of the radiocarbon in rats and 32 % of the radiocarbon in humans) was a metabolite resulting from di-oxidation of the tetrahydrofuran moiety and an additional oxidation of the aniline  portion  of  the  molecule.  Glucuronides  and  acetylated  metabolites  of  parent  compound  have been  identified, showing  that amprenavir  is a substrate for uridine-diphosphate  glucuronosyl transferase (UDPGT) and N-acetyl transferase. All of the metabolites identified in humans have also been seen in rats or dogs, but the rat metabolic profile appeared more similar to the human metabolic profile. Amprenavir was eliminated mono-exponentially with a half-life of 1to 2 hours in rats and dogs compared to 7 to 10 hours in humans.

Amprenavir  is  an  inhibitor  of  human  and  rat  microsomal  activity  CYP3A4  at  clinically  relevant concentrations; a comparison of amprenavir and other HIV protease inhibitors showed the potency of CYP3A4 inhibition to be the following (in declining potency): ritonavir &gt;&gt; indinavir  nelfinavir 

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

amprenavir &gt; saquinavir.  Metabolic interactions are mostly likely to occur with substances that affect, or are affected by, CYP3A4 and UDPGT. Co-administration of amprenavir and abacavir in rats and humans had no apparent effect on systemic exposure of either compound.

In  dogs  there  was  no  effect  on  C max or  T max values  of  amprenavir  after  co-administration  with saquinavir  or  ritonavir.  Saquinavir  had  no  effect  on  amprenavir  AUC,  but  ritonavir  increased amprenavir  AUC  values  by  25  %.  Co-administration  of  amprenavir  and  cimetidine  resulted  in  a moderate decrease (17 %) in amprenavir AUC values and a small decrease (8 %) in cimetidine AUC values.

There  were  no  significant  sex  differences  in  pharmacokinetic  parameters.  Systemic  exposure  to amprenavir was similar after oral dosing of pregnant and non-pregnant rats; plasma concentrations of amprenavir were higher after oral administration in juvenile rats compared to mature rats, probably due to underdeveloped drug metabolising capacities in juvenile animals.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Toxicology A  conventional  toxicity  programme  has  been  conducted  in  compliance  with  Good  Laboratory Practices. Studies have been performed both with amprenavir mesylate and free base contained in a formulation equal or at least similar  to the clinical soft capsule formulation or the paediatric liquid formulation.  The oral route was mostly used since it is the proposed clinical route of administration. The oral bioavailability of amprenavir free base was good in the dog, adequate in the rat and poor in the  rabbit.  For  amprenavir  mesylate,  oral  bioavailability  was  adequate  in  the  rat  and  poor  in  the cynomolgus monkey. Due to the fact that estimates of C max and AUC were sub-proportional to dose at the dose levels used in animal toxicity studies, animals were dosed twice daily to maximise exposures. At the end of the long term rat and dog studies, at the high dose level AUC values were approximately 2.3 to 2.8 and 5.4 to 11.2 times the human AUC, at the proposed therapeutic dose, respectively (the median AUC in humans at the therapeutic dosage of 1200 mg bid was approximately 37  g.h/ml). Only one early study has been carried out on the cynomolgus monkey since the dog was shown to be a better pharmacokinetic model for amprenavir in humans. Single  dose  toxicity :      After  oral  dosing,  all  rats  survived  a  maximum  dose  of  3000  mg/kg  with minimal  signs  and  mice  died  at  doses  of  1000  mg/kg  after  salivation,  labored  breathing,  and prostration.  Intravenous doses of  100 mg/kg in the rat and  75 mg/kg in the mouse produced death with preceding signs of labored breathing, prostration and convulsions.  Ataxia noted in amprenavir and control animals was considered related to the PEG 400 dosing vehicle. Repeated dose toxicity : In the 6-month rat study, doses ranged from 50 to 750 mg/kg/day. In the 6 and 12 months dog studies, the high dose was reduced to 225 mg/kg/day due to severe clinical signs of emesis, weight loss and dehydration observed with higher doses. The  liver  was  the  primary  target  organ  for  toxicity  of  amprenavir  free  base  in  both  species.  Dose related increases in liver weight and correlated hepatocellular hypertrophy were seen in most studies. Histopathological signs of toxicity, such as hepatocyte pigmentation and necrosis, were also noted at higher  doses.  The  concomitant  finding  of  increased  liver  and  thyroid  weights,  and  hepatocyte  and thyroid follicular hypertrophy in both rats and dogs, were most likely the result of induction of liver drug metabolising enzymes by amprenavir. In terms of laboratory findings, AST and ALT activities increased  at  all  doses  in  male  rats,  but  inversely  proportional  to  dose.  There  was  also  an  increase during the recovery period. Although the cause of this effect has not been elucidated, no significant liver toxicity that could involve safety concerns in human use, was found during clinical studies.

In  the  dog,  reductions  in  red  cell  indices  were  found  in  all  studies,  but  were  reversible  during  the recovery period. These haematological variations are considered to be of no clinical relevance since no significant effects on erythroid paramaters have been reported during the clinical studies.

In  four  studies  where  amprenavir  was  administered  daily  for  approximately  one  month  to  rats  in different formulations starting at age 4 days, a high percentage of pups died due to acute toxicity. A high mortality response was also reported in the vehicle control group. The possibility that amprenavir may be more toxic in very young animals (may be due to immaturity of their metabolising enzymes) which  may  be  influenced  by  the  vehicle  (propylene  glycol,  PEG  400),  is  unlikely  to  be  of  any

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

consequences for patients four years old and over. These results have been reflected in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

Genotoxicity : Amprenavir mesylate and free base are neither mutagenic nor clastogenic in a standard battery of in vivo and in vitro genotoxic tests.

Carcinogenicity: the studies performed in rodents was l ongoing at time of Marketing Authorisation.. Provision of the results is part of the follow-up measures to be fulfilled by the applicant.

Final  reports  of  the  two-year  carcinogenicity  studies  in  rats  and  mice  were  submitted  to  fulfil  the commitment as a follow-up measure.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In mice , there was a treatment-related statistically significant increase in the incidence of hepatocellular adenomas in male at the high dose. A high incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma was seen in all male APV-treated groups although the increase was not statistically significantly different from male control mice and is within the range of historical controls for this finding at the test facility. In females, an increase in incidence of hepatocellular adenomas at the medium dose was reported and was not statistically different from controls and also was within the range of historical controls at this laboratory. APV-related liver changes were seen in all treated groups, consistent with the toxicity profile of APV from the toxicity studies. In rats ,  the  incidence  of  hepatocellular  adenomas  was  increased  in  males  at  the  medium  and  high dose.  A similar finding was not seen in females. According to the Expert of the MAH, although the incidence of hepatocellular adenomas in males was higher than in either control group, it was within the historical control range of the test facility. The mechanism for the hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas found in these studies has not been elucidated. Although the incidences for hepatocellular carcinomas were not statistically significantly different from controls an increase in the incidence was reported with a low safety margin and the clinical relevance in humans is unknown. Also, it should be considered that APV-related changes were seen in the liver during the toxicology program in rodents and dogs. Therefore, the liver can be considered as a target organ for toxicity. The Marketing Authorisation Holder proposed an adequate statement to be added to section 5.3 of the SPC. Reproduction toxicity: Orally administered amprenavir mesylate or free base was evaluated for effects on fertility, embryofoetal and perinatal development. Amprenavir had no effect on the mating performance and fertility of male and female rats. However, amprenavir was shown to cross the placenta. In  rats,  minor  abnormalities  indicating  developmental  delay  were  identified.  Some  evidence  for embryo-foetal toxicity (reduced ossification of the skull bones) was found in the group receiving the highest dose (750 mg/kg/day), which gives systemic exposure approximately 2.3 times the exposure in humans.  Females showed a significant dose dependent increase in placental weights.

Studies  in  rabbits  showed  that  pregnant  rabbits  have  poor  tolerance  to  amprenavir  and  its  vehicle compared to non-pregnant rabbits. Only limited systemic exposure was therefore achieved in pregnant rabbits  which  makes  conclusions  difficult  to  draw.    Results  carried  out  with  another  more  suitable second species will be submitted once available.

Post natal development study in rats showed that male and female pups from dams that received 750 mg/kg/day  had  significantly  lower  mean  body  weights.  Amprenavir  has  also  been  shown  to  be excreted in rat milk. On the basis of these results, amprenavir should not be administered in pregnant women unless potential benefit outweighs the potential risk to the foetus, as indicated in the Summary of Product Characteristics.  In addition, breast-feeding is not recommended.

As a follow up measure following Marketing Authorisation, it was stated that another more suitable species to study the effects of APV should be considered. According to the follow-up measure, the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Marketing Authorisation Holder submitted in December 2000 a pilot developmental toxicity study in pregnant  CD-1  BR  mice,  to  determine  if  the  mouse  is  a  suitable  species  in  which  to  conduct  a subsequent  developmental  toxicity  study.  Several  findings  (variation  of  tarsal  flexure,  cleft  palate, ablepharia)  were  reported,  although  differences  were  not  statistically  significant  related  to  controls. The  Applicant  considered  that  the  mouse  was  not  likely  to  offer  any  new  information  about  the teratogenic potential of amprenavir and no further studies were planned to evaluate the reproductive toxicity of amprenavir.

Therefore, although the lack of a suitable second species for reproductive toxicity does not alter the safety assessment, the CPMP required that the currently approved SPC was updated with reference to the data in the mouse alongside data in the rat and the rabbit.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Local tolerance :  amprenavir free base was not a sensitiser and not an irritant to the skin, but was a slight irritant to the rabbit eye. Environmental risk assessment : no toxicological risk for the environment with amprenavir is foreseen. Other  toxicity :  The  toxicity  of  amprenavir  free  base  in  combination  with  abacavir  sulphate  was investigated in rats. High dose of amprenavir and abacavir at exposures (in terms of AUC) equivalent to 35 (abacavir) and 3.5 (amprenavir) times the exposures in humans at the therapeutic dose (i.e 530 and  750  mg/kg/day,  respectively)  caused  increased  heart  weight.  This  effect  was  not  accompanied with  significant  changes  in  histopathology  but  was  still  present  in  females  after  recovery  period showing  that  this  effect  seems  to  be  irreversible.  This  effect  was  not  acheived  with  either  of  the products administered alone. Impurities : Results from three specific oral impurity studies showed that impurities at a concentration of  at  least  15  times  greater  than  the  current  specifications  did  not  change  the  established  toxicity profile or mutagenic potential of amprenavir. 3. Clinical aspects The clinical programme consists of fifteen pharmacokinetic studies, two dose ranging studies and two phase III clinical  trials  to  support  the  indication  of  amprenavir  in  adults.  Five  supportive  phase  I/II studies have also been submitted. In addition, three pharmacokinetics studies, one phase II and one phase III studies have been conducted to support the indication in children. All the clinical trials have been performed according to GCP standards and agreed international ethical principles. The clinical programme  intended  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  amprenavir  generally  in  combination therapy, with NRTIs both in antiretroviral naive and experienced patients including PI naive patients. Double,  triple  and  quadruple  therapies  with  amprenavir  have  been  evaluated  but  not  all  possible combinations have been studied. The approved indication is the following: Agenerase is indicated for the treatment of protease inhibitor experienced HIV-1 infected adults and children above the age of 4 years, in combination with other antiretroviral agents. The choice of amprenavir should be based on individual viral resistance testing and treatment history of patients. In protease inhibitor naive patients, Agenerase is less effective than indinavir.

In heavily pretreated protease inhibitor experienced patients, the use of Agenerase has not been sufficiently studied.

The  recommended dosing schedule for Agenerase capsules is 1200 mg twice daily for adults and 20 mg/kg body weight twice daily for children (4 to 12 years) and patients less than 50 kg body weight. The recommended dosing schedule for Agenerase 15 mg/ml oral solution is 17 mg/kg body weight three times daily for children of 4 years and older unable to swallow capsules.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

##  Mechanism of action

Amprenavir is a protease inhibitor with a specific inhibitory activity of the viral protease of HIV-1 and HIV-2.      As  indicated  in  Part  III,  amprenavir  has in  vitro a  synergistic  effect  with  zidovudine, didanosine, abacavir and saquinavir.  It has also been shown to have an additive effect in combination with indinavir, ritonavir and nelfinavir.

##  Resistance profile

Medicinal product no longer authorised The resistance profile has been extensively monitored during the clinical trials.  The mutation pattern associated with reduced viral susceptibility to amprenavir appears to be  different from those reported with other PIs.  Genotypic and phenotypic analyses confirmed that reduced sensitivity of laboratory strains and clinical isolates of HIV-1 to amprenavir is generally mediated via mutation at codon 50 (I50V).  When  amprenavir  was  used  in  an  early  monotherapy  study,  the  key  mutation  I50V  was associated with high level of resistance. PI cross-resistance profile following amprenavir failure In  clinical  practice  (PROAB3006,  randomised  phase),  four  principal  routes  for  the  development  of phenotypic resistance to amprenavir in protease inhibitor-naïve patients have been identified:  combinations of mutations including the I50V (19% failures)  or substitutions at position 54 (I54L/M, 21% failures)  or the I84V substitution (6% failures)  or the substitutions V32I + I47V (15% failures). All  four  routes  resulted  in  cross-resistance  with  ritonavir,  but  not  with  the  other  available  PIs (indinavir, saquinavir and nelfinavir). Therapy with amprenavir following PI containing regimen failures Analysis  of  clinical  isolates  from  55  PI  experienced  patients  from  CNAA2007  revealed  at  baseline multiple PI mutations which conferred resistance to saquinavir, indinavir, nelfinavir and ritonavir in the range of 72 to 84 %.  None of the isolates harboured the I50V mutation, which seemed to confirm that apart from amprenavir none of the PIs select this mutation.  Based on phenotypic assays, 30 of these 55 isolates were still sensitive to amprenavir. Combined analysis of data from published studies, involving PI-experienced patients, indicates that the level  of  cross-resistance  among  indinavir,  ritonavir  and  nelfinavir  (37-84%  of  clinical  isolates)  is considerably higher than observed with amprenavir (18-45%). The incidence of saquinavir resistance was generally lower than for the other PIs except amprenavir. The potential for cross-resistance between amprenavir and NRTIs and NNRTIs is unlikely considering the different target enzymes involved.

Correlation analyses of the non randomised phase of PROAB3006 (n ~ 40 indinavir experienced patients treated with amprenavir) and PROAB3004 (in children, n = 50) showed that, in addition to baseline viral load, the most important predictor for failure of amprenavir containing therapy in PI experienced patients is the increasing number of key protease inhibitor mutations at baseline. These data are reinforced by the preliminary analysis of the subgroup of patients (n = 111) in whom amprenavir is a component of their antiretroviral  salvage  regimen  (analysis  of  an  ongoing  study,  NARVAL,  aiming  to  evaluate  the  use  of resistance testing to guide the treatment of PI-experienced patients). Nevertheless, further prospective data are still needed to clarify the predictive value for amprenavir failure of the different combinations of PI mutations, and their relationship with the phenotypic findings.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  Dynamic studies

Preliminary dose escalation studies in adult and children showed that all amprenavir doses tested (150 to  1200  mg)  were  well  tolerated.  The  most  common  adverse  events  reported  possibly  related  to amprenavir were headache and nausea.

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetic profile of amprenavir has been determined in 15 studies after single and multiple doses ranging from 150 mg single dose to 1200 mg twice a day in healthy volunteers, HIV-1 infected adult  patients,  children  (5  mg/kg  to  20  mg/kg  dose)  and  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment.  The studies  have  been  conducted  using  hard  capsules  and  soft  capsules  containing  different  amounts  of TPGS ranging from 22.9 % to 51 % compared to the formulation intended for marketing.  Studies have also been conducted using the oral solution.

Food  (standardised  high  fat  breakfast)  delayed  absorption  and  decreased  both  C max (33  and  40  % respectively)  and  AUC 0-∞ (14  and  25  %  respectively)  in  two  studies  using  the  clinical  trial  capsule formulation  and  the  formulation  intended  for  marketing.  As  the  steady  state  trough  concentration (Cmin,ss )  was  not  affected  by  food  intake,  amprenavir  may  be  administered  with  or  without  food  as indicated in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Absorption and distribution After oral administration, amprenavir is rapidly and well absorbed. It has been demonstrated in vitro that  absorption  is  mediated  by  active  absorption,  amprenavir  being  a  substrate  for  the  countertransport protein P-glycoprotein (PgP), like other available protease inhibitors. The  absolute  bioavailability  of  amprenavir  is  unknown  due  to  the  lack  of  an  adequate  intravenous formulation but has been estimated to be 89% (without taking into account any pre-systemic and first passage metabolism). Amprenavir exhibits linear pharmacokinetic behaviour, but for single doses up to 1200 mg there are greater than proportional dose related increases in AUC 0-∞ . After  single  administration  of  doses  ranging  from  150  to  1200  mg,  peak  amprenavir  plasma concentration is achieved by 2 hours. The oral solution containing 15 mg/ml is more rapidly absorbed with a T max reached in 0.75 hours. A second small peak is observed approximately 10 to 12 hours after the administered dose, which may be due to delayed absorption or enterohepatic circulation. Following multiple doses ranging from 300 mg bid to 1200 mg bid, the pharmacokinetics is linear at steady-state but no dose proportionality could be observed. Total amprenavir concentrations decreased over the initial 3 to 4 weeks of therapy (48 % at 1200 mg bid). No conclusion can be drawn on the dose proportionality considering the inadequacy of the study design (e.g. limited number of patients, bioinequivalence  of  the  capsules  used).  Amprenavir  has  time  dependent  pharmacokinetics  probably due to a reduction in protein binding (lower to alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) concentration as a result of the antiretroviral therapy). Data do not allow a definitive conclusion on when the steady state total  plasma  concentrations  are  reached.  At  therapeutic  dosages  (1200  mg  twice  daily),  the  mean maximum steady state concentration (C maxss ) of amprenavir capsules is 5.36  g/ml (0.92-9.81) and the minimum steady state concentration (C minss ) is 0.28  g/ml (0.12-0.51). The mean AUC over a dosing interval  of  12  hours  is  18.46  g.h/ml  (3.02-32.95).  No  sign  of  accumulation  has  been  observed. Multiple  administration  of  amprenavir  (900  mg,  1050  mg  and  1200  mg)  in  combination  with lamivudine  and  zidovudine,  resulted  in  a  large  intra-variability  reported  in  amprenavir  trough concentrations.  Similarly  the  inter-variability  was  important  for  the  median  trough  levels  within treatment groups.

In  vitro ,  amprenavir  is  highly  protein  bound  approximately  90  %,  mainly  to  AAG  and  to  a  lesser extent  albumin. In  vitro binding  of  amprenavir  to  AAG  was  not  linear  with  the  concentration  of amprenavir and AAG. The clinical implications are unclear. However, even if a decrease or increase in AAG occurred, there will be no change in the concentration of free substance as long as the unbound (intrinsic) clearance has not changed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The apparent volume of distribution corrected for the fraction absorbed (V 2 /F) decreased with dose and  ranged  from  336  to  482  l,  suggesting  that  amprenavir  penetrates  freely  into  tissue  beyond  the systemic circulation.

Penetration of amprenavir into cerebrospinal fluid at steady state was poor, with a cerebrospinal spinal fluid to plasma concentration ratio &lt; 1%.

## Metabolism and elimination

Amprenavir is primarily metabolised by the liver and less than 3 % excreted unchanged in the urine. As demonstrated during in  vitro studies,  the  metabolism  is via cytochrome P450, mainly CYP 3A4 isoenzyme. Phase I metabolism is essentially oxidative and Phase II metabolism is via UDP-GT and N-acetyl  transferase.  The  main  metabolites,  inactive in  vitro, represent  50.3  %  of  the  administered dose .

Medicinal product no longer authorised Clearance of amprenavir following single oral doses ranging from 150 to 1200 mg is estimated to be between  3  and  4.7  ml.  The  elimination  half-life  (t ½)  ranged  between  7.08  and  9.54  hours.  The elimination pathway for amprenavir is mainly through the faeces. Total recovery of a dose of 600 mg was  89  %  (range  66-93  %)  and  approximately  14  %  and  75  %  was  detected  as  parent  drug  or metabolites in urine and faeces respectively. Approximately 94 % of the excreted dose in faeces was detected as metabolites. Special populations The pharmacokinetic profile of amprenavir has not been established in the elderly and patients with renal dysfunction. Amprenavir is only minimally excreted in urine and therefore the impact of renal impairment  should  be  minimal.  Appropriate  recommendations  have,  however,  been  included  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics to reflect the lack of data. In  patients  with  moderate  and  severe  hepatic  cirrhosis  (Child  Pugh  score  5-15),  AUC 0  increased significantly  compared  with  healthy  volunteers  after  administration  of  single  oral  doses  of  600  mg (almost 3-fold in patients with moderate hepatic impairment and 4-fold in patients with severe hepatic impairment). The clinical experience in this patients group is limited but, based on pharmacokinetic data  only,  the  dose  recommendations  in  adults  should  be  reduced  as  indicated  in  the  Summary  of Product Characteristics. The  gender  did  not  seem  to  influence  amprenavir  pharmacokinetics,  however  further  data  will  be collected. Amprenavir exposures were lower in black subjects compared to white which may be linked to differences in AAG levels. The real clinical relevance is currently unknown. The pharmacokinetic profile of amprenavir in children has been evaluated in single and multiple doses studies. Single dose of amprenavir capsules (5, 10, 15 and 20 mg/kg) was administered to HIV-1 infected children aged 4 to 12 years. These children had similar pharmacokinetics parameters to those adults (t ½ : 6.2 to 8.3; V 2 /F 321 to 360 l). Linear pharmacokinetics in terms of AUC and dose proportionality were observed within this dose-range. The C max of amprenavir increased linearly but less than proportionally. Following multiple doses (15 mg/kg tid oral solution or 20 mg/kg bid oral solution or 20 mg/kg bid capsules) similar exposures to the ones in adults receiving 1200 mg bid were obtained. As the oral solution is 14% less bioavailable than amprenavir capsules, doses of 15 mg/kg tid  or  20  mg/kg  bid  of  capsules  or  17  mg/kg  tid  or  22.5  mg/kg  bid  of  oral  solution  seemed  to  be sufficient to provide adequate plasma levels.

## Interactions studies

Amprenavir is a substrate and a potential  inhibitor  of  CYP3A4.  Caution  should be exercised when it is co-administered with substrates, inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4 and relevant information has been included into the Summary of Product Characteristics.

Considering that HIV infected patients are frequently subject to multiple therapies, that amprenavir is extensively  metabolised  by  CYP  3A4,  interaction  studies  have  been  conducted  with  commonly  coadministered medicinal products. The main findings are displayed in the below tables:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Antiretroviral agents

|                                                                           | Co- administered substances   | Population   | Dose                 | C max   | AUC   | Cmin   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------|----------------------|---------|-------|--------|
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Indinavir                     | Patients     | 800 mg tid           |  18%   |  33% |  25%  |
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Nelfinavir                    | Healthy      | 800 mg tid           |  14%   |  9%  |  189% |
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Saquinavir                    | Healthy      | 800 mg tid           |  37%   |  32% |  14%  |
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Lamivudine                    | Patients     | 600 mg (single dose) |        |      | N/A    |
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Zidovudine                    | Patients     | 600 mg (single dose) |        |      | N/A    |
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                     | Abacavir                      | Healthy      | 900 mg BID           |  47%   |  29% |  27%  |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Indinavir                     | Patients     | 800 mg tid           |  22%   |  38% |  27%  |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Nelfinavir                    | Healthy      | 800 mg tid           |  12%   |  15% |  14%  |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Saquinavir                    | Healthy      | 800 mg tid           |  21%   |  19% |  48%  |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Lamivudine                    | Healthy      | 600 mg (single dose) |  16%   |  9%  | N/A    |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Zidovudine                    | Patients     | 600 mg (single dose) |  40%   |  31% | N/A    |
| Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Abacavir                      | Patients     | 900 mg BID           |        |      |       |

COL30439 :  A multi-dose pharmacokinetic study of the interaction between delavirdine and APV in 18 healthy volunteers.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Nelfinavir Saquinavir Lamivudine Zidovudine amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of  co-administered substance Abacavir Based on the results presented in the above table, no dose adjustment is necessary when amprenavir is co-administered  with  any  of  these  antiretrovirals:  indinavir,  saquinavir,  nelfinavir,  lamivudine, zidovudine or abacavir. A preliminary report indicated that co-administration of amprenavir with efavirenz produced 40 % reductions in AUCss, C maxss and C minss of amprenavir. The magnitude of this interaction seems relevant. The administration of amprenavir and efavirenz without the administration of a pharmacokinetic booster (an appropriate protease inhibitor) is therefore not recommended as it is likely to result in sub-optimal plasma levels of amprenavir.  Following Marketing Authorisation, final results of study NIH-IRT 023 were submitted.  It concerns a pharmacokinetic sub-study of the interaction between ritonavir, amprenavir and efavirenz in 19 HIV-infected patients with plasma RNA &gt; 500.  Patients who had failed therapy with a PI were enrolled into 3 parallel treatment groups: (1) APV 1200 mg BID + RTV 200 mg BID + EFV 600 mg QD (n=6); (2) APV 1200 mg BID + RTV 500 mg BID + EFV 600 mg QD (n=4); (3) APV 1200 mg BID + NFV 1250 mg BID + EFV 600 mg QD (n=9). All patients received abacavir 300 mg BID. The results seem to confirm the lack of effect of efavirenz on amprenavir kinetics when the latter is combined with ritonavir, although the available information is scarce and the number of patients in each group small. Based on the results of the above study,  the CPMP requested the Marketing Authorisation Holder to reword the interaction between amprenavir and efavirenz (variation II/10). No study has been performed to evaluate the potential interaction between amprenavir and nevirapine, and stavudine.  With respect to delavirdine, results from 2 clinical studies were submitted as part of post-approval commitment: COL10010 :  A pharmacokinetic study of the interaction between delavirdine and APV in 12 healthy volunteers.

Amprenavir (APV) and delavirdine (DLV) are both primarily metabolised by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP 3A4). In vitro data have shown that delavirdine is a potent inhibitor of CYP 3A4 indicating that delavirdine might inhibit the metabolism of APV. Data from phase I, single dose studies in healthy volunteers have shown that DLV significantly inhibited the metabolism of amprenavir. These studies could not find any significant impact of a single dose of APV on the pharmacokinetic parameters of DLV.

Data from a multiple dose study between APV and DLV in 18 healthy volunteers are available.  It was a  prospective, open label, randomised, controlled, two-sequence, two-period multiple dose in which

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

volunteers  were  randomly  assigned  to  either  regimen  A  (n=9)  or  regimen  B  (n=9).  Regimen  A involved dosing for nine days  with amprenavir , 600 mg twice daily, with a 24 hours pharmacokinetic evaluation on day 10 after a single dose of amprenavir 600 mg in the morning. Regimen B involved dosing for nine days with delavirdine, 600 mg twice daily, with a 24 hours pharmacokinetic evaluation on day 10 after a single dose of delavirdine in the morning. Both regimens were followed by regimen C, on day 11, which was amprenavir 600 mg and delavirdine  600 mg twice daily for another nine days with a 24 hours pharmacokinetic evaluation on day 20 after single doses of amprenavir 600 mg and  delavirdine  600  mg  in  the  morning.  Amprenavir  decreased  all  the  delavirdine  pharmacokinetic parameters  apart  from  the  t max .  Particularly,  a  considerable  decrease  of  88%  in  median  delavirdine C12h from 7916 to 933 ng/ml was seen. Delavirdine AUC(0-12h) and C max decreased 61% and 47% respectively when co-administered with amprenavir. Delavirdine increased the effect on both the C12h (125%) and AUC(0-12h) (130%) values for amprenavir.    The study also showed considerable interindividual variation in steady-state concentrations of both amprenavir and delavirdine, e.g. an almost 8-fold difference between the lowest and highest C12h value for amprenavir during regimen C, with four of the participants below 252 ng/ml. This means that in a clinical setting some patients could have sub-therapeutic concentrations of both amprenavir and delavirdine

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised To reflect these data, a revised text for the SPC statement under section 4.5 was proposed, relating to all Agenerase SPCs. (variation II/10). No data are available with didanosine however it is recommended to administer the two substances one hour apart. Further data on possible interactions will be submitted when available. Preliminary pharmacokinetic data from healthy volunteers showed that amprenavir 450 mg bid co-administered with a low dose of ritonavir resulted in an increased AUC ss ,  C maxss and Cminss by 131 %, 31 % and 680 % respectively. These results suggest that a reduction of amprenavir dose is necessary when used with low dose ritonavir but further data will be submitted to confirm the efficacy and safety of the combination. The relevant information has been adequately reflected in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Other medicinal products

|                                                                                     | Co- administered substance   | product Population   | Dose                     | C max   | AUC    | Cmin   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|---------|--------|--------|
| Effect on amprenavir pharmacokinetics                                               | Ketoconazole                 | Healthy              | 200 mg bid (single dose) |  16%   |  32%  | N/A    |
|                                                                                     | Clarithromyci n              | Healthy              | 1200 mg bid              |  15%   |  18 % |  39%  |
|                                                                                     | Rifampicin                   |                      | 1200 mg bid              |  70%   |  82%  |  92%  |
|                                                                                     | rifabutin                    | Healthy              | 1200 mg bid              |  7%    |  15%  |  15%  |
| Medicinal Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Ketoconazole                 | Healthy              | 200 mg bid (single dose) |  19%   |  44%  | N/A    |
| Medicinal Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Clarithromyci n              | Healthy              | 1200 mg bid              |  10%   |       |       |
| Medicinal Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | Rifampicin                   |                      | 1200 mg bid              |        |       |       |
| Medicinal Effect of amprenavir on the pharmacokinetics of co-administered substance | rifabutin                    | Healthy              | 1200 mg bid              |  127%  |  193% |  349% |

In view of these results, the co-administration of rifampicin with amprenavir is contraindicated.

In addition amprenavir increases rifabutin AUC by 193 % and therefore a reduction of rifabutin dose of at least 50% is recommended when co-administered with amprenavir, although no clinical data is available.

Interaction between amprenavir and methadone has been conducted as part of a follow-up measure, following regulatory approval of Agenerase.   Study COL30330 was a controlled, open-label study to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of amprenavir and  methadone enantiomers following co-administration to  HIV  seronegative,  opiate-dependent  individuals.    The  primary  objective  of  this  study  was  to determine the steady-state pharmacokinetics of methadone enantiomers in the presence and absence of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

amprenavir. Secondary objectives were to determine the effect of multiple doses of methadone on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of amprenavir, to evaluate the short-term safety of the combination and to  correlate  methadone  dose  with  the  magnitude  of  amprenavir-induced  metabolic  inhibition. Nineteen subjects were enrolled. Of these, 16 completed the study.  Co-administration of amprenavir and  methadone  resulted  in  a  3-4  hour  delay  in  (R-)  and  (S-)  methadone  absorption.  Plasma  (R-) methadone  AUC  ,ss  was  decreased  13%  and  plasma  (R-)  methadone  Cmax,ss  was  decreased  25% when  methadone  was  co-administered  with  amprenavir.  Plasma  (S-)  methadone  AUC  ,ss  was decreased  40%  and  plasma  (S-)  methadone  Cmax,ss  was  decreased  48%  when  methadone  was  coadministered with amprenavir.

The 13% reduction in exposure to the active methadone enantiomer was not associated with clinical evidence of methadone withdrawal, findings which indicate no a priori adjustment of methadone is required during co-administration with amprenavir.

The  bioequivalence  between  the  different  formulations  used  during  the  clinical  trials  has  been investigated.  Bioequivalence  was  demonstrated  in  terms  of  AUC  but  not  C max between  the  hard capsule (150 mg) and soft capsule (150 mg) formulations. The two different strengths of the proposed marketed  formulations  50  and  150  mg  soft  capsules  are  bioequivalent  for  AUC  and  C max and  can therefore be interchanged.

Medicinal product no longer authorised With reference to concomitant use of amprenavir and St-John's Wort, serum levels of amprenavir can be  reduced  by  concomitant  use  of Hypericum  perforatum .  This  is  due  to  induction  of  drug metabolising enzymes by Hypericum perforatum . Herbal preparations containing Hypericum perforatum should therefore not be combined with Agenerase. If a patient is already taking Hypericum perforatum ,  amprenavir  and  if  possible  viral  levels  should  be  checked  and Hypericum  perforatum stopped. Amprenavir levels may increase on stopping Hypericum perforatum preparations. The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  conducted  a  study (PRO10018) to  evaluate  the  interaction between amprenavir and a combination of an oral contraceptive Ortho-Novum 1/35 (0.035 mg ethinyl estradiol  plus  1.0  mg  norethindrone).      The  primary  objectives  of  the  study  were:  to  determine  the effects  of  co-administration  of  amprenavir  with  Ortho-Novum  1/35  on  the  pharmacokinetic  of amprenavir, ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone, to evaluate the tolerability of Ortho-Novum when coadministered with APV, as well as to determine if any dosage adjustment is appropriate for either drug due  to  their  concomitant  administration.  The  secondary  objective  was  to  determine  what,  if  any, effects there were of APV co-administration on FSH and LH. Twenty-five healthy female subjects were enrolled into the study and began treatment with OC. All these  were  included  in  the  safety  analysis  but  only  ten  provided  data  for  the  pharmacokinetic  and pharmacodynamic analyses. Regarding  the  pharmacokinetic  parameters,  oral  contraceptive  co-therapy  with  APV  resulted  in  a decrease of 22% (90% CI: 0.65-0.92) in serum APV AUC  ,ss. The 9% decrease (90% CI: 0.80-1.03) in APV Cmax,ss was within the pre-specified range of 0.7-1.43.  As a result, it is concluded that the concomitant use of Agenerase and contraceptive pill may result in a decrease of the therapeutic effect of Agenerase.  Consequently, the Marketing Authorisation Holder has reworded section 4.4 (Special warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use)  and  4.5  (Interactions  with  other  medicinal  products  and other  forms of interactions) of the SPC in order to recommend the use of an alternative method of contraception instead of \"additional\" ones. Bioequivalence studies

The  comparative  rate  and  extent  of  absorption  between  different  formulations  of  amprenavir  have been evaluated in 4 single dose (600 mg) randomised open label, cross over studies. The oral solution has a lower bioavailability compared with the 50 and 150 mg soft capsules. AUC and C max were 14% (CI 90%: 4% to 23%) and 19 % (CI 90 %: 7 % to 29 %) lower at equivalent doses than the 150 mg soft  capsules  formulation  intending  for  marketing.  Therefore  an  adequate  statement  has  been introduced in the Summary of Product Characteristics to highlight that equal doses of the soft capsules and the oral solution are not bioequivalent and therefore can not be interchangeable on a milligram per milligram basis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical efficacy

In  adults,  two  dose  ranging  studies  and  two  phase  III  studies,  in  antiretroviral  naive  patients  and antiretroviral experienced but protease inhibitor naive patients, have been conducted. In the paediatric population, amprenavir was evaluated in one phase II study and one phase III study. Five supportive studies in adults have also been submitted. The efficacy of amprenavir was evaluated in a total of 1215 adults and 268 paediatric patients.

## Dose response studies and main clinical studies

## Dose response studies

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetic  data  do  not  fully  justify  the  recommended  1200  mg  bid  dose.  Mean  total concentrations of amprenavir 12 hours after the 1200 mg single dose were greater than the in  vitro IC50 for HIV-1 IIIB (0.04  g/ml). However, for some patients , unbound plasma concentrations 12 h after single dose are below this value. Two dose response, open label, studies have been performed in protease inhibitor naive adult patients and the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic relationship was evaluated. The  first  non-randomised  study PROA1002 included  three  distinct  phases.  In  the  first  phase,  the antiviral activity was evaluated over 4 weeks of multiple doses of amprenavir monotherapy (300 mg, 900  mg,  1050  mg  and  1200  mg  twice  daily).  A  cohort  with  900  mg  bid  amprenavir  treatment,  in combination  with  abacavir,  was  also  included.  Baseline  characteristics  differed  between  cohorts, median HIV-1 RNA levels ranged from 4.91 log 10 copies/ml in the amprenavir 1200 mg group to 4.29 log 10 copies/ml in the amprenavir 1050 mg group. The relationship between amprenavir concentrations and the decrease in the time-weighted average AUC minus the baseline (AAUCMB) in HIV RNA over 4 four weeks was assessed. It was estimated that  the  C minss of  total  amprenavir  in plasma to provide 90% of the maximum decrease in AAUCMB over 4 weeks is 0.23  g/ml [EC90 ]. The  C minss medians  for  amprenavir  after  1050  and  1200  mg  bid  doses  were  0.29  and  0.28  g/ml respectively  which  therefore  exceeded  the  EC90.  No  difference  could  be  seen  between  the  doses, however the design of the study (baseline characteristics not well balanced, non randomised and small size)  did  not  allow  definitive  conclusions.  These  three  dose  levels  were,  however,  evaluated  in combination therapy with NRTIs in the subsequent study PROA2002 over a longer period of time. This study PROA2002 included three doses of amprenavir (900, 1050 and 1200 mg bid) and placebo in  combination with lamivudine and zidovudine in 80 lamivudine and protease naive patients (CD4 cell counts &gt; 150 cells/mm 3 and plasma HIV-1 RNA levels &gt; 10,000 copies/ml). At week 12, the four treatment arms were compared with respect to AAUCMB for HIV-1 RNA and CD4 cell counts. Results are displayed in the table below: HIV-1 RNA and CD4 cell counts changes at week 12 HIV-1 RNA (log10 copies/ml) Baseline ¹ Week 12 ²

¹ median; ² median AAUCMB while on trial medication; LAM = lamivudine; ZDV = zidovudine; APV = amprenavir

|                                         | Placebo + LAM/ZDV (n = 20)   | APV 900 mg + LAM/ZDV (n = 21)   | APV 1050 mg + LAM/ZDV (n = 22)   | APV 1200 mg + LAM/ZDV (n = 21)   |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| HIV-1 RNA (log 10 copies/ml) Baseline ¹ | 4.65                         | 5.14                            | 4.78                             | 4.96                             |
| Week 12 ²                               | -1.47                        | -1.41                           | -1.70                            | -1.76                            |
| CD4 cell counts (cells/mm 3 ) Baseline¹ | 422                          | 405                             | 312                              | 401                              |
| Week 12 ²                               | + 52                         | + 113                           | + 79                             | + 55                             |

There were no statistically significant differences either between any of the three treatment groups and the placebo group nor between the three treatment groups.

After week 12, all patients of the placebo arm received amprenavir 1050 mg bid and the study was continued to collect data on the durability of the antiviral effect of amprenavir in combination with lamivudine and zidovudine as detailed below:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Proportion of patients with plasma HIV-RNA values &lt; 400 copies/ml at week 12 and week 60 (Intentto-treat or ITT, Per protocol or PP populations)

|                                             | Placebo            | APV 900 mg (n = 21)   | APV 1050 mg (n = 22)    | APV 1200 mg (n = 21)   |
|---------------------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|
| Baseline HIV-1 RNA log 10 copies/ml (range) | 4.65 (3.35 - 5.21) | 5.14 (3.34 - 5.98)    | 4.78 (3.81 - 6.15)      | 4.96 (2.51 - 5.82)     |
| Week 12 ITT PP                              |                    | 43 %(9/21) 60 %(9/15) | 59 %(13/22) 70 %(14/20) | 29 %(6/21) 62 %(8/13)  |
| Week 60 ITT PP                              |                    | 25 %(5/20) 64 %(7/11) | 43 %(9/21) 79 %(11/14)  | 20 %(4/20) 86 %(6/7)   |

Medicinal product no longer authorised There  was  no  statistical  difference  between  the  two  dosage  regimens  (1200  mg  and  1050  mg  bid) however the study was not powered to demonstrate any difference between the doses. On the basis of data from studies PROA1002 and PROA2002, no difference could be found between the  doses  1200  mg  bid  and  1050  mg  bid  regarding  either  their  pharmacokinetic  profile  or  antiviral activity. Furthermore, in one of the supportive studies, PROA2001, amprenavir 800 mg tid resulted in comparable Cminss , inducing a viral load reduction similar to that observed with 1050 mg bid in study PROA2002. It cannot, therefore, be ruled out that the three time daily dosing schedule could result in equal efficacy and better safety. Doses of amprenavir higher than 1200 mg bid or 800 mg tid have not been evaluated. In  conclusion,  the  proposed  dosage  recommendation  proposed  by  the  applicant,  1200  mg  bid,  was questioned and was further addressed during the hearing. Although the twice daily regimen is not fully justified to exclude any risk that C minss may fall below antiretroviral levels compared to the three times daily regimen, 1200 mg bid has been used in the main studies. Main studies Results up to 24 weeks from two main studies in adult patients using 1200 mg twice daily as dosage regimen  were  initially  provided  in  the  submission  of  the  application.  The  efficacy  and  safety  of amprenavir has been evaluated in antiretroviral naive and experienced patients. Amprenavir in triple combination with NRTIs has been compared to placebo (PROAB3001) and to indinavir (PROAB3006). The initial documentation has been supplemented by results through 48 weeks. The efficacy and safety of amprenavir in combination with NRTIs have also been evaluated through 24 weeks in paediatric patients over the age of 4 years. The overview of the main clinical studies in adults and children is displayed in the table below:

|                        | PROAB3001                                                                    | PROAB3006                                            | Paediatric study PROB2004                                      | Paediatric study PROAB3004                                                                                                      |
|------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Period reported        | 48 weeks                                                                     | 48 weeks                                             |                                                                |                                                                                                                                 |
| Study design           | Medicinal Randomised Multicentre Double blind Placebo controlled             | Randomised Open label Active comparator controlled   | Randomised Multicentre Open label Active comparator controlled | Randomised Multicentre Double blind Placebo controlled                                                                          |
| Initial study drug arm | APV/LAM/ZDV Placebo/LAM/ZDV APV: 1200 mg bid LAM: 150 mg bid ZDV: 300 mg bid | APV/NRTIs IDV/NRTIs APV: 1200 mg bid IDV: 800 mg tid | 20 mg/kg bid APV/NRTIs 15 mg/kg tid APV/NRTIs                  | Randomised 1200 mg or 20 mg/kg bid APV/2 NRTIs Placebo/2NRTIs amendment Open label 1200 mg or 20-22.5 mg/kg bd amprenavir/NRTIs |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Amprenavir formulation               | 200 mg soft capsules 150 mg soft capsules                                                    | 150 mg soft capsules                                                                                 | 15 mg/ml oral solution 50 mg/150 mg soft capsules                                           | 15 mg/ml oral solution 50 mg/150 mg soft capsules                                                                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Inclusion criteria                   | Adult Protease naive 4 weeks NRTI or NNRTI CD4 ≥ 200 cells/mm 3 HIV-1 RNA ≥ 10,000 copies/ml | Adult NRTI experienced Protease naive 12 weeks prior lifetime NRTI treatment HIV RNA ≥ 400 copies/ml | Paediatric > 2 years and less than 13 years PI naive or experienced HIV RNA > 400 copies/ml | Subjects  18 years able to swallow capsules PI naive HIV-1 RNA ≥ 10,000 copies/ml Amendment Open label Non comparative Paediatrics 4 years to 18 years PI naive/experienced HIV-1 RNA ≥ 400 copies/ml |
| Patients initiating study medication | N = 102 N = 112 (control arm)                                                                | N = 245 N = 241 (control arm)                                                                        | N = 40                                                                                      | N = 229                                                                                                                                                                                                |

|                                                    | By treatment group   | By treatment group   |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|                                                    | PLO + LAM/ZDV        | APV + LAM/ZDV        |
| N                                                  | 116                  | 116                  |
| Median (range) baseline HIV-1 RNA log 10 copies/ml | 4.74 (3.06 - 6.31)   | 4.64 (3.61 - 6.09)   |
| counts (cells/mm 3 )                               |                      | 442                  |
| Median (range) baseline CD4 cell                   | 410 (139             | (216 -1800)          |
|                                                    | -984)                |                      |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Patients initiating study medication APV: amprenavir; LAM = lamivudine; ZDV = zidovudine Study PROAB3001: antiretroviral naive adult patients The study was planned to enrol 290 patients. However due to changes in the clinical management of HIV infected patients, the sample size was reduced to 230 patients. A total of 232 patients over 18 years of age were therefore randomised, 116 in each group. Patients were to continue their randomised therapy until all patients completed 48 weeks unless they met  a  protocol  defined  switch  criterion  defined  as  two  consecutive  plasma  HIV-1  RNA  400 copies/ml at week 16 or thereafter or progression to CDC class C event or experienced a treatment limiting adverse event. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients with plasma HIV-1 RNA plasma levels below 400 copies/ml as measured by PCR assay without progression to a new AIDS-defining condition or permanent discontinuation of randomised therapy. The primary analysis was the intent-to-treat (ITT) analysis  (i.e.  missing  patients  were  regarded  as  failures  and  all  premature  discontinutions  of randomised therapy, all new confirmed CDC Class C events, and deaths, carried forward as treatment failures).  The  response  was  also  analysed  in  the  per  protocol  population  (i.e.  data  collected  during randomised therapy only). Results Population The demographic and baseline characteristics were very similar in each treatment group. Median (range) baseline HIV-1 RNA

PLA = placebo; LAM = lamivudine; ZDV = zidovudine; APV = amprenavir

Approximately 80 % of the patients were asymptomatic. The median age was 35 years old and 89 % were  male.  The  percentage  of  patients  who  completed  48  weeks  of  treatment  with  the  randomised therapy  was  12  %  in  the  placebo  group  and  48  %  in  the  amprenavir  group.  Of  more  patients  who stopped treatment prior to week 48 most met switch criteria (placebo arm: 81 %; amprenavir arm: 24 %)  or  experienced  adverse  events  (5  %  versus  31  %  in  the  placebo  and  amprenavir  groups respectively).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels

The proportion of patients with plasma HIV-1 RNA plasma levels below 400 copies/ml at week 48 is displayed in the below table:

|                                                                  | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                  | ITT: missing = failure                                                                             | ITT: missing = failure                                                                             | ITT: data as collected *                                                                           | ITT: data as collected *                                                                           | PP                                                                                                 | PP                                                                                                 |
|                                                                  | PLO + LAM/ZDV N = 116                                                                              | APV + LAM/ZDV N = 116                                                                              | PLO + LAM/ZDV N = 116                                                                              | APV + LAM/ZDV N = 116                                                                              | PLO + LAM/ZDV N = 107                                                                              | APV + LAM/ZDV N = 109                                                                              |
| By HIV-1 RNA strata 10,000 - 30,000 > 30,000 - 100,000 > 100,000 | 3/37 (8 %) 1/55 (2 %) 0/24 ( 0 %)                                                                  | 19/37 (51 %) 23/55 (42 %) 6/24 (25 %)                                                              | 15/24 (63%) 26/33 (79%) 13/17 (76%)                                                                | 21/27 (78 %) 28/31 (90 %) 8/13 (62%)                                                               | 4/10 (40%) 1 /2 (50%) 0/0                                                                          | 20/23 (87 %) 24/24 (100 %) 6/7 (86%)                                                               |
| Total population                                                 | 4/116 (3 %)                                                                                        | 48/116 (41 %)                                                                                      | 54/74 (73%)                                                                                        | 57/71 (80 %)                                                                                       | 5/12 (42%)                                                                                         | 50/54 (93 %)                                                                                       |

|                             | PLO + LAM/ZDV   | PLO + LAM/ZDV             | APV + LAM/ZDV             | APV + LAM/ZDV   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------|
|                             | < 400 copies/ml | < 50 copies/ml            | < 400 copies/ml           | < 50 copies/ml  |
| Total population at 16 week | 17/116 (15 %)   | 10/116 (9 %)              | 64/116 (55 %)             | 51/116 (44 %)   |
| Total population at 48 week | 4/116 (3 %)     | 1/116 (1 %) 48/116 (41 %) | 1/116 (1 %) 48/116 (41 %) | 40/116 (34 %)   |

A total of 504 subjects were enrolled in this study and subsequently randomised to amprenavir (n = 254) and to indinavir (n = 250). The study was powered, at least 80 %, to show non-inferiority in the success rates between the treatment groups over 48 weeks of therapy, using 95 % confidence intervals. Results at 48 weeks have been provided.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 10,000 - 30,000 &gt; 30,000 - 100,000 &gt; 100,000 3/37 (8 %) 1/55 (2 %) 0/24 ( 0 %) Total population 4/116 (3 %) ITT = intent-to-treat; PP = per protocol * all data as collected analysed until the last study related visit regardless of whether patients were still receiving the original randomised therapy. Total population at 16 week Total population at 48 week In  conclusion, the triple therapy with amprenavir plus lamivudine/zidovudine in antiretroviral naive patients was superior to dual therapy with these nucleoside analogues (p &lt; 0.001). The durability of the  response  with  the  triple  therapy  regimen  up  to  48  weeks  should  however  be  interpreted  with caution in view of an apparent decline in the response after week 16. Study PROAB3006 antiretroviral experienced adult patients This study was designed as an open label non inferiority trial to compare the efficacy and safety of amprenavir  versus  indinavir,  when  administered  in  combination  with  unspecified  NRTI  therapy  in NRTI experienced and PI naïve HIV infected patients. The open label design was chosen in view of the  practical  problems  with  blinding  the  differences  in  daily  pattern  of  study  drug  administration (twice daily for amprenavir versus three times daily for indinavir) and the need to increase fluid intake with indinavir. The primary endpoint was the number of patients with HIV-1 RNA plasma levels below the limit of detection (400 copies/ml). The primary population for the efficacy analysis was the ITT population although  a  PP  analysis  was  also  performed.    Two  ITT  analyses  were  performed:  'ITT:  missing  = failure', in which all missing values were considered failures, and subjects permanently discontinuing randomised  treatment  and  experiencing  CDC  class  C  events  were  carried  forward  as  failures;  and, 'ITT:  data  as  collected'  in  which  all  data  were  included,  regardless  of  whether  patients  were  still receiving the original randomised or assigned therapy, without any imputation for missing values.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Results

## Population

Baseline demographic and characteristics were similar between the treatment groups. The majority of the patients were asymptomatic.

|                                            | By treatment group   | By treatment group   |
|--------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|                                            | Amprenavir + NRTIs   | Indinavir + NRTIs    |
| N                                          | 254                  | 250                  |
| Median baseline HIV-1 RNA log 10 copies/ml | 3.87                 | 3.98                 |
| Median baseline CD4 cell counts            | 389                  | 414                  |

|                                                                 | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   | longer Number of patients with HIV-1 RNA levels < 400 copies/ml per treatment group at week 48 (n/N, %)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                 | ITT: missing = failure                                                                                    | ITT: missing = failure                                                                                    | ITT: data as collected                                                                                    | ITT: data as collected                                                                                    | PP                                                                                                        | PP                                                                                                        |
|                                                                 | APV/NRTIs N = 254                                                                                         | IDV/NRTIs N = 250                                                                                         | APV/NRTIs N = 254                                                                                         | IDV/NRTIs N = 250                                                                                         | APV/NRTIs = 236                                                                                           | IDV/NRTIs N = 237                                                                                         |
| By HIV-1 RNA strata  400 - 10,000 > 10,000 - 100,000 > 100,000 | 52/140 (37%) 19/94 (20%) 6/20 (30%)                                                                       | 72/137 (53%) 40/93 (43%) 3/20 (15%)                                                                       | no 65/100 (65%) 25/54 (46%) 8/11 (73%)                                                                    | 82/105 (78%) 51/70 (73%) 5/11 (45%)                                                                       | 53/79 (67%) 19/35 (54%) 6/8 (75%)                                                                         | 74/91 (81%) 39/51 (76%) 4/6 (67%)                                                                         |
| Total population                                                | 77/254 (30 %)                                                                                             | 115/250 (46%)                                                                                             | 98/165 (59%)                                                                                              | 138/186 (74%)                                                                                             | 78/122 (64%)                                                                                              | 117/148 (79%)                                                                                             |

|                             | APV/NRTIs       | APV/NRTIs      | IDV/NRTIs       | IDV/NRTIs      |
|-----------------------------|-----------------|----------------|-----------------|----------------|
|                             | < 400 copies/ml | < 50 copies/ml | < 400 copies/ml | < 50 copies/ml |
| Total population at 16 week | 113/254 (40 %)  | 89/254 (35%)   | 147/250 (59 %)  | 117/250 (47%)  |
| Total population at 48 week | 77/254 (30%)    | 58/254 (23 %)  | 115/250 (46 %)  | 93/250 (37 %)  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised To mimic the current therapeutic management of the patients, randomisation was stratified according to  the  investigator's  intention,  at  screening,  to  change  at  least  1  NRTI  in  the  patient's  treatment regimen  at  day  1.  The  treatment  groups  were  similar  with  respect  to  background  treatment.  The majority of patients received lamivudine or stavudine. The percentage of patients who discontinued the study prior to week 16 was higher in the amprenavir arm  (30  %)  than  in  the  indinavir  arm  (15  %).  The  results  at  48  weeks  showed,  however,  that  the overall rate of discontinuation of treatment due to adverse events was similar in both treatment arms. Plasma HIV-1 RNA levels at 48 weeks APV = amprenavir; IND = indinavir The proportion of patients with HIV-1 RNA &lt; 400 copies/ml and 50 copies/ml at 16 and 48 weeks, in the ITT population analysis (with missing values imputed as failures and premature discontinuations of randomised treatment and clinical progressions carried forward as treatment failures) are displayed in the table below:

Results seemingly revealed a superiority of the indinavir containing regimen. In the ITT population, median  increases  from  baseline  in  CD4  cell  counts  was  measured  as  a  secondary  endpoint  and accounted for 27 cells/mm 3 in the amprenavir group and 44 cells/mm 3 in the indinavir group at week 16.

The combination therapy with amprenavir and NRTIs in antiretroviral experienced patients seemed therefore less efficacious in reducing viral load below the limit of detection of the two assays used (400 copies/ml and 50 copies/ml). The final report will be provided when available.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Supportive studies

## Monotherapy

Study ACTG 347 compared amprenavir alone with amprenavir in combination with lamivudine and zidovudine in antiretroviral naive and experienced HIV-1 infected patients (plasma HIV-1 RNA levels of at least 5,000 copies/ml). This study was terminated early following an interim review. The final analysis showed similar plasma HIV-1 RNA reductions at week 2 in both arms but rebound of the viral  load  in  the  monotherapy  arm  led  to  a  median  decline  in  plasma  HIV-1  RNA  of  only 0.91 log 10 copies/ml at week 12 compared to more than 2.16 log 10 copies/ml in the triple therapy arm. Monotherapy with amprenavir is not recommended as stated in the Summary  of Product Characteristics.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Double therapy An open label, randomised study, PROA2001 , investigated amprenavir (800 mg tid) in dual therapy with different protease inhibitors (saquinavir soft capsules, indinavir and nelfinavir) in the absence of NRTIs therapy in protease naive patients. At week 3, lamivudine plus zidovudine were added to the amprenavir monotherapy group. Median reductions from baseline of approximately 2 log 10 copies/ml or greater were observed in the saquinavir and indinavir combination treatment groups from week 4 through 24. Although these values were slightly lower in the nelfinavir/amprenavir and amprenavir/lamivudine/zidovudine  groups,  no  conclusion  regarding  efficacy  differences  could  be drawn in view of the small sample size (n=33). Study CNAA2004 was an open label randomised study designed to evaluate abacavir in dual therapy with different protease inhibitors including amprenavir, saquinavir, indinavir, ritonavir and nelfinavir. The study included a small number of patients (82 patients randomised). The data at 48 weeks did not demonstrate equivalence or a difference between the different PI containing regimens, but the study was  not  powered  to  do  so.  In  the  PP  analysis,  amprenavir/abacavir  seemed  to  be  as  effective  as indinavir/abacavir  (90 %) although ritonavir/abacavir (100 %) appeared more effective. Due to the reduced sample size in each treatment arm, these results should be taken with caution. Quadruple therapy Study PROA2003 , an open label and non randomised study was designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of amprenavir in combination with abacavir, zidovudine and lamivudine. Patients were either chronically  infected  with  HIV  (protease  inhibitor  and  lamivudine  naive  patients)  or  were  acutely infected  with  HIV  (antiretroviral  naive  patients).  Of  twenty  four  patients  initially  enrolled  into  the study, 20 completed 24 weeks. The majority of the patients had less than 30,000 copies/ml at baseline. In the ITT population (failures carried forward) the majority of patients had plasma levels below the limit of detection of the assay used (&lt; 500 copies/ml) at week 24 (10/13, 77 % of the acutely infected patients and 7/11, 64 % of the chronically infected patients). The interpretation of the contribution of amprenavir  to  the  therapeutic  effect  is  limited  by  the  design  of  the  study,  the  low  baseline  plasma HIV-1 RNA levels and limit of detection of the assay used. Efficacy in children

The efficacy of amprenavir has been evaluated in two ongoing paediatric studies using amprenavir as oral solution, which represents an adequate formulation for paediatric purposes, in combination with NRTIs.  Results  of  both  studies  involving  a  total  of  268  HIV  infected  children  who  have  received amprenavir oral solution  or  capsules  with  NRTI  therapy  for  an  average  duration  of  4  months.  One hundred and fifty three children were exposed to amprenavir for at least 12 weeks and 61 for more than 6 months. Both studies included naïve and experienced PI children.

Based on the results from the pharmacokinetics analysis evaluated in PROA1006 and PROB2004 the exposure after administration of doses of 15 mg/kg tid or 20 mg/kg bid are in the same range as those in adult patients.

In the open label study PROB2004 , the efficacy and safety of amprenavir oral solution (15 mg/ml) in combination with NRTIs in HIV-infected patients below 13 years old (plasma HIV-1 RNA levels &gt; 400 copies/ml). Patients were enrolled sequentially according to age (7 years to 13 years, 4 years to 7 years and 2 to 4 years) and were randomised to receive amprenavir 20 mg/kg bid or amprenavir 15 mg/kg tid.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  study PROAB3004, was  initially  carried  out  to  evaluate  amprenavir  against  placebo  in combination with NRTIs in children aged from 6 months to 18 years. The protocol of the study was amended  following  the  availability  of  guidelines  recommending  more  aggressive  treatment  in paediatric  population  to  an  open  label  non  comparative  phase  III  study.  This  amendment  coincides with the availability of the oral solution.

Patients  13  years  of  age  with  weight  50  kg  received  1200  mg BID as 50 or 150 mg capsules. Patients less than 13 years old or patients with weight less than 50 kg received the dose of 20 mg/kg bid  in  the  form  of  50  mg  capsules.  Children  unable  to  swallow  capsules  received  amprenavir  oral solution at the dose of 22.5 mg/kg bid, adjusting for the lower bioavailability of the oral solution.  The most  frequent  NRTI  combinations  at  study  entry  for  both  PI  naïve  and  experienced  patients  were stavudine/ddI (27 %), lamivudine/stavudine (23 %) and lamivudine/zidovudine (21 %).

|                                                                       | PROB2004         | PROB2004       | PROB2004              | PROB2004              | PROAB3004                | PROAB3004       | PROAB3004                | PROAB3004                |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|                                                                       | PI naïve N= 25   | PI naïve N= 25 | PI experienced N = 15 | PI experienced N = 15 | PI naïve N= 109          | PI naïve N= 109 | PI experienced N = 120 b | PI experienced N = 120 b |
|                                                                       | Week 16          | Week 24        | Week 16               | Week 24               | Week 16                  | Week 24         | Week 16                  | Week 24                  |
| N - ITT                                                               | 16 9             | 13 9           | 5 2                   | 6 2                   | 53 48                    | 34 30           | 53 46                    | 15 11                    |
| N - PP Patients with < 400 copies/ml HIV RNA (n, %) ITT¹              | 10 (63%) 6 (67%) | 6 (46%)        | 0 0                   | 0 0                   | longer 19 (36%) 18 (38%) | 11 (32%) 11     | 7 (13%)                  | 2 (13%) 2                |
| PP² Median change from baseline in HIV-1 RNA log10 copies/ml ITT¹ PP² | - 1.8            | 4 (44%) - 1.0  | - 0.3                 | no - 1.0 - 0.8        | - 1.0 - 1.1              | (37%)           | 5 ( 11%)                 | (18%)                    |
| Median change baseline in CD4 counts/mm 3 ITT¹                        | - 1.9 62         | - 1.8 134 158  | - 1.4 61              | 51                    | 81                       | - 0.9 - 1.0     | - 0.4 - 0.3              | - 0.4 - 0.3              |
| from cell PP²                                                         |                  |                | 82ª                   | -                     |                          |                 |                          | - 40                     |
|                                                                       | 153              |                |                       |                       |                          | 130             | 69                       | 5                        |
|                                                                       |                  |                |                       | 46                    | 81                       | 120             | 51                       |                          |

Medicinal product no longer authorised The primary efficacy endpoint is the proportion of patients who reached plasma HIV-1 RNA below 400  copies/ml  at  week  48,  ITT  population  analysis  of  all  collected  data.  A  PP  analysis  of  data collected until study discontinuation (with data censored post deviation or dose adjustment) has also been performed. Preliminary results at week 16 and 24 are displayed in the table below: ¹ Intent to treat of all collected data ²  Per  protocol analysis of data collected until study drug discontinuation with data censored post deviation or dose adjustment ª only 2 patients provided data b includes one patient not exposed to amprenavir Only 5 % of patients in both studies discontinued because of adverse events related to gastro-intestinal tract and rash. Efficacy results are strongly influenced by the previous therapy with the PI naive patients showing the best response to treatment. The changes in CD4 cell counts are consistent with the pattern observed for the virological response.

The tid regimen of amprenavir oral solution used in study PROB2004 seems more effective than the bid  at  week  24  (25  %  of  the  patients  in  the  bid  regimen  reached  plasma  HIV  RNA  less  than 400 copies/ml versus 43 % in the tid regimen), however the baseline characteristics and concomitant antiretroviral therapy were not the same in the two groups.

Sufficient data have been provided in terms of number of patients exposed and duration. Altogether and despite the small numbers precluding statistical comparison, a three times daily dosage regimen with the oral solution is supported by a better tolerability, less variability in plasma concentrations and a higher probability to achieve effective plasma concentrations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Final reports on the two paediatric studies, PROB2004 and PROAB3004 confirm that amprenavir is an effective antiretroviral agent in children.However, considering the scarcity of the data in children aged 2-&lt;4 years (i.e. 17 patients, 6 % of the paediatric population), amprenavir is not indicated in this age range.

## Amprenavir treatment in PI experienced patients

| Study                              | Design                                          | Inclusion criteria                                                                         |   Population | Duration   | Regimen                                                                  |
|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ACTG398 US                         | Phase II, randomised, ongoing                   | prior exposure to up to 3 PIs plasma HIV RNA  1,000c/ml naïve to study quad regimen       |          460 | 48 weeks   | APV/ABC/EFV/AD V vs same quad +SQV vs same quad + IDV vs same quad + NFV |
| ICC-605 sub-protocol to ICC-006 US | Phase II, open label pilot non controlled study | prior exposure to PIs naïve to NNRTIs naïve to study regimen plasma HIV RNA  2000c/ml     |           25 | 24 weeks   | APV/ABC/EFV/AD V                                                         |
| CNAF3011 France                    | Phase II, open label pilot non controlled study | experienced with  1 PI naïve to ABC, APV, HU CD4 > 100c/mm 3 plasma HIV RNA > 10,000 c/ml |           20 | 48 weeks   | ABC/APV/ddl/HU                                                           |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Study CNAA2007 was  designed as  an  open  label study  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  and  safety  of amprenavir in combination with abacavir and efavirenz in HIV-1 infected patients with HIV-RNA ≥ 500 copies/ml despite previous treatment with at least one of the following PIs: indinavir, ritonavir, saquinavir and/or nelfinavir. Patients were to be treated for 48 weeks. Overall 25 % and 23 % of the patients included in the ITT population (missing = failure) analysis (n = 101) had plasma HIV-1 RNA below 400 copies/ml at weeks 16 and 48 respectively. Analysis per stratum showed that patients with pre-entry viral load &lt; 40,000 copies/ml and no prior NNRTI experience were more likely to  achieve  an  endpoint  of  plasma  HIV  RNA  below  400  copies/ml  (53  %  response  rate)  than  were patients in any other stratum subgroup/NNRTI experienced (range 7 -33%) (ITT collected data only). The interaction between amprenavir and efavirenz which resulted in approximately 40 % reduction in amprenavir  plasma  concentrations,  indicates  that  amprenavir  had  not  been  optimally  dosed  in  this study.  No dose adjustment of amprenavir had been made to take account of the interaction. Hence the quantitative contribution of amprenavir to the therapeutic effect cannot be assessed. The results of this study do not provide any clear evidence of the efficacy of amprenavir as salvage therapy. Considering  the  potential  interest  of  amprenavir  as  a  second  line  PI  therapy  based  on  the in  vitro resistance  profile,  the  CPMP  requested  the  applicant  to  provide  further  data  on  the  response  of  PIexperienced patients to subsequent amprenavir containing regimen and vice-versa to substantiate the benefit of amprenavir in this indication. Results  from  ongoing  studies  ACTG  398,  PROAB3006  (open  label  extension  phase),  ICC-605, CNAF3011 and PROAB3004, where PI experienced adults and children changed to an amprenavir containing  regimen,  were  therefore  submitted.  Data  on  amprenavir-experienced  adult  patients  who changed to a different PI-containing regimen were also provided. An overview of studies ACTG 398, ICC-605 and CNAF3011 is summarised below Study Design Inclusion criteria ACTG398 US Phase II, randomised, ongoing prior exposure to up to 3 PIs plasma HIV RNA  1,000c/ml naïve to study quad regimen ICC-605 sub-protocol to    ICC-006 US Phase II, open label pilot non controlled study prior exposure to PIs naïve to NNRTIs naïve to study regimen plasma HIV RNA  2000c/ml CNAF3011 France Phase II, open label pilot non controlled study experienced with  1 PI naïve to ABC, APV, HU CD4 &gt; 100c/mm 3 plasma HIV RNA &gt; 10,000 c/ml APV  =  amprenavir;  ABC  =  abacavir;  EFV  =  efavirenz;  ADV  =  adefovir;  ddI  =  didanosine  SQV  =  saquinavir;  IDV  = indinavir; NFV = nelfinavir; HU = hydroxyurea

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A  summary  of  the  results  on  the  antiviral  response  of  PI-experienced  patients  to  an  amprenavircontaining salvage regimen is presented in the table below:

| Study      | Regimen                            | Baseline HIV-1 RNA log 10   | Patients with < limit of detection 1 copies/ml HIV-1 RNA at week 24   | Patients with < limit of detection 1 copies/ml HIV-1 RNA at week 24   | Patients with < limit of detection 1 copies/ml HIV-1 RNA at week 24   | Patients with < limit of detection 1 copies/ml HIV-1 RNA at week 24   |
|------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|            |                                    |                             | As treated or missing excluded                                        | As treated or missing excluded                                        | ITT: Missing = failure                                                | ITT: Missing = failure                                                |
|            |                                    | copies/ml                   | NNRTI naive                                                           | NNRTI experienced                                                     | NNRTI naive                                                           | NNRTI experienced                                                     |
| ACTG398    | APV/PI/ NRTI/NNRTI APV/NRTI/N NRTI | 4.7 4.7                     | 72% (69/96) 53% (30/57)                                               | 38% (27/71) 12% (3/25)                                                | 47% (84/147) 33% (31/93)                                              | 19% (28/147) 8% (5/64)                                                |
| ICC-605    | APV/ NRTI/NNRTI NRTI/NNRTI         | 4.6                         | 62% (8/13)                                                            | -                                                                     | 32% (8/25)                                                            | authorised -                                                          |
| PROAB30 06 | APV/NRTIs                          | 2.8                         | 63% (10/16)                                                           |                                                                       |                                                                       |                                                                       |
| CNAA200 7  | APV/ABC/EF V                       | 5.1                         | 54% (15/28)                                                           | 26% (5/19)                                                            | 30% (18/60)                                                           | 12% (5/41)                                                            |

In addition, some data on PI therapy for amprenavir experienced patients who participated in the open label extension of PROAB3006 or ACTG373 (an open label extension of ACTG347) were provided. Data  from  ACTG  373,  in  which  almost  half  of  the  patients  had  been  previously  treated  with amprenavir  monotherapy  showed  that  the  quadruple  therapy  indinavir/nevirapine/stavudine  and lamivudine  achieved  a  high  response  rate,  maintaining  plasma  HIV-RNA  &lt;  500  copies/ml  in approximately 60 % of patients over 48 weeks.

Medicinal product no longer authorised NRTI ICC-605 APV/ NRTI/NNRTI NRTI/NNRTI PROAB30 06 APV/NRTIs CNAA200 7 APV/ABC/EF V 1. LOD - Assay Limit of Detection for ACTG398 = 200c/ml, PROAB3006 and CNAA2007 = 400c/ml, ICC-605 = 500c/ml 2. After Week 24 in this study subjects were able to modify their treatment regimen to increase the APV exposure by adding ritonavir (RTV) at a dose of 100mg BID and reducing the dose of APV to 600mg BID. Ten of the twenty subjects introduced low dose RTV after Week 24, achieving an additional median 1.15 log 10 copies/ml reduction in plasma HIV-1 RNA 4 weeks later, indicating the potential value of this combination. 3. Sensitivity to ABC and APV was therefore an important predictor of treatment response. Based  on  these  results,  amprenavir  seemed  to  contribute  to  the  antiviral  effect  of  combination regimens  in  PI  experienced  patients.  Nevertheless,  the  design  of  the  studies  had  some  limitations, which do not allow drawing definite conclusions on the specific role of amprenavir in such therapy regimen.  For  instance,  in  ACTG  398,  there  was  no  arm  without  amprenavir.  In  addition,  the proportion of patients previously exposed to at least 3 PIs varied greatly among groups which makes it difficult to compare different dual PI based therapies (from 26 % for the amprenavir/saquinavir arm to 80 % for amprenavir/nelfinavir). Complex pharmacokinetics drug interactions added to the difficulty in assessing the true contribution of amprenavir to the salvage regimens and the comparison among treatment arms. There is only limited and non controlled information on the value of amprenavir as rescue therapy in PI experienced children. However from the data, the value of amprenavir in PI experienced patients seems to be conditioned by the number of new drugs that are introduced in the rescue regimen, the extent of the previous exposure to other PIs and the presence of key PI mutations at baseline.

## Clinical safety

The safety database for amprenavir consists of data collected from the different clinical trials where over 1,000 patients have been exposed to amprenavir. The safety profile is mainly based on the two main studies PROAB3001 and PROAB3006 where results have been provided through 48 weeks and patients  have  been  exposed  to  amprenavir  for  a  median  duration  of  249  days  and  391  days respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The most frequent adverse events clinical adverse events (AEs) [  10% in any treatment arm, of any severity (Grade 1 to 4) and regardless of the investigator's assessment of causality], reported during the randomised phase of PROAB3001 and PROAB3006, respectively are displayed in the table below:

|                                               | PROAB3001                                     | PROAB3001                                     | PROAB3006                                     | PROAB3006                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
|                                               | Placebo + LAM/ZDV                             | Amprenavir + LAM/ZDV                          | Indinavir + NRTIs                             | Amprenavir + NRTIs                            |
| Prior antiretroviral therapy                  | no                                            | no                                            | yes                                           | yes                                           |
| No subjects exposed                           | 109                                           | 113                                           | 241                                           | 245                                           |
| Median (range) duration of exposure in days   | 146 (1-561)                                   | 249 (2-595)                                   | 396 (6-526)                                   | 391 (1-531)                                   |
| %subjects with at least one adverse event     | 94%                                           | 100%                                          | 95%                                           | 96%                                           |
| authorised Most frequent AEs (No subjects, %) | authorised Most frequent AEs (No subjects, %) | authorised Most frequent AEs (No subjects, %) | authorised Most frequent AEs (No subjects, %) | authorised Most frequent AEs (No subjects, %) |
| Nausea                                        | 55 (50)                                       | 84 (74) b                                     | 85 (35)                                       | 106 (43)                                      |
| Fatigue                                       | 40 (37)                                       | 42 (37)                                       | 64 (27)                                       | 42 (17)                                       |
| Vomiting                                      | 19 (17)                                       | 38 (34)                                       | 48 (20)                                       | 58 (24)                                       |
| Gaseous symptoms                              | 48 (44)                                       | 37 (33)                                       | 26 (11)                                       | 43 (18)                                       |
| Diarrhoea                                     | 27 (25)                                       | 35 (31)                                       | 89 (37)                                       | 130 (53) b                                    |
| Headache                                      | 31 (28)                                       | longer 33 (29)                                | 64 (27)                                       | 63 (26)                                       |
| Rash                                          | 7 (6)                                         | 31 (27) b                                     | 36 (15)                                       | 49 (20)                                       |
| Oral/perioral paresthesia                     | 7 (6)                                         | 29 (26) b                                     | 6 (2)                                         | 76 (31) b                                     |
| Viral respiratory infections                  | 15 (14)                                       | 28 (25)                                       | 55 (22)                                       | 67 (28)                                       |
| Sinus disorders                               | 11 (10)                                       | 18 (16)                                       | 30 (12)                                       | 31 (13)                                       |
| Loose stools                                  | no 16 (15)                                    | 13 (12)                                       | 20 (8)                                        | 42 (17)                                       |
| Abdominal discomfort                          | 15 (14)                                       | 14 (12)                                       | 20 (8)                                        | 20 (8)                                        |
| Fever                                         | 7 (6)                                         | 14 (12)                                       | 7 (6)                                         | 14 (12)                                       |
| Ear nose and throat infections                | 9 (8)                                         | 14 (12)                                       | 70 (29)                                       | 50 (20)                                       |
| Cough                                         | 13 (12)                                       | 12 (11)                                       | 44 (18)                                       | 29 (12)                                       |

The  incidence  of  nausea  and  vomiting  in  patients  treated  with  amprenavir  was  lower  in  study PROAB3006  compared  to  PROAB3001.  The  subgroup  of  patients  treated  with  amprenavir  in combination with lamivudine/zidovudine showed an incidence of nausea and vomiting similar to that of the overall population of PROAB3006. Diarrhoea is one of the most reported adverse events with amprenavir (14 %). The incidence of diarrhoea was 63 % and 60 % in subgroups receiving amprenavir in  combination  with  ddI  or  stavudine  as  compared  to  53  %  in  the  overall  population  treated  with amprenavir  during  the  randomised  phase  of  study  PROAB3006.  These  results  confirmed  that stavudine  or  ddI  play  an  important  role  in  the  overall  high  incidence  of  diarrhoea  in  this  study. Diarrhoea appeared to have no impact on the plasma concentration of APV and antiviral response.

Medicinal product no longer authorised b : Fisher's exact test: p &lt;0.001 Most patients experienced only Grade 1 or moderate events. A  subgroup  analysis,  according  to  the  most  frequent  combination  therapies  used  in  PROAB3006 confirms that rash and oral paresthesia are related to amprenavir as the incidence was similar in all subgroups.

The  relative  safety  profile  of  amprenavir  and  indinavir  was  compared  over  a  median  duration  of exposure  for  each  substance  of  56  weeks.  Globally  the  nature  of  the  clinical  adverse  events  was similar  between  amprenavir  and  indinavir  arms.  The  overall  proportion  of  patients  reporting  any clinical adverse events was similar in each treatment group (96 % in amprenavir arm versus 95 % in indinavir arm) but was lower for amprenavir with respect to laboratory abnormalities of any grade (85 %  in  amprenavir  arm  versus  95  %  in  indinavir  arm).  The  frequency  however  was  different  for diarrhoea and oral/perioral paeresthesia which have been significantly more reported in the amprenavir

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

group compared to the indinavir one (53 % versus 37 % and 31 % versus 2 % respectively). Other gastro-intestinal symptoms did not reach statistical significance.

The  most  frequent  adverse  events  leading  to  treatment  discontinuation  were  nausea  (6  %  in  the amprenavir arm versus 3 % in the indinavir arm), vomiting (4 % in the amprenavir arm versus 2 % in the indinavir arm) rash (3 % in the amprenavir arm) and diarrhoea (2 % in the amprenavir arm).

## Rash

In dose-ranging studies, the incidence of rash was greater in the 1200 mg bid group leading to more discontinuations. Further investigation showed that there was no significant relationship between rash and  amprenavir  plasma  concentrations.  On  this  basis  and  considering  that  there  might  be  a  risk  of resistance occurring when using suboptimal doses, it was not considered necessary to introduce a dose escalation scheme.

Macular symptoms were reported in 32 % of patients treated with amprenavir during the main studies as  compared  to  41  %  in  the  placebo  group  (PROAB3001)  and  42  %  in  the  indinavir  group (PROAB3006). Considering that rhabdomyolosis may be considered as a class effect linked to PIs, an adequate class labelling wording has been introduced in the SPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Rash  was  usually  mild  to  moderate,  erythematous  or  maculopapular  cutaneous  eruptions  with  or without pruritus, occurring during second week of treatment. Spontaneous resorption usually occurred within 2 weeks. Less than 1 % of severe or life-threatening skin reactions including Stevens-Johnson Syndrome have been reported. The incidence of rash in study CNAA2007 where amprenavir was coadministered  with  abacavir  and  efavirenz,  was  54  %.  This  may  indicate  an  additive  effect  between efavirenz  and  abacavir.  There  was  no  evidence  of  enhanced  toxicity  when  amprenavir  is  given  in combination with efavirenz and abacavir. Laboratory findings Abnormal liver functions were not more frequent with amprenavir in combination with NRTIs than with lamivudine in combination with zidovudine but they were less frequent with amprenavir (37 %) than with indinavir (60 %). Most of the patients (73 %) who reached Grade 3 or 4 transaminase or alkaline phosphatase values were patients with documented co-infection with HBV and/or HCV. In view of the liver toxicity reported in the rat toxicological studies, liver toxicity was monitored during the  clinical  trials  but  no  significant  effect  was  observed  during  or  after  treatment  with  amprenavir. Based  on  the  review  of  the  two  main  studies,  there  was  no  evidence  of  enhancement  of  the  low intrinsic hepatotoxicity of amprenavir when other hepatotoxic substances were co-administered. Abnormal fat redistribution Based on data collected retrospectively, the incidence of symptoms related to fat redistribution appears low in patients treated with amprenavir. Only one case (buffalo hump) was reported in 113 (&lt; 1 %) antiretroviral  naive  patients  treated  with  amprenavir  in  combination  with  lamivudine/zidovudine (PROAB3001) for a median of 36 weeks (range 0-85). In study PROAB3006 seven cases have been reported over a median duration of 56 weeks (range 0-76). The incidence was significantly higher in patients in the indinavir arm compared to the amprenavir arm (11 % versus versus 3 %).  The impact of  amprenavir  on  carbohydrate  and  lipid  metabolism  in  antiretroviral  naive  patients  will  be  further evaluated. As for the other protease inhibitors, a class labelling wording has been introduced in the SPC of amprenavir to highlight the potential lipodystrophy and other metabolic disorders associated with combination therapy including protease inhibitors. Rhabdomyolysis

## Safety in special population

The  adverse  event  profile  reported  in  the  two  studies  in  paediatric  population  was  similar  to  that observed in adult patients.  The most common adverse events reported were related to gastrointestinal tract and rash which led to 5 % of discontinuation in both studies.

The incidence of grade 3 or 4 laboratory abnormalities was similar in both studies 9 %.  Although some concern related to higher toxicity of amprenavir in young animals (see Part III) the tolerability of amprenavir  seemed  acceptable.    However,  data  are  too  limited  on  children  under  the  age  of  4  to recommend the administration of amprenavir in this population.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The safety profile of amprenavir in adults over 65 years old has not been established.

## 4. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendations

-  The quality  of  this  product  is  considered  to  be  acceptable  when  used  in  accordance  with  the conditions  defined  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics.  The  soft  capsules  and  oral solution  are  not  bioequivalent  and  therefore  cannot  be  interchanged  during  treatment  on  a milligram  per  milligram  basis.  Physicochemical  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance  of  the  product  have  been  investigated  and  are  controlled  in  a  satisfactory  way. However the high amount of propylene glycol in the oral solution raised a concern over its safe use in children.
-  The  efficacy  and  the  safety  of  amprenavir  in  patients  with  advanced  HIV-1  disease  and  in patients  treated  following  failure  with  PI  containing-regimen  could  not  be  comprehensively evaluated.  Amprenavir  seemed  to  have  a  favourable  resistance  profile  compared  to  other protease inhibitors but additional data would be needed to conclude on the use of amprenavir in these patents. Based on results from ongoing studies, amprenavir seemed to contribute to the antiviral  effect  observed  with  combination regimens in PI experienced patients. Nevertheless, the design of the studies had some limitations, which do not allow definite conclusions to be drawn on the specific role of amprenavir in such therapy regimen.
- Medicinal product no longer authorised  Taking  into  consideration  the  therapeutic  indication  of  amprenavir,  the  pharmacological  and toxicological profile has been satisfactory defined although there are some concerns related to the toxicity in young animals (probably due to immature metabolising system and influenced by the vehicle) for the use of amprenavir in young children. Due to the suspicion of embryotoxicity with amprenavir in rats, amprenavir should not be given to pregnant women, as indicated in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Carcinogenicity studies are still ongoing and results will be submitted as part of the follow-up measures to be fulfilled by the applicant.  The inter and intra-variability  in  the  pharmacokinetic  parameters is of concern. Although the twice  daily  regimen  was  not  fully  justified  to  exclude  any  risk  of  C minss falling  below antiretroviral  levels  compared  to  three  times  daily  dosing,  1200  mg  bid  has  been  used  in  the main studies. In children, the recommended dose of 20 mg/kg twice daily of capsules (17 mg/kg three  times  daily  of  oral  solution)  was  considered  acceptable.  However  there  were  some concerns  relating  to  the  proposed  alternative  dosage  regimen  15  mg/kg  three  times  daily  of capsules (22.5 mg/kg twice daily of oral solution).  Data on the potential pharmacokinetic interactions with other antiretroviral medicinal products were  not  extensive  but  results  from  ongoing  studies  will  be  submitted  post-authorisation  in order to propose specific dosing recommendations.  The efficacy data up to 48 weeks showed that amprenavir administered at the dose of 1200 mg bid  has  an  antiviral  effect  in  antiretroviral  naive  adult  patients.  Triple  therapy  including amprenavir  and  NRTIs  was  more  effective  than  the  double  therapy  of  NRTIs  (proportion  of patients  with  HIV  RNA  &lt;  400  copies/ml  =  41  %  in  amprenavir/lamivudine/zidovudine compared to 3 % in lamivudine/zidovudine). The effects lasted longer although a decline after 16 weeks was apparent in the triple regimen group. Further comparative studies with standard care  therapy  would  be  necessary  to  further  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  amprenavir  in  this population.  In antiretroviral experienced patients, the response was sustained with amprenavir in combination with NRTIs up to 48 weeks. Its efficacy seemed to be lower and less sustained than that of the comparator indinavir (proportion of patients with HIV RNA &lt; 400 copies/ml = 30 % in amprenavir/NRTIs compared to 46 % in indinavir/NRTIs at 48 weeks).
-  The  efficacy  and  safety  of  amprenavir  in  children  is  supported  by  data  obtained  from  268 children. The efficacy pattern is similar in children and adults. Considering the scarcity of the data in children less than 4 years old, amprenavir should not be recommended in this age.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  The solution contains an amount of propylene glycol resulting in a daily intake in excess of the acceptable limit defined by FAO/WHO which poses a potential risk of toxicity, particularly in infants. The review of the literature related to preclinical and clinical data of propylene glycol showed that it is of low toxicity in animals and in humans. When administered at high doses it could promote several toxic effects as central nervous system depression, hyperosmolality, renal toxicity  and  hemolysis,  Patients  at  risk  could  be  infants  and  patients  with  hepatic  or  renal dysfunction. The  data  comparing  the  safety  of  the  solution  with  that  of  the  capsules  (which contain less propylene glycol) in children above 4 years gave some reassurance. Considering the indication,  the  age  limit  of  4  years,  it  was  considered  that  the  benefit  of  treatment  with amprenavir outweighs the potential risk of adverse effects.
-  Adverse events associated with amprenavir in the clinical setting was mainly related to gastrointestinal  symptoms,  rashes  and  oral/peri-oral  paraesthesia.  They  were  generally  mild  to moderate in severity, early in onset and rarely treatment limiting.
-  The clinical evidence submitted for amprenavir suggest that the product can have a role in the treatment  of  patients  who  have  failed  previous  therapies,  for  whom  there  is  a  medical  need. Amprenavir containing salvage regimens (e.g. studies CNAA2007 and ACTG398) have been shown to be effective, but the contribution of amprenavir itself is difficult to establish due to the design of the studies. In addition, the population included in those trials was not homogeneous with regard to PI-experience and level of virological failure. The CPMP requested the applicant to  conduct  a  prospective  clinical  trial  of  amprenavir  in  PI-experienced  patients  to  clearly establish the efficacy of the product in this population. The protocol of this study submitted by the  applicant  was  further  discussed  during  the  hearing  held  before  the  CPMP.  As  part  of  the specific obligation to be fulfilled, the results of this study will be submitted and will form the basis of the annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Benefit/risk assessment The  applicant  during  an  oral  explanation  before  the  CPMP,  focused  on  the  following  issues,  as previously defined by the CPMP:  the  efficacy  activity  of  amprenavir  as  compared  to  that  of  the  currently  available  protease inhibitors  the pharmacokinetic data in relation to the proposed dosage regimen/desired therapeutic levels and likely pharmacokinetic interactions. The potentially favourable resistance profile of this product was discussed but the predictive value of these  data  and  the  role  of  amprenavir  in  PI  experienced  patients  were  considered  uncertain.  An  Ad Hoc group of experts was also convened to discuss the issue. The dose recommendation in adults was adequately addressed by the applicant. In  response  to  the  request  of  the  CPMP,  the  applicant  provided  further  information  particularly  to substantiate  the  potential  usefulness  of  amprenavir  in  protease  inhibitor  experienced  adults  and children. The CPMP in its concluding assessment of the benefits and risks of amprenavir made the following points:  There  remained  concerns  over  first  line  treatment  of  HIV  infected  adult  patients  with amprenavir, due to the apparent inferiority versus indinavir. Since no new data were available, the CPMP did not support a first line indication for amprenavir.  The extensive in vitro data provided showed that amprenavir has a distinctive resistance profile which  involves  different  mechanisms  from  those  of  other  protease  inhibitors.  In  addition,  a substantial amount of data and analyses (mostly retrospective) suggested that, for amprenavir, there is a correlation between laboratory data and clinical response. Therefore, amprenavir could be a potential candidate for treatment regimens  based on baseline virological testing in PI experienced patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  The drug-drug interaction information has been expanded so as to justify the dosage of amprenavir when  used  in  combination  with  other  antiretrovirals,  likely  to  occur  in  the  proposed  indication. Preliminary  data  showed  that  the  combination  with  ritonavir  may  be  of  interest  in  term  of pharmacokinetic exposure. However, the available information is still preliminary and should be completed on an on-going basis, particularly in relation to efficacy and safety. This is particularly relevant in relation to children.
-  The three times a day dosage in children using the oral solution was accepted. Considering the high  amount  of  propylene  glycol,  the  CPMP  agreed  that  the  oral  solution  could  only  be considered as a temporary stage during amprenavir therapy. Therefore children should switch to the capsules as soon as the child is able to swallow them. This, as well as the potential dangers of the propylene glycol, which should be carefully monitored, are explained in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised RECOMMENDATION Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Agenerase was favourable for use in combination with other antiretroviral agents in the treatment of protease inhibitor (PI) experienced HIV-1 infected adults and children  above  the  age  of  4  years.  The  choice  of  amprenavir  should  be  based  on  individual  viral resistance  testing  and  treatment  history  of  patients  (see  section  5.1).  In  protease  inhibitor  naive patients, Agenerase is less effective than indinavir.