---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:18:37
document_pages: 32
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/angiox-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: angiox-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 14.1115957
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 16:21:29.509722
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Angiox. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2004. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Bivalirudin  is  an  anticoagulant  intended  for  parenteral  use  during  invasive  intravascular  procedures such  as  percutaneous  coronary  intervention  (PCI),  including  percutaneous  transluminal  coronary angioplasty (PTCA) procedures like angioplasty and balloon angioplasty and PTCA with stenting. Patients with ischaemic heart disease are treated with medical therapy, PCI and CABG. The number of PCI  performed  in  Europe  now  exceeds  500,000  per  year.  The  technique  involves  positioning  of  a balloon  within  the  coronary  artery,  which  is  then  inflated  to  distend  the  occlusion.  The  ensuing damage to the arterial wall releases tissue factor, causes platelet adhesion and aggregation and starts the clotting cascade. Currently,  unfractionated  heparin  with  GPIIb/IIIa  inhibitor  and  adjuvant  treatment  with  aspirin, clopidogrel is regarded as standard care in patients  undergoing  PCI. Despite this treatment approximately 5-11% develop ischaemic events with 4-10% having clinically major bleed. Bivalirudin is a direct thrombin inhibitor with linear pharmacokinetics and dynamics. It is effective against fluid phase and clot bound thrombin and is alleged to inhibit protease-activated receptor (PAR) mediated activation of platelets. Bivalirudin is a single chain of 20 amino-acid polypeptide based on the structure of hirudin. It is a direct  thrombin  inhibitor  that  binds  reversibly  to  thrombin  at  both  the  active  site  and  the  substrate recognition  site.    Bivalirudin  inhibits  all  thrombin-catalysed  or  -induced  reactions,  including  fibrin formation,  activation  of  coagulation  factors  V,  VIII,  and  XIII,  activation  of  protein  C  and  platelet aggregation. Bivalirudin is highly selective for thrombin with an inhibitory constant (Ki) of 2.3 nM, and does not require a co-factor. The  claimed  indication is for use as an 'anticoagulant in patients  undergoing  percutaneous intervention  (PCI)'.  The  recommended  dose  is  an  intravenous  bolus  of  0.75  mg/kg  followed immediately  by  an  intravenous  infusion  at  a  rate  of  1.75  mg/kg/h  for  at  least  the  duration  of  the procedure. The infusion may be continued for up to 4 hours post-PCI as clinically warranted. An additional 0.3 mg·kg -1 bolus dose of bivalirudin may also be administered during the procedure to reach a target activated clotting time (ACT) of greater than or equal to 225 seconds. The dose may need  to  be  reduced  in  patients  with  renal  impairment.    A  physician  experienced  in  coronary intervention procedures should administer Angiox. 2. Quality aspects Introduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

The proposed market dosage form is a lyophilised powder presented in a 10 ml single use sterile Type I  glass  vial,  closed  with  a  bromobutyl  rubber  stopper.    Each  vial  nominally  contains  250  mg  of bivalirudin together with the bulking agent mannitol.

Immediately  prior  to  use  the  lyophile  is  reconstituted  with  5  ml  Water  for  Injections  to  yield  a concentrate of 50 mg/ml. This is then further diluted in 50 ml of either 5% dextrose in water or 0.9% sodium  chloride  to  give  a  final  concentration  of  5  mg/ml.    The  resulting  solution  is  intended  for intravenous injection or infusion.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Drug Substance

The drug substance bivalirudin is a trifluoracetate salt of a synthetic 20 amino acid peptide with an average molecular weight of 2180.3 (anhydrous free base).  It is an amorphous powder with lowest solubility around its isoelectric point about 3.6.

## Manufacture

The manufacturing process of bivalirudin has evolved over time from a solid phase method via a pilot liquid  phase  process  that  was  subsequently  scaled  up  and  further  optimized.  Further  modification resulted in the current process.

One related substance  detected  by  the  new  neutral  gradient  HPLC  method  was  characterized  as  DPhe 12 -bivalirudin. In this method, D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin co-elutes with other minor impurities, e.g. diGly-bivalirudin  (the  so-called  NGIP,  neutral  gradient  impurity  peak).    When  this  mixture  was  first identified, D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin was the major impurity.  A separate acid gradient assay was developed to quantitate D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin, which later turned out to also contain di-gly bivalirudin.  The neutral gradient method therefore gives the total peak area of the three bivalirudin diastereomers (as the NGIP peak)  while  the  acid  gradient  HPLC  method  is  used  to  accurately  quantify  the  levels  of  D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin and the quantities of the other, co-eluting minor impurities and related substances.

An organic chemical process in solution-phase involving the synthesis and the condensation of two key intermediates to finally obtain the fully assembled peptide obtains Bivalirudin.  Purification and isolation  processes  for  bivalirudin  drug  substance  involve  the  use  of  reverse  phase  preparative chromatography by two buffer systems (neutral and acidic), desolventization of acetonitrile by thinfilm evaporation and a final filtration and lyophilisation step. In  comparison  to  the  earlier  manufacturing  processes  of  the  active  substance,  the  formation  of impurities  which  are  difficult  to  remove  during  chromatographic  purification  (e.g. [ (D)Phe ] 12 and [ Asp ] 9 ) are minimised with the current process. Only  batches  manufactured  with  the  earlier  processes  have  been  used  in  clinical  trials.  However, equivalence  has  been  demonstrated.  Also,  the  specifications  of  the  drug  substance  have  been tightened. Characterisation The chemical structure of bivalirudin peptide has been elucidated by a number of standard methods including Amino acid analysis, Counter ion characterization, Elemental analysis, Mass spectrometric analysis  (both  fast  atom  bombardment  and  collision-induced  dissociation  techniques),  Amino  acid sequence analysis by automated Edman degradation, Analysis of enantiomeric purity of amino acids (after  deuterolysis  of  the  peptide,  2-dimensional  NMR  analysis,  UV  spectral  analysis  and  Peptide mapping (after enzymatic digestion). Physicochemical characterization of bivalirudin includes studies of hygroscopicity, solubility, decomposition and secondary structure. It  can  be  concluded  that  bivalirudin  is  a  well-characterized  peptide,  and  that  the  structure  has  been conclusively established. Impurities Following a comparison of the initial pilot scale and commercial synthetic processes, several HPLC methods  were  developed  for  impurity  analysis.  These  methods  were  based  on  more  advanced technologies and allowed improved resolution of impurities. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Retrospective  testing  of  historical  material  confirmed  that  this  second  and  minor  impurity  di-Glybivalirudin  has  been  present  at  relatively  low  and  consistent  levels  also  in  material  manufactured according to the old processes. The levels of both impurities are therefore described as a combined impurity by a relative retention time.

During the development of the current synthetic process, one of the coupling reactions, which were found  to  be  responsible  for  the  formation  of  the  D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin,  was  succesfully  modified  to reduce the impurity level.

A further impurity of importance is Asp 9 -bivalirudin, which is also reflected in the specfication. Asp 9 -bivalirudin is both a process impurity and degradant of bivalirudin drug substance.

Both  impurities  (D-Phe12-  and  Asp9-)  have  been  investigated  in  pre-clinical  studies.    And  it  was concluded that no toxicological effects are associated with either impurity. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the D-Phe12-bivalirudin impurity is pharmacologically inactive. The other major group of impurities eluting in the the neutral gradient system have been shown to be peptide breakdown products produced during the post purification desolventization and drying process - the levels of these are consistent and are independent of the synthesis process. Specification Testing of the active substance is conventional and includes Characteristics (appearance) and Identity (MS,  TLC,  amino  acids  relative  composition),  water  and  TFA  acid  content.  Tests  for  bivalirudin characterize  both  the  peptide  (HPLC  testing  using  two  solvent  systems  to  confirm  the  levels  of specific  and  non  specific  impurities  as  well  as  the  purity  of  bivalirudin)  and  the  non-peptide components (water, trifluoroacetate, residual solvents and residual palladium). The product is adequately assayed by the use of quantitative HPLC against a reference standard and the use of quantitative amino acid analysis to determine peptide content.  Rather to provide historical continuity,  a  biological  assay  (thrombin  binding  activity)  of  the  well-characterised  petide  is  also included. Impurities  are  controlled  by  HPLC  methods  as  described  above.  The  [Asp 9 ]-  bivalirudin  analog content  increases  with  the  water  content.    This  is  controlled  in  the  specifications  and  adequate packaging of the active substance is guaranteed. All  test  method  has  been  appropriately  validated.  Batch  analytical  data  have  confirmed  that  the impurity  profile  of  drug  substance  is  consistent  irrespective  of  the  route  of  synthesis.  It  is  is  well defined for a peptide product and consistent over a range of batches. Container Hygroscopicity  studies  have  shown  that,  as  expected  for  a  peptide,  bivalirudin  drug  substance  is slightly  hygroscopic.    Long-term  stability  studies  have  shown  that  this  is  not  a  practical  problem provided it is adequately packaged for storage. To ensure this, Bivalirudin drug substance is packed and stored in polyethylene multi-layered polyethylene heat-sealed bags.  The multi-layered bag is then packed  into  an  aluminium  foil  layer  and  sealed.    The  foil  laminate  pouch  acts  as  an  impermeable moisture barrier. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Stability

Stability studies on material manufactured using the current manufacturing route have been carried out on one development batch and on three validation batches, stored in the same quality of packaging as used  for  bulk  storage.    Up  to  24  month  data  have  been  provided  from  samples  stored  under  ICH storage  conditions  including  25°C/60%RH,  5°C  in  darkness,  -20°C  in  darkness,  40°C/75%RH  and under light at 20°C. Analytical methods are as above.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No  changes  are  seen  to  appearance,  the  level  of  bacterial  endotoxins  and  microbial  contamination under all storage conditions.  At -20 ° C and +5 ° C no change is seen over the storage timeline to purity, impurity profile or assay.  At elevated temperatures +25 ° C and +40 ° C and/or light a significant degree of degradation was observed.

Batch  analytical  data  indicate  that  moisture  levels  on  drug  substance  release  do  not  increase significantly after 12 months storage. Based on the current data, the recommended storage conditions of -20 ° C to -10 ° C in the dark with a retest date of 12 months is acceptable.

Drug Product Each 10 mL vial provides 250 mg of bivalirudin in a mannitol-bulked, lyophilized formulation. The product is presented in single-use glass vials with rubber stoppers. Pharmaceutical Development The development of the current (lyophilised) formulation began with a solution formulation that was stored frozen.  A further solution formulation was developed that required refrigeration only which finally led to the development of the current (lyophilised) formulation. The formulation proposed for commercialization is simple and unremarkable and was based upon the considerations  of  pharmaceutical  properties  of  the  active  ingredient,  chemical  stability,  intended clinical use and commercial considerations. The proposed formulation, 50-mg/mL bivalirudin at pH 5.5 in 2.5% mannitol solution, was found to be robust during laboratory scale lyophilization testing. Moisture  content  and  solubility  have  been  identified  as  important  considerations  for  the  successful formulation  of  an  amorphous  lyophilised  drug  substance.    In  aqueous  solutions,  pH  is  expected  to influence bivalirudin solubility while it should be unaffected by parameters such as temperature and the addition of mannitol. The excipients are commonly used for parenteral products. Mannitol was chosen to provide a product that would be approximately isotonic upon reconstitution. Nitrogen is used as the headspace gas of the filled vial to provide an inert atmosphere for storage.  Poor bioavalibility of peptide-based products also supports their formulation for direct intravenous administration. A manufacturing filling overage of  10%  is  used  during  manufacture  to  ensure  reaching  of  the  target  concentration.  Exposure  to  a standard autoclave cycle resulted in loss of 90% bivalirudin indicating that aseptic filling would be required. Two formulations of finished product (frozen liquid formulation and the lyophilized) have been used during clinical development. Bioequivalence between the two formulations was confirmed in in two pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic studies. Compatibility data on reconstituted product in sterile water and intravenous solution has shown the solutions to be chemically stable.  In addition, eighty-seven out of ninety six intravenous drugs tested were compatible with bivalirudin.  Products, which are found to be incompatible, have been listed in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Manufacture of the product

The manufacture of bivalirudin proceeds through the two  main stages preparation of the bulk drug solution (compounding of the drug substance, and filtration prior to aseptic filling) and sterile filling of vials followed by lyophilization and sealing.  The sterilization conditions for vials and stoppers and automatic machine parts comply to the Ph Eur standard conditions with margin and are considered satisfactory.  In process controls include the following critical tests: appearance; assay by UV; density; pH and bioburden.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The drug product manufacturing process has been validated by three non-consecutive batches, one at 38% of commercial scale and two at 100% of commercial scale.  An satisfactory explanation for not validating  three  successive  batches  has  been  provided  (due  to  limited  expiry  of  bivalirudin).    The evaluation  has  been  thoroughly  carried  out  and  has  involved  each  of  the  stages  of  the  process  i.e. formulation, post-filtration, filling and lyophilisation.  In addition, considerable experience has been gained at the intended site of manufacture with the production of over thirty batches of material.

The  excipients  are  standard  and  are  controlled  in  accordance  with  their  respective  current  Ph  Eur monographs.  Exemplary Certificates of Analysis have been provided.  None of the raw materials are of human or animal origin.

Furthermore,  it  was  shown  that  following  reconstitution  with  5mL  water  for  injections  to  a concentration of 50 mg/mL that the diluted material was stable for at least 24 hours at between 2-8 ° C. Subsequent dilution in dextrose or saline, and storage in plastic infusion bags to final concentrations ranging from 0.5 mg/mL to 5 mg/mL showed that the product remained unchanged for up to 48 hours at 25 ° C.  No evidence was seen of adsorption of the material onto infusion bag materials.

Specifications Specifcation  include  identity  (UV  and  HPLC),    biological  activity  (inhibition  of  thrombin),  purity (HPLC), strength (UV). Additional tests of product quality, including particulates, pH, sterility, and uniformity of dosage units are carried out. Tests to assure product sterility and microbial contamination (endotoxin) comply with the Ph.Eur. It is considered that the control tests described for the finished product specification contain standard tests and limits that are relevant for a product that is intended for parenteral administration. The  levels  of  D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin  are  greatly  reduced  in  drug  product  containing  drug  substance manufactured using the modified synthetic process. Drug product therefore contains only a residual quantity of this impurity plus a small amount of the second minor impurity, di-gly-bivalirudin. Stability Eighteen  months  real-time  data  at  5°C  and  25°C/60%RH  and  6  months  accelerated  data  at 40°C/75%RH  are  provided  on  three  batches  of  drug  product  manufactured  using  drug  substance produced by the most recent process stored in the marketing pack.  Three-year real-time data and 6 months accelerated data are also provided on three batches containing drug substance manufactured using the previous process. Compendial tests are carried out according to USP requirements. However; the sterility test has been modified to meet both Ph Eur and USP requirements.  Although it would be preferable to have all testing conducted to comply with the Ph Eur, overall this is not considered to have any impact on the interpretation of the results as critical non-compendial test methodologies are identical to those used for release testing in the EU.  Moreover, it is considered that that the relevant compendial USP tests, applied consistently can be used to provide evidence of adequate stability . For product containing active substance, which was manufactured using the recent process, the results at all, storage conditions are seen to be well within the specification limits. Overall the data support the  stability  equivalence  between  drug  products  manufactured  with  bivalirudin  manufactured  using either synthetic processes or the recommended storage conditions of up to 25 ° C for a maximum of 36 months is acceptable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The overall storage conditions as stated in detail in the SPC are therefore supported.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion

## Impurities

As  is  common  with  synthetic  peptides  purified  by  reverse  faze  preparative  HPLC,  most  of  the impurities are deletions, additions or optical enantiomers of the parent peptide and are grouped around the foot of the major  bivalirudin  peak.  The  levels  of  these  impurities  have  decreased  with manufacturing experience and as described above, in the  most  recent  process the  level  of  D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin are significantly reduced.

Manufacturing experience to date indicates that the levels of the combined impurities in the NGIP in bivalirudin drug substance are below 0.5% and as such, there is a justification for removing D-Phe 12 -bivalirudin  as  a  named  impurity  from  the  specification.    In  view  of  the  fact  that  manufacturing experience with the current route is still limited, a limit for D-Phe 12 bivalirudin on the drug substance specification is retained, and, in order to control the levels of this and the di-Gly derivative, describe both impurities on the release specification for drug substance manufactured by the modified synthetic route by their relative retention time.  A conserative limit for the combined impurity is imposed. A number of additional impurities at  levels of  less  than  0.5%  (including  di-Gly  bivalirudin),  and  a range of break down sequences have also been identified and characterized.  These products do not feature on the release specification and this is acceptable since the ICH guideline on impurities does not apply to peptide-based drug products with respect to impurity qualification levels. In summary it can be noted that as a result of the improvements to the manufacturing process for the drug substance the specification for the drug substance has been tightened.  This in turn has led to a tightening  of  the  specification  for  the  drug  product.  Process  validation  has  been  provided  for commercial scale batches. The stability data shows a stable drug product. 3. Non-clinical aspects GLP Although most of the safety pharmacology studies were made before it became mandatory for these to be  performed  in  accordance  with  GLP,  the  Applicant  states  that  they  were  carried  out  under  GLP conditions and only lack Quality Assurance (QA) involvement. All toxicity studies were carried out in compliance with GLP. Pharmacology Primary pharmacodynamics Bivalirudin  is  a  direct  thrombin  inhibitor  that  was  designed  using  the  leech  anticoagulant  protein hirudin as a model.  It comprises a COOH-terminal region, which binds to the anion binding exosite through  a  dodecapeptide  sequence  based  on  residues  53-64  of  hirudin,  and  a  4  amino  acid  NH2terminal region that binds to the active catalytic site, separated by 4 glycine residues.  Unlike hirudin, which binds so tightly to thrombin that its action is essentially irreversible, bivalirudin is a reversible inhibitor. Bivalirudin was shown to be a mixed competitive/non-competitive thrombin inhibitor with a Ki value of 2.3 nM. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  kinetic  data  for  the  interaction  between  bivalirudin  and  thrombin  are  consistent  with  a  4-step mechanism.  The first step, binding of the C-terminal region to the anion-binding site, is followed by an intramolecular conformational change, the rate-limiting step.  The N-terminal portion of bivalirudin then binds very rapidly to the catalytic site and a second intramolecular conformational change occurs. These steps stabilise the enzyme-inhibitor complex 400-fold.

Bivalirudin  is  a  highly  specific  thrombin  inhibitor  and  causes  a  dose-dependent  prolongation  of clotting time as assayed by 3 different methods, namely thrombin (TT), Activated partial

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

thromboplastin time (APPT), and prothrombin time (PT).  APTT is considered to be the most useful estimation for assessment of bivalirudin activity.  The dose-response relationship for prolongation of APTT is close to linear at bivalirudin concentrations of ≥ 100 ng·mL -1 .

There is considerable inter-species variation in the efficacy of bivalirudin as a thrombin inhibitor.  In a dose-response study, the order of sensitivity for bivalirudin inhibition was mouse &gt;rat&gt;human&gt;cynomolgus monkey&gt;cow&gt;pig&gt;dog&gt;rabbit. At the concentrations required for prolongation of APTT to 300% of baseline, the species closest to man was the cynomolgus monkey.

Bivalirudin inhibits thrombin-induced platelet aggregation and α -granule secretion.  However, the IC50 for α -granule  secretion  is  approximately  3.5  times  greater  than  that  for  aggregation.    Bivalirudin activity is specifically directed against thrombin.  It does not appear to interfere with normal platelet function. Bivalirudin  inhibits  the  cleavage  of  fibrinogen  by  clot-bound  thrombin  as  effectively  as  by  free thrombin, but has no obvious intrinsic effect on the fibrinolytic system. The effects of bivalirudin on preformed thrombi and thrombus formation were investigated in several species.  In a rat model, bivalirudin potentiated tPa-induced thrombolysis of an artificially established thrombus in the aorta.   In combination with tPA, bivalirudin, but not a similar dose of recombinant hirudin (rHIR) or heparin, significantly reduced time to re-establishment of blood flow.  Anticoagulant treatment  significantly  reduced  re-thrombosis  in  comparison  with  control,  but  although  all 3 anticoagulants  increased  the  duration  of  patency,  bivalirudin  was  significantly  more  effective  than heparin. Bivalirudin was also more effective than heparin in reducing incidence of repeated thrombosis after clot formation and dislodgement in injury and stenosis damaged carotid artery in the pig. Bivalirudin  itself  is  slowly  hydrolysed  by  thrombin  at  the  Arg 3 -Pro4 bond that lies  at  the  scissional point of the catalytic site. Secondary pharmacodynamics No specific studies have been performed, which is considered acceptable since bivalirudin is highly specific and does not appear to inactivate serine proteases other than thrombin. Although it inhibits platelet aggregation, bivalirudin does not increase platelet reactivity, as it appears able to inhibit clot-bound thrombin and consequently the secondary and primary mediated pathways for thrombin activation. Safety pharmacology The only effects of any consequence observed in the safety pharmacology screening studies were on the  cardiovascular  system  in  rats  and  dogs;  bivalirudin,  1  or  5  mg·kg -1 iv caused  a  dose-  related increase (~30% at the higher dose) in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in the rat.  A dose of 5 mg·kg -1 , given as an iv infusion over 15 minutes increased blood pressure parameters in the dog, with the maximal effect observed at 4 minutes.  However, as discussed later, no cardiovascular effects were seen in the baboon or in cynomolgus monkeys in the repeated dose toxicity studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There was no evidence of adverse effect on the CNS or ANS, or on the gastrointestinal tract or renal function at pharmacologically active doses.

Bivalirudin did not cause anaphylaxis in the guinea pig and there were  no  indications of immunological effects in the repeated dose toxicity studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamic drug interactions

There  are  no  indications  of  adverse  interactions  with  aspirin,  warfarin,  urokinase  or  streptokinase although,  not  unexpectedly,  bivalirudin  may  potentiate  the  anticoagulant  effects  of  warfarin  and aspirin.

## Pharmacokinetics

## Methods of analysis

| Species                         | Rat    |       |          | Rabbit   | Rabbit   | Rabbit   |
|---------------------------------|--------|-------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| Sex                             | Males  |       |          | Males    | Males    | Males    |
| Administration Route            | s.c    | s.c   | iv       | sc       | sc       | iv       |
| Dose (mg·kg -1 )                | 50     | 250   | 50       | 50       | 250      | 50       |
| Max. Plasma level ( µ g·mL -1 ) |        |       |          |          |          |          |
| Approx.2 min                    |        |       | 381.0    |          |          | 1,036.9  |
| 15 min                          | 29.8   | 72.3  | 65.4     | 21.5     | 75.1     | 620.6    |
| 30 min                          | 37.7   | 81.8  | 34.0     | 16.4     | 78.8     | 339.8    |
| 1h                              | 17.7   | 67.3  | 17.3     | 10.7     | 111.8    | 95.9     |
| 12h                             | 1.8    | 0.9   | 0.4      | 619      | 3.3      | BLQ      |
| 24 h                            | <50    | 0.2   | 0.6      | BLQ      | BLQ      | BLQ      |
| Coagulation                     |        |       |          |          |          |          |
| Evident                         | 15 min | 15min | ≤ 2 min  | 15min    | 15min    | ≤ 2 min  |
| Maximal                         | 30 min | 1h    | ≤ 2 min  | 30 min   | 2 h      | ≤ 2 min  |
| Elevated                        | >2<4 h | >4 h  | ≤ 30 min | 6 h      | 24 h     | 6 h      |

Although bivalirudin  is  intended  for iv administration  only,  absorption  following  subcutaneous  ( sc ) administration was also investigated to validate this route for the reproductive studies. The  pharmacokinetic  studies  generally  used  radioactive  bivalirudin  labelled  with 3 H  and/or 14 C  in different  parts  of  the  peptide  and  an  enzyme-linked  immunoassay  (ELISA)  that  detected  the  parent compound. Th ELISA method detects bivalirudin by its ability to  inhibit the  binding  of  a  specific  monoclonal antibody to a bovine serum albumin (BSA)-peptide conjugate bound to the solid phase. The accuracy of the ELISA assay is not very high ( ± 20%). Validation was only reported in one study, where recovery was 96 to 110 % over the range of 300 to 900 ng·mL -1 . The 3 H and 14 C  labelled  peptides  were  synthesised  from  labelled  and  unlabelled  amino  acids  by  a combination of automated and manual solid phase procedures.  The 3 H label was placed in the proline2 amino acid to trace the N-terminal DPh-Pro moiety.  In the initial rat study the 14 C label was placed in the tetra-glycine spacer only.  In all other studies, the 14 C label was distributed along the remaining 18 C-terminal residues. Absorption - Bioavailability Pharmacokinetics after a single bolus dose BLQ = Below level of quantification Medicinal product no longer authorised

Pharmacokinetics after 4 h continuous infusion

| Species          | Rat            | Rat            | Rat            | Dog     | Dog     | Cynomolgus Monkey   | Cynomolgus Monkey   |
|------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|---------|---------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Sex              | Males &Females | Males &Females | Males &Females | Females | Females | Females             | Females             |
| Dose (mg·kg -1 ) | 1.04           | 3.12           | 10.42          | 6.8     | 6.8     | 6.9                 | 42.5                |
| Cmax (ng·mL -1 ) | 2,468          | 4,525          | 19,484         | 2223    | 2053    | 2707                | 23750               |
| Tmax (h)         | 1              | 1              | 1              | 2       | 2       | 2.5                 | 4                   |
| AUC (ng.h/mL)    | 6970           | 11,772         | 60,431         |         |         | 8480                | 93159               |
| t 1/2 , (h)      | 2.2            |                | 0.4            |         |         | 0.7                 | 0.7                 |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics: absorption after repeated doses

Distribution Two tissue distribution studies were performed in rats using 3 H / 14 C labelled bivalirudin.  In the first study, the dose used was 3mg·kg -1 and tissue levels were assayed at 24 h. The only tissue containing measurable levels of 3 H was the kidney. In the second study, the 14 C label was uniformly incorporated throughout the 18 residue C-terminal peptide. The dose was 10 mg·kg -1 and tissues were assayed at 3 time points. At the first sampling time, the only tissue with a higher concentration of 3 H than plasma was the kidney and very little remained by 6 h after dosing.  In contrast, 14 C was rapidly taken up into skeletal muscle, bone skin and kidney and by 6 h was distributed to skeletal muscle, skin and bone with a smaller amount in liver and spleen. At 24 h, the concentrations in skeletal muscle and bone were still high, while those in other tissues had declined and small quantities had appeared in kidney and small intestine. The distribution of the N-terminal non-physiological amino acid D-phenylalanine was investigated in the  rat  using  bivalirudin  labelled  with 3 H  in  this  position.  It  was  rapidly  cleared  from  blood  and initially widely distributed.  Within 6 h after administration of an IV bolus dose of 1 mg·kg -1 ,  tissue levels were all &lt;1.5% of the dose. Binding to plasma proteins were examined by 2 methods, equilibrium dialysis across a membrane and gel  filtration,  using 125 I-  labelled  bivalirudin.    In  the  absence  of  plasma,  equilibration  across  the dialysis  membrane  was  reached  in  2  h.    The  gel  chromatography  elution  profile  of 125 I-  labelled bivalirudin was also unchanged in the presence of human plasma, peak radioactivity being found at 11.0 mL. Human  plasma  causes a volume-dependent inhibition of thrombin-catalysed hydrolysis of a chromogenic  substrate  by  thrombin.    However,  bivalirudin  caused  dose-related  inhibition  in  the presence  of  5,  10  and  25  %  human  plasma.      Bivalirudin's  biological  activity  does  not,  therefore, appear to be affected by the presence of plasma proteins. Binding  of 125 I-  labelled  bivalirudin  to  human  erythrocytes  was  investigated  using  gel-filtration chromatography and sucrose-layer centrifugation.  Binding would appear to be non-specific, involving a high number of low affinity-sites. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Species                   | Cynomolgus Monkey   | Cynomolgus Monkey   | Cynomolgus Monkey   | Cynomolgus Monkey   |
|---------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Sex                       | M                   | M                   | F                   | F                   |
| Method of Administration  | iv                  | sc                  | iv                  | sc                  |
| Duration, days            | 7                   | 7                   | 7                   | 7                   |
| Dose (mg·kg -1 ·day -1 )  | 4                   | 4                   | 4                   | 4                   |
| AUC, h.ng/mL Day 1 Day 7  | 12,046 11,439       | 11,469 dead         | 8,528 9,491         | 4,909 2,636         |
| Cmax ( ng/mL) Day 1 Day 7 | 37,118 24,102       | 3,382 dead          | 21,572 23,036       | 1,831 1,635         |
| Tmax (min) Day 7          | 2 2                 | 120 dead            | 2 2                 | 30 30               |

In the study using the N-terminal dipeptide, whole blood and plasma levels of 3 H activity declined in parallel, indicating that the cleaved dipeptide does not bind to or penetrate erythrocytes.

There were no investigations into possible placental transfer of bivalirudin, or its transfer into milk.

## Metabolism

The differences in the fate of the 3 H in the N-terminal dipeptide and the 14 C in the rest of the molecule, suggest  that  the  parent  compound  is  metabolised  early  and  extensively.  The  similarity  of  the  data

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

whether the 14 C is placed in the glycine spacer only or evenly distributed along the 18-amino acid Cterminal portion indicates that the initial reaction is the hydrolysis of the N-terminal dipeptide. This is supported by the clear separation of the 3 H and 14 C activity by iso-electric focusing of urine from a rat treated  with  bivalirudin  with  the 14 C  label  in  the  glycine  spacer.    Bivalirudin  is  stable  in  citrated plasma from rat, cynomolgus monkey and man in  vitro and,  therefore,  proteolysis must occur at an extravascular site. Published data for other small peptides suggest that this could be the kidney.  A study  in  which  the  N-terminal  dipeptide  was  administered  indicated  that  this  is  metabolised  in  the kidneys.

The 14 C  label  was  initially  cleared  from  plasma  in  parallel  with  the 3 H  label,  but  was  widely distributed  to  tissues  with  prolonged  maintenance  of  a  low  plasma  level.  There  was  an  uptake  into skeletal muscle and skin and a later appearance in the small intestine.  These findings are consistent with breakdown of the peptide by non-specific proteinases with the fragments entering the amino acid pool. Induction of cytochrome P450 liver enzymes was investigated in liver samples obtained from rats after 28 days continuous infusion of bivalirudin at doses up to 250 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 .  Total protein yield, total cytochrome P450 content and enzyme activities data revealed no biologically significant effects. Excretion Excretion  of  the  breakdown  products  of  bivalirudin  is  almost  exclusively  in  the  urine  in  rat  and cynomolgus monkey.  Excretion of 3 H activity was rapid, almost all within the first 4 h.  Low recovery of 14 C  is  consistent  with  incorporation  of  the  amino  acids  from  the  C-terminal  peptide  into  newly synthesised protein. The excretion of the N-terminal non-physiological amino acid D-phenylalanine was investigated in the rat using bivalirudin labelled with 3H in this position.  The radioactivity was rapidly excreted in urine. Recovery from faeces was higher than for 3H label in the proline2 position.  Total recovery was low and it was suggested that the radiolabel may have undergone proton exchange with body water and been exhaled through the lungs. Pharmacokinetic drug interactions Pharmacokinetic  interactions  were  investigated  in  the  cynomolgus  monkey.    Plasma  levels  of bivalirudin were  not  significantly altered by  concomitant  administration  of  urokinase. Prior administration  of  oral  warfarin  to  give  a  steady  state  prolongation  of  prothrombin  time  did  not significantly affect Tmax, Cmax or AUC of bivalirudin.  The interaction between bivalirudin, aspirin and tPA was investigated in the rhesus monkey and compared with that of heparin.  Aspirin, 40 mg, was given orally for 3 days before an infusion of tPA.  Bivalirudin, 3 mg·kg -1 ·h -1 or heparin (100 U bolus, followed by 50 U·kg -1 ·h -1 )  was infused for 48 h starting 15 min before the end of the tPA infusion. Both bivalirudin and heparin increased plasma tPA levels and prolonged its half-life. Other pharmacokinetic studies Renal impairment Medicinal product no longer authorised

Partially  nephrectomised  rats  were  used  as  a  model  for  renal  impairment.    Peak  plasma  levels  and AUC for unchanged bivalirudin  were  increased  and  clearance  was  decreased.    Recovery  of  the 3 H label  from  the  normal  kidney  was  comparable  to  controls,  but  that  from  the  ischaemic  kidney  was reduced.  Excretion of the radiolabel was also reduced but total excretion over 48h was comparable.

## Comparison of Manufacturing Processes and Formulations

Changes in manufacturing process and formulation implemented during product development had no effect  on  the  pharmacokinetic  profile  and  pharmacodynamic  activity  of  bivalirudin  in  animals.  The material utilised in the first Phase III  PTCA clinical trial was manufactured using pilot scale liquid phase  synthesis  and  formulated  as  a  frozen  formulation.  The  material  used  in  the  second  Phase  III

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

study was manufactured for commercial use using commercial scale liquid phase synthesis and was formulated as a lyophile.

These  formulations  were  administered  to  the  monkey  by  continuous  infusion  for  14  days.  The commercial  scale  product  was  kinetically  similar  to  the  pilot  scale  product,  as  indicated  by  the terminal  half-lives,  total  body  clearance,  and  mean  residence  time  values.  Pharmacological  activity monitored as prolongation of aPTT measured during infusion on the first (Day 1) and last (Day 15) days of treatment indicated comparable effects of the two formulations.

## Toxicology

|             | Rat                  | Rat                                | Cynomologous Monkey   | Cynomologous Monkey   |
|-------------|----------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Dose, mg/kg | Plasma level, µ g/mL | APTT prolongation                  | Plasma level, µ g/mL  | APTT prolongation     |
| 40/45       |                      |                                    | 2.8-4.0/4.4           | 2-fold/3-fold         |
| 75/100      | 7-9                  | 2-fold                             |                       |                       |
| 150         |                      |                                    | 10.5/13.4             | 5-7-fold              |
| 250         | 21                   | 3-fold                             |                       |                       |
| 500         | 32                   | 3-7-fold                           |                       |                       |
| 1000        | 30-40                | 3-7-fold                           |                       |                       |
| 2000        | 100-150              | 2-fold in males, slight in females |                       |                       |

Single dose toxicity The  acute  toxicity  of  bivalirudin  is  low,  with  mice  and  rats  tolerating  single iv doses  of  up  to 200 mg·kg -1 without  any  adverse  effects.    Cynomolgus  monkeys  tolerated  increasing  doses  of  5  to 100 mg·kg -1 with only prolonged bleeding at the injection site. Pilot studies revealed that the limiting toxicity would be an extension of the pharmacological effect. Repeat dose toxicity There were no adverse effects observed in rats administered an iv bolus  of  36  mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for  28 days. Following  28  days  of  continuous iv infusion  at  75  mg·kg -1 ·day -1 ,  only  the  minimal  effect  of inflammation at the administration site (phlebitis/periphlebitis) was observed in rats.  At a dose of 250 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 , increased spleen weight in 3/20 animals was accompanied by lymphoid hyperplasia and the phlebitis/periphlebitis was exacerbated.  These effects generally reversed over a 14-day recovery period.  A dose of 1000 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 resulted in pale mucous membranes and apparent constipation in some male animals.  Red blood cell parameters were decreased, adrenal and kidney weights increased, pale foci were seen in the kidneys and there was evidence of internal haemorrhage and splenomegaly, associated with extramedullary haematopoiesis.   Treatment related deaths, possibly may due in part to haemorrhage, occurred at doses of ≥ 250 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 . In the cynomolgus monkey 14-day study, there was a minor decrease in red blood cell parameters at the highest dose of 150 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 and gross and microscopic evidence of haemorrhage in a wide variety of tissues in the males.  One female died at this dose level, although the cause of death was not established. After 28 days continuous infusion at 150 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 , histological examination revealed focal/ multifocal  myocardial  degeneration  and/or  necrosis  associated  with  slight  to  mild  haemorrhage  in  2/6 animals. These lesions were not seen after a 14-day recovery period. Studies  using sc administration  were  also  performed  in  rabbit  and  cynomolgus  monkey.    Repeated injection of 12.5 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 5 or 7 days produced mainly local effects in rabbits.  Administration of 4, 12 and 36 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 28 days caused dose related bruising at the injection site and also at sites related to the restraint in cynomolgus monkey. Toxicokinetics Comparison of plasma levels and pharmacological effect Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Differences  were  found  between  the  sensitivity  of  rat  (less  sensitive)  and  cynomologous  monkey (sensitivity  close  to  humans)  to  the  anticoagulant  action  of  bivalirudin.  As  expected,  the  rat  has tolerated much higher doses of bivalirudin for 14 days with plasma levels about ten times above those levels considered in the therapeutic range, and no indication of toxicities different from those derived of anticoagulation were reported.

## Genotoxicity

No positive  results  were  obtained  in  5 in  vitro studies.    Assays  were  carried  out  with  and  without metabolic activation by arochlor-induced rat S-9 mix except for DNA repair in rat hepatocytes which are  capable  of  internal  metabolic  activation.    Although  a  toxic  level  was  not  reached,  each  study employed  the  maximum  recommended  dose.    Appropriate  positive  and  negative  controls  were included in each study. Bivalirudin was degraded to a small extent in HAM's medium in the presence of  S9,  but  this  does  not  appear  to  have  affected  the  interpretation  of  the  cultured  CHO  cell mutagenicity study. Bivalirudin  did  not  increase  the  incidence  of  micronucleated  polychromatic  erythrocytes  in  bone marrow cells  in  rats  at  24  hrs  after  2  daily sc doses  of  250  to  1,000  mg·kg -1 .    Plasma  drug  levels obtained in the range-finding study provided adequate evidence of exposure. Carcinogenicity No studies performed, which is considered acceptable in the light of the intended use of the product. Bivalirudin is intended for a short period of administration in the clinical setting. Bivalirudin will not be  used  for  long-term  administration  or  in  children,  and  is  not  genotoxic  and  therefore  it  is  not considered neccesary to perform any study. Reproductive and developmental studies Reproduction studies used the sc route  of administration. The pharmacological effect of bivalirudin, and the potential bleeding, precluded administration during the peri-natal period. In  a  combined  fertility  and  development  study,  there  was  no  effect  on  male  fertility  or  mating behaviour up to a dose level of 500 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 administered for 28 days pre-mating. There were also no effects on female fertility, mating behaviour or implantation at this dose when administered from 15 days pre-mating to day 17 of gestation.   Pre-implantation loss was, however, increased at 500 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 . In a developmental and peri- and post-natal study at doses of up to 150 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 , there were no adverse physical or developmental effects (including reproductive function) in the F1 generation. In a second study, dosing was recommenced during the lactation period (LD2 to LD20) and again there were no adverse effects on the F1 generation at a maternal dose level of 150 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 .  No delayed adverse effects on parturition were seen in either study. In studies covering the period of organogenesis in rats and rabbits there were no adverse effects on the offspring  at  doses  up  to  150  mg·kg -1 ·day -1 .    A  toxic  level  was  not  reached  in  rabbits,  although decreased body weight gain and food consumption were observed at doses of ≥ 75 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 in a pilot study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Local tolerance

Three separate studies were made using sc administration in rabbits.  Local irritation was minimal up to a dose level of 50 mg·kg -1 .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Other toxicity studies

When incubated in human blood, bivalirudin did not cause haemolysis of red blood cells or plasma protein flocculation at a concentration of 10 mg·mL -1 .

The effect of 4 potential impurities, PB19-1, PB 19-2, PB-19-3 and PB 19-6 (D-PHE12 bivalirudin), was compared with those of the parent compound after a single iv bolus dose of 50 mg·kg -1 in rats.  No adverse  effects  were  observed  with  PB19-1,  PB  19-2  and  PB-19-3.  The  major  impurity,  PB19-6 administered at a dose of 36 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 14 days caused minimal lesions of reversible type in the liver and marginally exacerbated age-related changes in heart and kidney. Changes in the method of synthesis have apparently significantly reduced the potential for this compound to arise.

Antithrombotic  activity  has  been  demonstrated in  vivo in  different  models  of  venous  and  arterial thrombosis yet there are no animal models for PCI/PTCA. No relevant adverse effects on the major physiological  systems  studied  were  found  for  bivalirudin  in  safety  pharmacology  studies.  The hypertensive response reported in rats and dogs is not due to inhibition of autonomic mediators, and was not found in primates. This difference can be reasonably explained by variation in the thrombin actions at the level of vascular tissues between species.

Administration of partially degraded bivalirudin, caused minor lesions in the liver, consistent with a response  to  a  foreign  protein,  minimal  biliary  hyperplasia  and  slight  exacerbation  of  the  portal inflammation  present  in  the  controls.  The  same  effects  were  present  in  the  bivalirudin  comparator group but have never been seen in other studies at higher doses. The bivalirudin formulation was not pyrogenic in rabbits and did not cause systemic anaphylaxis in guinea pigs.  No increase in antibody titres was seen in toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys after continuous IV infusion of up to 150 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 14 days or sc administration of up to 36 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 28 days. Bivalirudin did not induce systemic anaphylaxis in guinea pigs. Also, anti-bivalirudin antibodies were not  induced  in  the  cynomologous  monkey  toxicity  studies,  and  there  is  no  pharmacokinetic  or pharmacodynamic evidence of a neutralizing response. However, anti-bivalirudin antibody titres over pre-dose values at late stages (44 days after start of infusion) are not provided in these studies with cynomologous monkeys. According to these data, bivalirudin does not appear to elicit immunological responses or hypersensitivity reactions. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment Ecotoxicity and environmental risk is not to be expected with bivalirudin. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects Pharmacology The pharmacological activity of bivalirudin appears to reside solely in its inhibition of the enzymatic activity  of  thrombin.    The  anticoagulant  effect  should,  therefore,  be  highly  predictable  and  there should be no need for the frequent titration of  dose  as  required  with  heparin.    As  it  is  a  reversible inhibitor, normal coagulation is rapidly recovered after cessation of administration. Bivalirudin is highly specific and does not appear to inactivate serine proteases other than thrombin. Although it inhibits platelet aggregation, bivalirudin does not increase platelet reactivity as it appears able to inhibit clot-bound thrombin and consequently the secondary and primary mediated pathways for thrombin activation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The specificity  of  thrombin  as  a  serine  protease  appears  to  be  due  to  its  anion-binding  site.    Interspecies  variations  in  the  amino-acid  sequence  in  these  loops  would  affect  binding  affinity  and consequently inhibitory activity.    A  similar  interspecies  variation  in  activity  has  been  described  for other hirudin-based peptides.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Bivalirudin did not induce liver P450 isoenzymes in rats, and therefore, metabolic interactions with other  drugs  that  are  subjected  to  hepatic  biotransformation  are  not  to  be  expected.  Apart  from reduction of  tPA plasma clearance, bivalirudin does not appear to have an adverse interaction with warfarin, aspirin, urokinase or streptokinase when administered concurrently.

## Pharmacokinetics

The  Applicant  has  performed  a  number  of  studies  concerning  the  pharmacokinetic  profile  of bivalirudin in a number of animal species.

The overall conclusions are that bivalirudin has a very short plasma half-life, the N-terminal dipeptide is rapidly hydrolysed and excreted in the urine, and the rest of the molecule is rapidly broken down and the amino acids incorporated into tissue proteins. However, the accuracy of the ELISA assay is not  very  high  and  the  studies  employed  few  animals.  There  was  also  considerable  inter-individual variation in the cynomolgus monkey studies. Bivalirudin  is  cleared  rapidly  from  the  plasma  and  consequently,  its  pharmacodynamic  effects  are readily reversible after cessation of administration, leading to a rapid recovery of normal coagulation. The metabolites of bivalirudin have not been specifically identified. However, the assumption made by the Applicant that the  metabolites  of  bivalirudin  are  presumed  to  be  small  peptide  fragments  or individual amino acids, and therefore their characterisation in urine and tissues was not necessary, is considered  acceptable.  Renal  clearance  of  bivalirudin  is  important  and  therefore  its  half-life  is prolonged in renal failure. Bivalirudin  was  synthesised  by  different  procedures  (initially  by  a  solid-  and  later  a  liquid  phase process)  and  was  formulated in  different  ways  (solid  and  early  liquid  phase  bulk  substance  frozen) during  its  development  process.  The  two  formulations  obtained  during  the  development  process showed to be bioequivalent in the non-clinical studies performed. Bivalirudin  does  not  induce  its  own  metabolism  and  does  not  bind  to  plasma  proteins  or  enter  red blood  cells.  A  small  portion  appears  to  bind  in  a  non-specific  fashion  to  low  affinity  sites  on erythrocytes. Therefore, drug interactions derived from displacement of binding to plasma proteins are not to be expected from bivalirudin administration. Bivalirudin  is  unlikely  to  affect  the  hepatic  P450-mediated  metabolism  of  concomitant  therapies. There  appears  to  be  no  relevant  pharmacokinetic  interaction  when  bivalirudin  was  co-administered with  warfarin,  urokinase,  tPA,  aspirin  and  streptokinase.  Although  results  indicate  that  bivalirudin decreased the clearance of tPA in monkeys, the data show that this interaction was also observed with heparin,  and  there  were  no  unexpected  toxic  effects  observed  as  a  result  of  this  interaction.  It  is unknown whether there is a pharmacokinetic interaction with tPA in humans. Toxicology Single and repeated dose toxicity studies were performed in the cynomolgus monkey and in the rat. Also, some single dose toxicity studies were carried out in the mouse. In  the  absence  of  any  blood  sampling  procedures,  rats  tolerated  continuous  infusion  of  doses  up  to 1,000 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 28 days and up to 2,000 mg·kg -1 ·day -1 for 14 days without evidence of target organ toxicity.  At this dose, plasma levels of bivalirudin were approximately 10 times those seen in clinical use. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The cynomolgus monkey appeared to be more sensitive to the pharmacological effect of bivalirudin than  the  rat.  The  maximum  tolerated  dose  was  only  150  mg·kg -1 ·day -1 .    Although  the  plasma  drug levels  achieved  at  this  dose  did  not  exceed  the  expected  human  therapeutic  level,  the  prolonged duration of exposure at a constant level at least similar to that seen in clinical use should have revealed any potential target organ toxicity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Bivalirudin  is  intended  for  short-term  administration  and  therefore  no  data  on  the  long-term carcinogenic  potential  of  bivalirudin  are  available.    However,  bivalirudin  was  not  mutagenic  or clastogenic in standard assays for such effects.

Although a toxic level was not reached in the study covering the period of organogenesis in the rabbit, no  teratogenic  effects  were  seen  in  the  range  finding  study,  which  included  a  dose  that  produced maternal systemic toxicity.

Although  reactions  were  observed  at  the  administration  site  after  prolonged  administration,  these reactions  can  be  ascribed  to  excessive  pharmacological  effect  and  local  tolerance  of  bivalirudin  is acceptable.

C92-305: This  was  an  open,  randomised,  crossover  comparison  of  two  formulations  of  bivalirudin administered intravenously. A total of 20 healthy volunteers were recruited. Each subject received two IV infusions separated by 7 days. Bivalirudin `A' 0.5mg/kg/h *4h bivalirudin `D' 0.5mg/kg/h *4h was administered.

No  apparent  toxicity  linked  to  the  presence  of  the  D-Phe  amino  acid  portion  of  the  bivalirudin molecule was observed. Acute and repeated dose studies in rats demonstrated no toxicity associated with the major impurities and degradation products of bivalirudin. In conclusion, these toxicity studies offer reasonable support for an expected safe use of bivalirudin in the currently proposed clinical conditions (low dose level and short duration of exposure). The results reported  indicate  that  the  main  toxicity  observed  after  single,  repeated  or  continuous  exposure  is related  to  the  anticoagulant  effect  of  the  product.  No  other  toxicity  -  unrelated  to  the  haemostatic alteration - was found. Toxicity was reversible after stopping the drug administration and no delayed toxicity  was  apparent.  Undesirable  effects  that  resulted  from  prolonged  physiological  stress  in response to a non-homeostatic state of coagulation were not seen after short exposure comparable to that in clinical use, even at much higher doses.  Based on this, no special hazard is foreseen in humans. 4. Clinical aspects GCP All clinical studies were conducted in line with GCP standards. Pharmacokinetics Absorption - Bioavailability C90-010: This  was  a  three-part  study  in  72  healthy  volunteers.  Part  I  was  a  single  blind,  placebocontrolled, sequential dose-escalation, part II a single blind, placebo-controlled crossover evaluation with and without aspirin and part III an open-label, sequential dose-escalation evaluation with aspirin. The results showed dose-dependent increase in aPTT, PT and TT with good correlation with plasma concentrations. The anticoagulant activity was quick in onset and reversed rapidly. Kinetic parameter following IV administration showed mean elimination half-life of 24 minutes with volume  of  distribution  of  13L.  Approximately  10  -22%  of  drug  was  excreted  renally.  Following subcutaneous administration, prolongation of anticoagulant activity was noted with increasing doses with peak anticoagulant effect at 0.25 - 2 h. No PK/PD interaction was noted with aspirin and there was no effect on platelets. A single subject had a positive post-dose antibody titre. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Results showed similar kinetic parameters and anticoagulant activity for both formulations but greater incidence of nausea and vomiting with bivalirudin `D'. A statistically significant difference, however was observed for Tmax and urinary clearance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

C93-310: This was a double blind, placebo-controlled study in 15 healthy male subjects were given 4hour infusions of either a frozen (bivalirudin 'A') or a lyophilised formulation (bivalirudin 'E1'), or a placebo. Each treatment was separated by 7 days. The AUC  0-28  and Cmax values were similar and there was a strong correlation of aPTT values with plasma concentrations of bivalirudin. No antibodies were detected.

|                           |   AUC 0-28 (h.ng/mL) |   AUC 0- ∞ (h.ng/mL) |   C max (ng/mL) |   T max (h) |   Half- life (h) |   Clearance (mL/min/kg) |   Vdss (L/kg) |
|---------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-----------------|-------------|------------------|-------------------------|---------------|
| Frozen                    |              5638.44 |              5915.52 |         1474.13 |        3.36 |             0.61 |                    6.52 |          0.22 |
| Lyophilised               |              6202.46 |              6543.19 |         1667.54 |        3.14 |             0.61 |                    6.24 |          0.21 |
| Lyophilised (Rechallenge) |              7568.56 |              7368.56 |         1935.08 |        3.83 |             0.62 |                    4.63 |          0.2  |

C93-316: This  double  blind,  randomised,  crossover  study  compared  a  pilot  chemistry  frozen formulation with a commercial chemistry lyophilised formulation of bivalirudin in 20 healthy male subjects. The pharmacodynamic response to the two formulations was similar based on aPTT. Bioequivalence Six formulations of bivalirudin have been used in human studies. These are bivalirudin `A' (frozen solution  with  sodium  phosphate  and  mannitol),  bivalirudin  `B'  (frozen  solution  with  sodium hydroxide), bivalirudin `C' (frozen solution with tromethamine, used only in a comparative study with formulations A &amp; B), bivalirudin `D' (refrigerated solution with sodium hydroxide and trifluoroacetic acid)  and  bivalirudin  formulations  `E1'  &amp;  `E2'  (lyophilised  formulations,  in  pilot  and  commercial scales respectively). The lyophilised formulation is used commercially. The  pharmacokinetic  and  pharmacodynamic  profile  of  the  frozen  and  lyophilised  formulation  was bioequivalent (Studies C93-310 and C93-316). In the proposed indication, studies C90-041 &amp; C92-304/1-2 used frozen formulation `A' and studies TMC-97-01,  TMC-BIV-00-01  and  TMC-BIV-01-03  and  TMC-98-10  were  all  conducted  with  the lyphilised formulation. Distribution Bivalirudin is rapidly distributed between plasma and extracellular fluid. The steady-state volume of distribution is 0.1 litre/kg. Bivalirudin does not bind to plasma proteins (other than thrombin) or to red blood cells. Biotransformation As  a  peptide,  bivalirudin  is  expected  to  undergo  catabolism  to  its  constituent  amino  acids,  with subsequent  recycling  of  the  amino  acid  in  the  body  pool.  Bivalirudin  is  metabolized  by  proteases, including thrombin. The primary metabolite resulting from the cleavage of Arg3-Pro4 bond of the Nterminal sequence by thrombin is not active because of the loss of affinity to the catalytic active site of thrombin. About 20% of bivalirudin is excreted unchanged in the urine. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Elimination

The  concentration-time  profile  following  intravenous  administration  is  well  described  by  a  twocompartment  model.  Elimination  follows  a  first  order  process  with  a  terminal  half-life  of  25 ± 12 minutes  in  patients  with  normal  renal  function.  The  corresponding  clearance  is  about  3.4 ± 0.5 ml/min/kg

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Dose proportionality and time dependencies

Data regarding dose-linearity was derived from four studies (C90-10, C90-041, C92-301 and TMC9809).  Study  C90-10  in  72  healthy  volunteers  demonstrated  doubling  of  AUC  when  the  dose  was increased from 0.3 to 0.6 mg/kg. The Cl and t1/2 did not show any significant difference. Study C90041  in  patients  with  PTCA  showed  a  significant  linear  dose-response  relationship  with  increase  in plasma concentration of bivalirudin noted with increase in dose.

Study  C92-301,  a  double-blind  study  in  410  patients  with  unstable  angina  supported  a  linear  dose relationship  by  steady  state  plasma  concentration.  Study  TMC98-09  was  PK  study  in  26  PTCA patients with normal renal function or mild or moderate renal impairment.

| Renal function (GFR)                       |   Clearance (ml/min/kg) | Half-life (minutes)   |
|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------|
| Normal renal function ( ≥ 90ml/min)        |                     3.4 | 25                    |
| Mild renal impairment (60-89 ml/min)       |                     3.4 | 22                    |
| Moderate renal impairment (30-59 ml/min)   |                     2.7 | 34                    |
| Severe renal impairment (10-29 ml/min)     |                     2.8 | 57                    |
| Dialysis dependent patients (off-dialysis) |                     1   | 3.5 hours             |

Elderly -  An  increase  in  bleeding  event  has  been  noted  in  patients ≥ 65  years  of  age  compared  to younger patients in heparin treated patients as well as bivalirudin treated patients. Pharmacokinetics have been evaluated in elderly patients as part of a renal pharmacokinetic study. Dose adjustments for this age group should be on the basis of renal function.

In study C93-310, a lower total clearance was noted after 3 months (4.63 ± 0.8 vs. 6.24 ± 3.8). Pharmacokinetics in target population In patients undergoing PTCA, the percentage of patients for whom ACT (activated clotting time) &gt;300 sec (target ACT) was achieved increased from 12% in the lowest-dose group (0.15 mg/kg/ bolus + 0.6 mg/kg/hr infusion) to 100% in the highest-dose group (1.0 mg/kg bolus + 2.5 mg/kg/hr infusion) in a dose-dependent manner (Study C90-041). In study C92-301, a double blind, parallel-group comparison of 4 doses of bivalirudin (0.02, 0.25, 0.5 and  1.0  mg/kg/hr)  administered  as  IV  infusions  over  72  hours  in  patients  with  unstable  angina,  a correlation  between  aPTT  (activated  partial  thromboplastin  time)  and  plasma  concentrations  was observed at 12-24 and 36-48 hours after the start of the infusion. Special populations Impaired renal function -Four studies looked at the pharmacology in patients with renal impairment (C93-313,  C94-321,  TMC-98-09  and  TMC-BIV-00-02).  The  systemic  clearance  of  bivalirudin decreases with glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The clearance of bivalirudin is similar in patients with normal renal function and those with mild renal impairment. Clearance is reduced by approximately 20% in patients with moderate or severe renal impairment, and 80% in dialysis-dependent patients. Pharmacokinetic parameters for bivalirudin in patients with normal and impaired renal function. Impaired liver function -The pharmacokinetics of bivalirudin have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment but are not expected to be altered because bivalirudin is not metabolized by liver enzymes such as cytochrome P-450 isozymes. Gender/Race/Weight -  The  pharmacodynamics does not differ between males and females. In study C90-041 there was lack of difference in activity and safety of bivalirudin based on age, gender and weight. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Children -  The  product  is  not  recommended  for  use  in  children  as  safety  and  effectiveness  has  not been established in this age group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Interaction studies

In  CACHET  study  (parts  B  &amp;  C),  use  of  provisional  abciximab  in  34  patients  randomised  to bivalirudin did not markedly affect the ACT levels achieved at 5 min or thereafter. The mean ACT was 301, 307 and 348 seconds at 5 min, 30 min, and the end of the procedure respectively. Thrombin inhibition was more effective with bivalirudin + abciximab at 4 hours than with heparin + abciximab. In another study (TMC-BIV-00-03), the combination of bivalirudin and eptifibatide produced a mean steady state activated clotting time (ACTs) of around 339 seconds for the lower dose bivalirudin and 349.5 seconds for the higher dose bivalirudin. The mean peak ACT for heparin and eptifibatide was 234.9 seconds.

## Pharmacokinetics

The  combination  of  bivalirudin  and  tirofiban  produced  a  mean  steady  state  ACT  of  around  350 seconds  while  heparin  and  tirofiban  produced  a  mean  peak  ACT  of  225  seconds  5  minutes  after injection. The combination of bivalirudin and ticlopidin produced steady state ACT values of approximately 350 seconds. These were significantly higher than the mean peak ACT of 282 seconds for heparin. Bivalirudin can be administered to patients undergoing PCI following discontinuation of LMWH for at least 8 hours based on ACT data in conjunction with the antifactor Xa (TMC-99-05). Pharmacodynamics Mechanism of action Bivalirudin  is  a  short  acting  thrombin  inhibitor  that  binds  specifically  to  both  the  anion-binding (recognition) and catalytic (active) sites of thrombin. While heparin and antithrombin III only inhibit soluble thrombin, bivalirudin inhibits both soluble and clot-bound thrombin. Primary and Secondary pharmacology In healthy volunteers and in patients with unstable angina and PCI, bivalirudin exhibits linear dosedependent anticoagulant activity. Following intravenous administration, bivalirudin has a rapid anticoagulation effect, which reversed quickly  upon  cessation.  ACT  monitors  this  in  the  PCI  setting.  ACT  is  the  preferred  parameter  in interventional cardiology as higher levels of anticoagulation is required and aPTT is less useful for this. The  initial  dose  ranging  study  (C90-041)  showed  ACT  of  &gt;300  seconds  with  ascending  doses  in increasing proportion of patients. More than 80% of patients achieved ACT values of &gt;300 seconds with bivalirudin doses of 0.45 mg/kg bolus and 1.6 mg/kg/h infusion. In a subsequent study with GPIIb/IIIa blockers (TMC-97-01-A/B/C), the goal was to find a dose at which &gt;80% of patients  achieved  ACT  of  &gt;280  seconds  at  the  time  of  PCI  device  activation.  The median  was  305  seconds  for  bolus  doses  of  0.5  mg/kg/  and  321  seconds  for  0.75  mg/kg  but  the porportion of patients &gt;280 seconds at 5 minutes reached 80% only with 0.75mg /kg dose level. Bivalirudin inhibits thrombin induced platelet aggregation. Discussion on Clinical Pharmacology Medicinal product no longer authorised

Bivalirudin  is  a  twenty-residue  polypeptide  with  a  small  molecular  weight.  Bivalirudin  is  currently administered  only  by  the  iv  route.  However,  its  absorption  was  also  explored  after  subcutaneous injection.  Pharmacokinetic  parameters  were  not  measured  following  subcutaneous  administration because  most  values  fell  below  the  limit  of  quantification  and  the  only  sensitive  markers  for  drug absorption were coagulation parameters.

Bivalirudin pharmacokinetics has been evaluated in healthy volunteers in different doses that included iv  injections  and  infusions.  Doses  in  the  therapeutic  range  have  only  been  investigated  in  patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

undergoing PTCA. Although complete profiles were not characterised, the measurements did provide an approximate measure of exposure.

There was no evidence for binding bivalirudin to plasma proteins but binding to red blood cells may occur to  a  minor  extent.  The  kinetic  of  bivalirudin  was  dose  related  in  the  dose  range  tested.    The volume  of  distribution  is  approximately  equal  to  the  sum  of  plasma  and  interstitial  fluid  i.e. approximately 0.24 L/kg. In humans, bivalirudin has a mean half-life around 25 minutes.

The onset of anticoagulant activity was rapid and reversible within 30 to 60 minutes upon cessation of drug  administration.  Renal  excretion  was  approximately  10-22%  of  the  total  elimination  with remainder of the drug being eliminated via reabsorption in the kidney and proteolysis by intracellular lysosomes. The kinetics was not affected by co-administration with aspirin.

The initial development programme was for PCI in patients with unstable angina and acute coronary syndromes (ACS). The studies conducted in 1993 for that indication reflected the standard care at the time  and  therefore  uses  high  dose  of  heparin  as  comparator.  The  role  of  GPIIb/IIIa  inhibitor  and antiplatelet therapy apart from aspirin was not established. The use of stent was not so common and in those trials only rescue stenting was allowed.

Pharmacokinetics studies were performed in patients with renal disease. Bivalirudin was well tolerated in these patients. Pharmacokinetics was proportional to the degree of renal insufficiency. In  patients  with  renal  insufficiency,  monitoring  of  clotting  time,  such  as  the  ACT  is  recommended. Angiox is contraindicated in patients with severe renal insufficiency (GFR &lt;30 ml/min) and also in dialysis-dependent patients and the dose should be reduced in case of moderate renal impairment. No dose adjustment is necessary in the elderly, provided renal functions are normal. However, caution should  be  exercised  in  the  elderly  due  to  age-related  decrease  in  renal  function.  In  the  presence  of renal insufficiency the infusion dose/rate should be adjusted. Pharmacodynamics Bivalirudin  is  a  direct  thrombin  inhibitor,  which  inhibits  free  and  clot  bound  thrombin.  The pharmacodynamic profile of bivalirudin has been sufficiently explored in vitro and in vivo . In vitro , bivalirudin has prolonged coagulation parameters (aPTT, PT, TT). In vivo studies have been performed in healthy subjects, patients and patients with renal impairment. In healthy subjects and in patients bivalirudin also prolonged the coagulation parameters (aPTT, PT, TT, ACT). In patients with moderate and severe renal impairment and in dialysis dependent patients, these values were prolonged but this prolongation was higher than in normal patients or mild renal impairment. Specific drug-drug interaction studies have been performed with drugs usually used in the proposed indication  (aspirin,  ticlopidine,  inhibitor  GPIIb/IIIa,  streptokinase,  unfractionated  heparin  and  low molecular heparin). The results of these studies have shown that the coagulation parameters were not modified by the combination of bivalirudin with these drugs. The antigenicity of bivalirudin  was  studied in  vivo in  healthy  subjects  and in  vitro in  patients  with lepirudin  antibodies.  In  the in  vivo studies  undertaken,  all  pre-  and  post-dosing  assays  for  antibivalirudin  antibodies  were  negative.  The in  vitro studies  showed  that  it  is  probable  that  not  all lepirudin antibodies can actually bind bivalirudin. Clinical efficacy Summary of Bivalirudin Efficacy Trials in PCI Medicinal product no longer authorised

Having evaluated the earlier pooled data from PCI studies with heparin and GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors, a series of studies were undertaken to test the hypothesis that bivalirudin may replace heparin and may possibly limit the need for GPIIb/IIIa inhibition.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The clinical trial programme related to PCI indication comprised five studies (C90-041, C92-304-1/-2, TMC-97-01A/B/C,  TMC-BIV-00-01  and  TMC-BIV-01-03)  with  a  total  of  6113  patients on bivalirudin and 5757 on heparin.

At  present,  the  pivotal  data  supporting  this  application  come  mainly  from  study  TMC-BIV-01-03 (REPLACE-2). Data on studies TMC-97-01A/B/C (CACHET  A/B/C) and TMC-BIV-00-01 (REPLACE-1) allowed to optimised the dose to be used in study REPLACE-2 and to obtain additional information on efficacy and safety. Data on studies previously submitted by the Applicant can now be considered as supportive evidence.

| Study                                                | Indication   | Design                       | Patients    | Patients   |
|------------------------------------------------------|--------------|------------------------------|-------------|------------|
|                                                      |              |                              | Bivalirudin | Heparin    |
| Studies performed 1990- 1995 C90-041                 | PTCA         | Sequential dose groups       | 291         |            |
| C92-304-1/-2                                         | PTCA         | Randomised double- blind     | 2151        | 2161       |
| Studies performed 1997- 2003 TMC-97-01A/B/C (CACHET) | PTCA ± Stent | Randomised open-label        | 145         | 64         |
| TMC-BIV-00-01 (REPLACE-1)                            | PTCA ± Stent | Randomised open-label longer | 532         | 524        |
| TMC-BIV-01-03 (REPLACE-2)                            | PTCA ± Stent | Randomised double-blind no   | 2994        | 3008       |
| Total                                                |              |                              | 6113        | 5757       |

Dose-response studies and main clinical studies Study TMC-BIV-00-01 (REPLACE - 1) Description This pilot study evaluated any link between the use of bivalirudin and reduced clinical events in PCI. The trial  was  a  phase  IIIb  study,  randomised  and  open  label.  Patients  were  enrolled  in  1:1  ratio  to either  heparin  or  bivalirudin  with  use  of  GPIIbIIIa  inhibitors  in  both  groups  according  to  the investigator's choice. Following  randomisation,  bivalirudin  was  given  as  0.75mg/kg  i.v  bolus  prior  to  device  activation, immediately followed by a 1.75mg/kg/hr i.v infusion. Heparin was given as 60 - 70mg/kg i.v bolus, to target  an  activated  clotting  time  (ACT)  of  200  -  300  seconds  (not  to  exceed  7000  U),  followed  by additional  weight-adjusted  boluses  as  per  institutional  practice  to  maintain  the  target  ACT.  Both treatments were given for the duration of PCI and up to 4 hours post-bolus dose at the discretion of the investigator. Recommended adjunctive medications were aspirin and clopidogrel while ticlopidine was not recommended. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The primary criterion for evaluation was a composite quadruple endpoint evaluated at 48 hours or at hospital discharge, whichever occurred first. The secondary endpoints were composite of individual components  of  death/MI/revascularisation,  major  and  minor  bleeding,  adverse  events  and  health economic parameters.

## Results

In this study stents were used in approximately 85% of patients, thienopyridines in 56% and GPIIbIIIa inhibitors in 72%. No formal hypotheses were tested in this trial.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

While baseline ACT were comparable in both groups, the ACT values in the bivalirudin group were significantly higher prior to device activation, end of procedure and sheath removal. Fewer patients in the bivalirudin group (0.6%) failed to meet the minimum ACT of 200 seconds compared to heparin group (3.7%).

ACT coagulation measurements - Safety population

| Assessment Time Point      | Number Assessed   | Number Assessed   | Bivalirudin Mean ± SD [Median] (sec)   | Heparin Mean ± SD [Median]   | P-value (NP)   |
|----------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------|
|                            | Bivalirudin       | Heparin           |                                        | (sec)                        |                |
| Baseline                   | 491               | 463               | 136.3 ± 27.88 [135.0]                  | 138.5 ± 32.47 [136.0]        | 0.465          |
| Prior to device activation | 475               | 488               | 370.5 ± 101.80 [359.0]                 | 303.8 ± 88.80 [292.5]        | <0.001         |
| End of procedure           | 490               | 498               | 334.3 ± 62.98 [329.0]                  | 267.0 ± 57.62 [261.5]        | <0.001         |
| Sheath removal             | 351               | 337               | 186.1 ± 81. 71 [159.0]                 | 168.4 ± 54.28 [154.0]        | 0.014          |

|                          | Bivalirudin (N = 532)   | Heparin (N = 524) no   | %Diff a   | % Relative Diff a   | P-value   |
|--------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|-----------|---------------------|-----------|
|                          | n (%)                   | n (%)                  |           |                     |           |
| Quadruple endpoint       | 36 (6.8)                | 41 b (7.8)             | 1.07      | -13.5               | 0.503     |
| Triple endpoint          | 27 (5.1) product        | 31 b (5.9)             | 0.85      | -13.6               | 0.544     |
| Death                    | 0 (0)                   | 3 c (0.6)              | 0.57      | -95.0               | 0.122EX   |
| MI d                     | 26 (4.9)                | 27 c (5.2)             | 0.27      | -5.2                | 0.843     |
| Urgent revascularisation | 4 (0.8)                 | 7 b (1.3)              | 0.59      | -39.8               | 0.348     |
| Major haemorrhage d      | 11 (2.1)                | 14 c (2.7)             | 0.60      | -22.6               | 0.519     |

CRF declared MI (74%) or not declared but met MI enzyme criteria (26%). MI enzyme criteria defined as atleast two post baseline CK-MB elevations &gt;3*ULN with atleast one of the elevations ≥ 50% over previous nadir (CK used if CK-MB was missing)

ACT = activated clotting time: NP = nonparametric test: SD = standard deviation As  regards  the  composite  quadruple  endpoint  and  triple  endpoint,  there  was  a  trend  in  favour  of bivalirudinalthough no statistical significance was shown. Primary composite efficacy outcomes and components at discharge/48 Hours -  ITT population % Diff is the difference in the event rates between the bivalirudin and heparin treatment arms. % relative difference is % difference/% heparin Number assessed = 523 Number assessed = 524 Medicinal product no longer authorised

Diff = difference: EX = Fisher's exact test: MI = myocardial infarction

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Study TMC-9701A (CACHET Pilot study A)

## Description

This phase III, open label, randomised study investigated the effect of bivalirudin in combination with ReoPro on laboratory coagulation parameters and the incidence of clinically significant bleeding in patients undergoing PTCA.

The  primary  objective  was  to  compare  the  ACT  levels,  thrombin  levels  and  platelet  inhibition, incidence  of  death  and/or  haemorrhagic  stroke,  incidence  of  major  bleeding  and/or  red  blood  cell transfusion and incidence of adverse experiences following administration of bivalirudin + ReoPro or ReoPro + low-dose heparin in patients with PCI

Bivalirudin was administered i.v as 1.0mg/kg bolus followed by a 2.5 mg/kg/hour infusion for 4 hours. ReoPro  was  administered  i.v  as  a  0.25  mg/kg/bolus  followed  by  a  0.125  microgramme/kg/minute infusion  (to  a  maximum  of  10  microgramme/minute)  for  12  hours.  In  the  ReoPro  +  heparin  arm, additional boluses of heparin were administered every 30 minutes, as needed during the procedure to maintain the ACT between 200 - 300 seconds or a 7 units/kg/hour infusion of heparin was begun. A total of 60 patients were randomised (30 in each group). Approximately a similar number of patients received stent in each group (25/30 vs. 27/30). Results Results  showed  that  the  median  ACT  of  350  seconds  was  reached  rapidly  and  was  maintained throughout the procedure in the bivalirudin + Reopro group and was significantly higher than Reopro + heparin group. Thrombin inhibition was also more effective and less prolonged in the bivalirudin + ReoPro group. There were no deaths, haemorrhagic strokes, or revascularisation in either group but a single patient in bivalirudin + ReoPro group had a major haemorrhage while a single patient in Reopro + heparin group had myocardial infarction following intervention. CACHET B/C Description This  study  evaluated  bivalirudin  (with  provisional  abciximab)  versus  low-dose,  weight-adjusted heparin (with up-front abciximab). Assessments included ACT levels, thrombin activity, anticoagulation and haemostasis and clinical safety outcomes. A total of 209 patients were enrolled (144 randomised to bivalirudin plus provisional abciximab and 64 were randomised to receive heparin plus abciximab). All patients received aspirin. Approximately 68% in the bivalirudin group and 56% in the heparin plus abciximab group received pretreatment with clopidogrel and ticlopidine. Bivalirudin 0.5 mg/kg IV bolus (CACHET B) or 0.75 mg/kg IV bolus (CACHET C), followed by a 1.75 mg/kg/h IV infusion for the duration of procedure and upto 4 hours. Heparin 70 U/kg by IV bolus administered  prior  to  the  start  of  the  procedure.  Additional  weight  adjusted  heparin  boluses  were administered every 30 minutes, as needed to maintain an ACT between 200 and 300 seconds. Results The  results  showed  a  statistically  significant  benefit  with  reference  to  the  quadruple  endpoint  for bivalirudin.  The  incidence  of  triple  endpoint  and  major  bleeding  was  numerically  low  in  the bivalirudin group but the incidence of MI was higher. Study TMC-BIV-01-03 (REPLACE-2) Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Description

This  multicentre  (233  centres)  study  was  the  main  therapeutic  study  and  compared  the  use  of bivalirudin  +  provisional  GPIIbIIIa  inhibitor  with  heparin  +  planned  GPIIbIIIa  administration  in patients undergoing PCI. The study was double blind, randomised and multinational. The objectives were to validate the superiority compared to imputed heparin, simulating the comparison by which the efficacy of GPIIbIIIa inhibitors has been defined (ESPRIT and EPISTENT) and to demonstrate the non-inferiority of bivalirudin as foundation anticoagulant with provisional use of GPIIbIIIa inhibitors compared to heparin and routine use of GPIIbIIIa inhibitors in patients undergoing PCI.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  primary  efficacy criteria  were  a  composite  of quadruple  endpoints  (Death,  MI,  Urgent Revascularisation  and  Major  haemorrhage).  The  secondary  endpoints  were  the  composite  triple endpoint (Death, MI, Urgent Revascularisation), major haemorrhage, the individual components of the primary endpoint and safety endpoints.

## Results

Results for the primary endpoint and the triple composite endpoint

b Odds ratio and 95% CI for bivalirudin vs heparin + GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor c Odds ratio and 95% CI for bivalirudin vs imputed heparin for death/MI/Urgent revascularisation/bleeding endpoint d Odds ratio and 95% CI for bivalirudin vs imputed heparin for death/MI/Urgent revascularisation endpoint Discussion on clinical efficacy The  proposed  dose  has  been  well  justified. In the present submission,  the dosing  schedule recommended was mainly based on the results of studies CACHET A/B/C and REPLACE-1. In these studies, bivalirudin at a bolus dose of 0.75 mg/kg achieved an immediate ACT of approximately 280 to 320 seconds that was maintained for the duration of the PCI procedure by a subsequent infusion of 1.75  mg/kg/hr.  Additionally,  bivalirudin  directly  inhibits  thrombin,  but  has  no  direct  effect  on platelets. Bivalirudin shows no apparent pharmacological interaction with abciximab, and their actions on thrombin and platelets are independent when used together. The clinical efficacy of bivalirudin as an anticoagulant in the setting of PCI has been shown based on the 30-day results based on quadruple and triple endpoints from the randomised, double blind trial of over 6,000 patients undergoing PCI (REPLACE-2). REPLACE-2 Study results: 30-day endpoints (intent-to-treat and per-protocol populations) Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Endpoint                   | Statistic   | Bivalirudin (N=2994)   | Heparin + GPIIb/IIIa (N=3008)   | P- value   |
|----------------------------|-------------|------------------------|---------------------------------|------------|
| Quadruple Endpoint         |             | n (%)                  | n (%)                           |            |
|                            | N (%)       | 275/2975 (9.2)         | 299/2991 (10.0)                 | 0.32       |
|                            | OR(LL,UL) b | 0.92 (0.77, 1.09)      |                                 |            |
|                            | OR(LL,UL) c | 0.62 (0.47,0.82)       |                                 |            |
| Triple Endpoint            | N (%)       | 227/2975 (7.6)         | 211/2990 (7.1)                  | 0.40       |
| Triple Endpoint            | OR(LL,UL) b | 1.09 (0.90, 1.32)      | authorised                      |            |
| Triple Endpoint            | OR(LL,UL) d | 0.61 (0.44,0.83)       |                                 |            |
| Major haemorrhage Endpoint | N (%)       | 71/2993 (2.4)          | 123/3008 (4.1)                  | <0.001     |

|                                                                 | Intent-to-treat        | Intent-to-treat                           | Per-protocol           | Per-protocol                              |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Endpoint                                                        | bivalirudin (N=2994) % | Heparin + GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor (N=3008) % | bivalirudin (N=2902) % | heparin + GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor (N=2882) % |
| Quadruple endpoint                                              | 9.2                    | 10.0                                      | 9.2                    | 10.0                                      |
| Triple endpoint*                                                | 7.6                    | 7.1                                       | 7.8                    | 7.1                                       |
| Components:                                                     |                        |                                           |                        |                                           |
| Death                                                           | 0.2                    | 0.4                                       | 0.2                    | 0.4                                       |
| Myocardial Infarction                                           | 7.0                    | 6.2                                       | 7.1                    | 6.4                                       |
| Major bleeding** (based on non-TIMI criteria - see section 4.8) | 2.4                    | 4.1                                       | 2.2                    | 4.0                                       |
| Urgent revascularization                                        | 1.2                    | 1.4                                       | 1.2                    | 1.3                                       |

0.001

* excludes major bleeding component.    **p &lt;

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Based  on  the  main  therapeutic  study,  bivalirudin  with  provisional  GPIIb/IIIa  has  been  shown  noninferior  to  heparin  with  planned  GPIIb/IIIa  as  regards  the  quadruple  endpoint.  The  statistically significant difference is largely due to a beneficial effect on major bleeding which has been included as one of the components of the quadruple endpoint. This is unusual but was defined in the protocol a priory.

It is true that earlier trials in patients with unstable angina and PCI have used a triple endpoint with major bleeding evaluated as a safety criterion. Although this was not the primary efficacy criterion in the  REPLACE-2  study,  the  Applicant  had  included  this  as  one  of  the  secondary  efficacy  criteria. Additional analyses provided are considered sufficient to make an informed judgement.

Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia-thrombosis syndrome  (HIT/HITTS):    Clinical  trials  in  a  small  number  of  patients  have  provided  limited information about the use of Angiox in patients with HIT/HITTS.

Analysis of individual components shows that there is a higher incidence of myocardial infarction in the bivalirudin group but that this is balanced by a lower death rate overall and an advantage regarding major bleeding. The 6-month follow-up evaluated the triple composite endpoint of death/MI/revascularisation (target and any) and its individual components while evaluation at 1-year was for mortality only. The mortality benefit observed at 30 days is sustained at 1 year. At 6 months, the observed mortality benefit was (28/2994 (0.97%) in the bivalirudin group vs 40/3008 (1.37%) in the  heparin  +  GPIIb/IIIa  group.  At  30  days  the  advantageous  effect  of  bivaluridin  is  noted  for  the quadruple  endpoint  but  the  effect  on  the  triple  endpoint  is  marginally  verse,  although  within  the criteria of non-inferiority. Benefit has therefore also been demonstrated for the triple endpoint, which has been used in earlier trials for acute PCI and stent. This is based on the protocol-defined criteria. If more stringent statistical criteria are used the non-inferiority on the basis of quadruple endpoint will still  be  met  but  will  just  fail  for  the  triple  endpoint.  This  should  be  interpreted  in  the  light  that  the protocol defined quadruple endpoint a priori . The majority of mortality observed was due to cardiovascular causes. The increased incidence of MI were biochemical in nature as most increases were in the group with CK-MB of &gt;5-&lt;10. At one year there was 22% relative risk reduction of death although the difference between the groups was not statistically significant. However, it should be noted that the Absolute Risk Reduction (ARR) at 1 year was only 0.5%. Superiority over heparin has also been acceptably demonstrated but the clinical relevance of this is not clear, since the use of heparin alone in the PCI setting in not justified in current practice. The  incidence  of  thrombocytopaenia  was  lower  in  the  bivalirudin  group  compared  to  the  heparin group  (0.7%  vs  1.7%).  This  was  true  for  severe  thrombocytopaenia  (0.3%  vs  0.6%)  and  profound thrombocytopaenia (0.1% vs 0.3%). A sub-group analysis by age shows no significant difference between patient &lt;75 years and &gt;75 years of age for the quadruple and triple endpoints at day 30. However 12-month mortality data showed that patients &gt;75 years of age faired better than those &lt;75 years (3.6% vs 6.9%, p=0.039). Based on baseline creatinine clearance, 30-day quadruple and triple endpoints were higher in patients with severe renal impairment receiving Angiox than those receiving heparin + GPIIb. The mortality at 12 months was however less in these patients. All this was based on a small number of patients. Old age itself is not a barrier to the use of bivalirudin provided recommendations proposed in the SPC regarding use in renal impairment is taken into account. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical safety

## Patient exposure

The safety database comprised 30,402 patients including 6010 patients from the REPLACE-2 trial, pooled data from 6,191 patients in 11 PCI trials and pooled data from 15,817 patients from all clinical trials. There is additional information from post-marketing experience. It is estimated that approximately 164,300 patients have been exposed to bivalirudin in the past two years.

| COSTART Preferred Term for AE   | All Studies 1                | All Studies 1            | Pooled PCI Studies 2         | Pooled PCI Studies 2            | TMC-BIV-01-03                | TMC-BIV-01-03              |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|
| COSTART Preferred Term for AE   | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n=7378) | Heparin [n (%)] (n=6091) | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n=6191) | Heparin [n (%)] (n=5844) longer | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n=2914) | Heparin 3 [n (%)] (n=2987) |
| Pain back                       | 1477 (20)                    | 1335 (22)                | 1345 (22)                    | 1290 (22)                       | 268 (9)                      | 263 (9)                    |
| Hypotension                     | 466 (6)                      | 545 (9)                  | 393 (6)                      | 517 (9)                         | 91 (3)                       | 120 (4)                    |
| Headache                        | 581 (8)                      | 359 (6)                  | 386 (6)                      | 339 (6)                         | 75 (3)                       | 83 (3)                     |
| Pain                            | 592 (8)                      | 482 (8)                  | 476 (8)                      | 455 (8)                         | 98 (3)                       | 72 (2)                     |
| Injection Site Pain             | 315 (4)                      | 369 (6)                  | 267 (4) no                   | 364 (6)                         | 80 (3)                       | 80 (3)                     |
| Fever                           | 305 (4)                      | 167 (3)                  | 157 (3)                      | 131 (2)                         | 30 (1)                       | 16 (<1)                    |
| Pain Chest                      | 256 (3)                      | 188 (3)                  | 210 (3)                      | 182 (3)                         | 68 (2)                       | 69 (2)                     |
| Pain Abdominal                  | 197 (3) product              | 148 (2)                  | 154 (2)                      | 138 (2)                         | 30 (1)                       | 24 (<1)                    |
| Pain Pelvic                     | 186 (3)                      | 197 (3)                  | 150 (2)                      | 183 (3)                         | 2 (<1)                       | 4 (<1)                     |
| Angina Pectoris                 | 320 (4)                      | 183 (3)                  | 286 (5)                      | 174 (3)                         | 155 (5)                      | 156 (5)                    |
| Bradycardia                     | 223 (3)                      | 232 (4)                  | 185 (3)                      | 218 (4)                         | 35 (1)                       | 37 (1)                     |
| Hypertension                    | 208 (3)                      | 161 (3)                  | 178 (3)                      | 158 (3)                         | 34 (1)                       | 30 (1)                     |
| Syncope                         | 80 (1)                       | 89 (1)                   | 70 (1)                       | 84 (1)                          | 26 (<1)                      | 22 (<1)                    |

The major bleeding in the main therapeutic study was defined as transfusion of whole blood or packed cell ≥ 2  units,  intracranial  haemorrhage,  retroperitoneal  haemorrhage,  drop  in  haemoglobin  &gt;4  g/dL with no bleeding site identified and a spontaneous or non-spontaneous blood loss associated with drop in haemoglobin of &gt;3 g/dL.

The demographic characteristics of patients in all PCI studies were similar to all patient studies and to patients in main therapeutic study REPLACE-2 (TMC-BIV-01-03). Adverse events Common adverse events Back pain was the most common adverse events in both groups and in all studies, in all PCI studies and in the main therapeutic study. Incidence of common adverse events regardless of causal relationship (through 30 days 1Does not include data from study TMC-97-03 2Except for study TMC-98-10 3Plus GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor in all patients Bleeding events The overall bleeding events were less in bivalirudin group than the heparin group: 23% Vs 27% in all studies, 33% Vs 49% in all PCI studies and 16% Vs 30% in the main therapeutic study REPLACE-2 (TMC-BIV-01-03). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The incidence of major bleeding was clearly less in bivalirudin group than in the heparin group with GPIIbIIIa inhibitor (2.3% Vs 4.0%, p&lt;0.001). The advantage in bivalirudin group was also seen for non-CABG  bleed  but  the  incidences  were  similar  for  CABG  bleed.  Minor  bleeding  was  also significantly less in the bivalirudin group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Incidence of Major Bleeding Events 1

| Bleeding Event                                    | All Studies 2                   | All Studies 2                | Pooled PCI studies 3           | Pooled PCI studies 3       | Study TMC-BIV-01-03            | Study TMC-BIV-01-03         |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Bleeding Event                                    | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n =15,817) | Heparin [n (%)] (n = 14,585) | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n = 6191) | Heparin [n (%)] (n = 5844) | Bivalirudin [n (%)] (n = 2914) | Heparin 4 [n (%)] n = 2987) |
| Any Major Bleeding Event                          | 238 (2)                         | 389 (3)                      | 160 (3)                        | 335 (6)                    | 67 (2)                         | 118 (4)                     |
| Catheterisation Site Haematoma                    | 56 (<1)                         | 127 (<1)                     | 32 (<1)                        | 122 (2)                    | 12 (<1)                        | 44 (1)                      |
| Puncture Site Haemorrhage                         | 54 (<1)                         | 99 (<1)                      | 40 (<1)                        | 83 (1)                     | 7 (<1)                         | 15 (<1) authorised          |
| Venipuncture Site Prolonged Bleeding              | 12 (<1)                         | 26 (<1)                      | 12 (<1)                        | 26 (<1)                    | 8 (<1)                         | 17 (<1)                     |
| Anaemia                                           | 25 (<1)                         | 46 (<1)                      | 19 (<1)                        | 39 (<1)                    | 0                              | 0                           |
| Catheterisation Site Ecchymosis Without Haematoma | 21 (<1)                         | 44 (<1)                      | 21 (<1)                        | 44 (<1)                    | 12 (<1)                        | 39 (1)                      |
| Other Bleeding                                    | 19 (<1)                         | 27 (<1)                      | 10 (<1)                        | 23 (<1)                    | 9 (<1)                         | 14 (<1)                     |

| COSTART Term                                    | Bivalirudin (n = 2914) [n (%) ]   | Heparin + GP IIb/IIIa (n = 2987) [n (%) ]   |
|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Patients with at least one treatment related AE | 78 (2.7)*                         | 115 (3.9)*                                  |
| Thrombocytopenia                                | 9 (11.5)                          | 30 (26.1)                                   |
| Nausea                                          | 15 (19.2)                         | 7 (6.1)                                     |
| Hypotension                                     | 7 (9.0)                           | 11 (9.6)                                    |
| Angina pectoris                                 | 5 (6.4)                           | 12 (10.4)                                   |
| Headache                                        | 6 (7.7)                           | 5 (4.3)                                     |
| Injection site pain                             | 3 (3.8)                           | 8 (7.0)                                     |
| Nausea &vomiting                                | 2 (2.6)                           | 6 (5.2)                                     |
| Vomiting                                        | 3 (3.8)                           | 5 (4.3)                                     |

A patient could have more than one event in any category. Percentages are of the subpopulation with at least one treatmentrelated AE

1 Patients are included in each event where the patient had at least 1 bleeding episode 2 All studies, excluding healthy volunteers, safety population (all who received study drug) 3 All PCI studies except TMC-98-10 4 Plus GPIIb/IIIa Inhibitor in all patients Treatment Emergent Adverse Events The overall treatment-emergent adverse events were similar in the bivalirudin group and the heparin + GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor group in all patient studies, all PCI studies and in TMC-BIV-01-03 study. In  the  main  therapeutic  study,  the  most  frequent  treatment-related  adverse  event  (through  30  days) were less, except for nausea, in bivalirudin treated group compared to heparin + GPIIb/IIIa group, as shown below. Most frequent treatment-related adverse event (through 30 days) - Safety population - TMC-BIV-01-03 Medicinal product no longer authorised

*p-value = 0.0113

## Serious adverse events

The  incidence  of  major  bleeding  has  been  mentioned  above  as  this  was  one  of  the  components  of quadruple  primary  endpoint.  The  incidence  of  serious  adverse  events  in  the  main  therapeutic  study was 0.5% in bivalirudin group compared to 1.2% for the heparin group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There  was  no  difference  between  the  groups  regarding  incidence  of  serious  adverse  events  in  all patients' studies, all PCI studies and study TMC-BIV-01-03. The commonest serious adverse events reported  in  the  main  therapeutic  study  were  thrombocytopaenia  (4  in  bivalirudin  group  and  18  in heparin group), and events related to cardiovascular system (7 vs 11). In this study transfusion was needed for 1.5% patients in bivalirudin group and 2.5% in heparin group (P=0.009).

## Deaths

Death rates were similar in bivalirudin and heparin groups in all studies (6% vs 7% respectively) and in  all  PCI  studies  (1%  each  group).  In  the  main  therapeutic  study  TMC-BIV-01-03 it  was  lower in bivalirudin  group  (0.2%)  compared  to  heparin  group  (0.4%)  (table  2.7.4.15,  safety  summary).  This included all deaths upto 30 days. There was a trend towards lower death rate, although not statistically significant, in bivalirudin group over six months (0.93% vs 1.34%, P value=0.128).

|                      | Dose 0.75mg/kg bolus then 1.75mg/kg/h   | Dose 1.0mg/kg bolus then 2.5mg /kg/h   | All Subjects   |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------|
| Nadir platelet count | N= 25                                   | N=27 20 7 0 0                          | N=52 41 11 0 0 |
| ≥ 100,000            | 21 (84%)                                | (74%)                                  | (79%)          |
| ≥ 50,000 - 99,999    | 4 (16%)                                 | (26%)                                  | (21%)          |
| ≥ 20,000 - 49,999    | 0                                       |                                        |                |
| < 20,000             | 0                                       |                                        |                |

Laboratory findings Comparative laboratory data were provided from study TMC-BIV-01-03. The maximum haemoglobin drop was  0.90 g/dL in bivalirudin group and 1.00 g/dL in the heparin group.  Confirmed thrombocytopenia was lower in the bivalirudin group compared to heparin + GPIIb/IIIa group (0.7% vs 1.7%, P&lt;0.001). For all studies taken together there were no significant differences between the groups or between the baseline and the final visit. Safety in special populations Renal As bivalirudin clearance is diminished in patients with moderate to severe renal impairment, the dose needs to be adjusted in these patients based on evidence from four studies, which evaluated bivalirudin in patients with renal impairment. Patients with renal impairment have lower clearance of bivalirudin. Safety data in renal impairment patients were collected from four studies: C93-313 (39 patients), C94321  (11  patients),  TMC-98-09  (26  PTCA  patients  with  normal,  and  mild  to  moderate  renal impairment),  and  study  TMC-BIV-00-02  (10  patients).  Patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  had higher adverse events. HIT/HITTS Study  TMC-98-10  specifically  looked  at  the  safety  and  tolerability  of  bivalirudin  in  patients  with heparin-induced thrombocytopaenia with/without thrombosis syndrome, requiring PCI. A total of 52 patients were recruited in the study, 27 received bivalirudin 1mg/kg IV bolus followed by 2.5mg/kg/hr infusion and 25 received 0.75mg/kg/bolus and 1.75mg/kg/hr infusion. The primary outcome measures were the composite incidence of bleeding. Only one episode of major bleeding was reported in a patient receiving higher dose. This patient went on to have CABG and not PCI. The effect on platelet was not significant. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  study  C93-312  in  patients  with  HIT/HITTS,  three  cases  of  major  bleeding  were  reported,  two probably related to the drug. Four deaths were reported in these patients in study C93-312 &amp; C94-322, none related to bivalirudin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Gender/Age

Although  bleeding  rates  are  reportedly  higher  in  females  and  in  older  patients  undergoing  PCI, bivalirudin  was  safer  than  heparin  even  in  these  sub-populations.  Safety  has  not  been  assessed  in pregnant women and in paediatric population. PCI procedures are not commonly used in paediatric patients. Age related withdrawal was similar in both treatment groups.

Death  rates  were  higher  in  patients  &gt;65  years  of  age  in  both  groups  but  numerically  lower  in  the bivalirudin group. Death rate was higher in female than male patients in both the treatment groups in all studies and in all PCI studies but in TMC-BIV-01-03 fewer patients died in bivalirudin group than the heparin group (0.4% vs 0.8% in females and 0.1% vs 0.3% in males).

## Post marketing experience

Brachytherapy In patients receiving gamma brachytherapy (11 bivalirudin, 13 heparin), numerically greater quadruple endpoint, triple endpoint, MI and provisional use of GPIIbIIIa inhibitor were reported in bivalirudin group. Antigenicity Antibodies  to  bivalirudin  were  identified  by  ELISA  (enzyme  linked  immunosorbent  assay).  One patient each with antibodies was identified in studies C90-041 and C93-313. A total of 8 patients were reported  to  have  antibodies  in  study  C90-039  (2  patients  had  antibodies  pre-  and  post-dose,  1  had antibodies pre-dose only and 5 had antibodies post-dose only.) The incidence of allergic reaction was similar in the bivalirudin and heparin groups in all studies, in pooled  PCI  studies  and  in  study  TMC-BIV-01-03.  Anaphylactoid  reaction  has  been  reported  in  2 patients in bivalirudin as opposed to none in heparin group but angioedema was reported in a single patient in heparin group and none in bivalirudin group. Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions There  was  no  difference  between  the  bivalirudin  group  and  heparin  +  GPIIbIIIa  group  as  regards adverse events with concomitant use of ticlodipine or low molecular weight heparin. In  the  main  therapeutic  study,  the administration  of  concomitant drugs (beta  blockers, statins, other lipid  lowering  drugs,  ACE  inhibitors,  oral  hypoglycaemics  and  insulin  was  similar  in  both  groups. Adverse events in both groups were higher when GPIIbIIIa inhibitor was used concomitantly. In study TMC-BIV-00-01 the incidence of major bleeding in bivalirudin group and heparin group administered with GPIIbIIIa inhibitor was similar. Discontinuation due to Adverse Events The overall withdrawal rate in the safety population was similar in both groups (13% in each arm for all  studies,  10%  vs  13% respectively in bivalirudin and heparin group in all PCI studies and 2% in each arm in the main therapeutic study). Treatment failure as a reason for withdrawal was also similar in both groups (16% vs 14% and 37% vs 29% respectively in all studies and in all PCI studies). There was no withdrawal due to treatment failure in study TMC-BIV-01-03. The withdrawal due to adverse event in the main therapeutic study was 1.1% in the bivalirudin group and 2.0% in the heparin + GP IIa/IIIb group. The most common adverse events leading to withdrawal in this study were thrombocytopenia (0.1% vs 0 %), hypotension (0.1% vs 0.2%), headache (0.1% in each group), abdominal pain (0.1% vs 0%), back pain (0% vs 0.1%), angina pectoris (0.1% vs 0%), bradycardia (0 % 0.1%), coronary artery disorder (0% vs 0.1%) and cardiac arrest (0% vs 0.1%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Bivalirudin received marketing authorisation in the United States on 15 December 2000, in Canada on 9 October 2002 and in New Zealand on 21 October 1999.

The cut off date for the submitted report was 20 April 2003. Most of the adverse event reports were from the United States. A total of 153 events were reported in 97 patients. Twenty-two deaths were reported.

Adverse events of &gt;5% in system organ classes were Cardiac disorders (24.8%), Vascular disorders (15.7%),  Nervous  system  disorders  and  General  disorders  and  administration  site  conditions  (9.8%

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

each), Investigations (9.2%), Gastrointestinal disorders (7.2%), Blood and lymphatic system disorders (5.8%), and Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders (5.2%).

Out of the 22 deaths, 9 were due to cardiovascular causes, one due to haemarrhagic stroke and one each due to ananphylactic reaction and coagulopathy.

In addition, the applicant provided information during the evaluation about 7 serious adverse events and attached the CIOMs forms. Two of these events occurred in clinical trials and the remainder were spontaneous  reports.  These  events  were  pseudoaneurysm  (related)  and  hyperkalaemia  (possibly related),  coronary artery thrombosis (2 cases, unexpected and fatal), sepsis (1 case, unexpected and fatal), vascular injury (one case, unexpected) and ICH (one case, unexpected and fatal).

The number of patients who received any transfusion was significantly lower in the bivalirudin group than  in  the  heparin  group.  This  difference  was  also  significantly  different  for  patients  receiving transfusion ≥ 2 units. Both data would be consistent with the incidence of bleeding reported for both groups of treatment.

Discussion on clinical safety The safety database is considered adequate. There are no major safety concerns related to the use of bivalirudin  in  the  context  of  PCI.  However,  there  is  a  problem  with  increased  occurrence  of thrombosis in patients treated with gamma brachytherapy. Angiox should be used with caution during beta brachytherapy procedures. It is also worth pointing out that adverse events were higher in females, in patients &gt;65 years of age and  in  severe  renal  impairment  in  addition  to  those  observed  with  gamma  brachytherapy.  A  single death with anaphylaxis has been reported. There is a distinct safety advantage with use of bivalirudin in patients undergoing PCI by way of less bleeding and less incidence of thrombocytopenia which has been observed with heparin + GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor in the PCI setting. Amongst the most frequent treatment-related adverse events (through 30 days) thrombocytopaenia was noted in 11.5% of patients in the bivalirudin group and in 26.1% in the heparin  group.    Given  that  non-inferiority  has  been  shown  against  heparin  +  GPIIb/IIIa  as  regards efficacy, this adds to a favourable benefit/risk ratio for this medicinal product. However, there is some concern regarding the fact that the definition of `major bleeding' used in these studies  was  not  in  line  with  the  TIMI  classification  and  was  changed  throughout  the  clinical development of the product. The classification of bleeding episodes used in REPLACE-2 could have implied an overestimation of the effect of bivalirudin on major bleeding events. Since the criteria of major bleeding in REPLACE-2 was similar to the combination of TIMI major and some minor bleeds, it  is  necessary to point out that the differences were mainly driven by vascular access puncture and gastrointestinal tract bleeding episodes. There was little difference between the two groups in terms of real TIMI major bleedings. This will lead to significant dilution of the effect noted with the quadruple endpoint. Although there is no statistically significant difference between the bivalirudin group and the  heparin  +  GPIIb/IIIa  group  based  on  TIMI  definition  of  major  bleed,  there  is  still  a  numerical advantage  with  bivalirudin.  All  other  bleeding  criteria  show  significant  difference  in  favour  of bivalirudin With respect the site of bleeding, there was a lower incidence of major bleeding (defined by protocol) among patients in the bivalirudin group compared with the heparin + GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor group. The treatment difference was significant for bleeding at the sheath puncture site, cardiac/pulmonary bleeds, GI bleeding and non-CABG other bleeding. No difference was found in intracranial bleeding. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the clinical setting patients must be observed carefully for symptoms and signs of bleeding during treatment.  Although most bleeding associated with bivalirudin occurs at the site of arterial puncture in patients undergoing PCI, haemorrhage can occur at any site during therapy.  Unexplained decreases in haematocrit, haemoglobin or blood pressure may indicate haemorrhage.  Treatment should be stopped if bleeding is observed or suspected.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The applicant has adequately addressed the issue of special populations considering that bivalirudin is intended for use in a particular patient population in acute situation.

The  incidence  of  AEs  was  similar  in  the  two  groups  of  treatment  regardless  of  age  and  gender, although elderly and females had a higher rate of death and withdrawals from studies in both groups of treatment.  Treatment  emergent  serious  adverse  events  were  higher  in  patients  &gt;65  years  of  age compared  to  younger  patients  (&lt;65  years)  in  both  treatment  groups.  Bivalirudin  has  a  numerical advantage in age related death.

No dose adjustment is necessary in the elderly, provided renal functions are normal. However, caution should  be  exercised  in  the  elderly  due  to  age-related  decrease  in  renal  function.  In  the  presence  of renal insufficiency the infusion dose/rate should be adjusted. The adverse events rate was higher in patients with severe renal impairment is study C93-313 although this  was based on very few patients in this category (8). In the REPLACE-2 study the incidence of major  bleeding  was  higher  in  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment.  The  incidence  of  major haemorrhage  was  significantly  higher  in  the  bivalirudin  group  among  patients  with  a  baseline creatinine  clearance  &gt;  30  ml/min.  In  patients  with  renal  insufficiency,  monitoring  of  clotting  time, such  as  the  ACT  is  recommended.    Angiox  is  contraindicated  in  patients  with  severe  renal insufficiency  (GFR  &lt;30  ml/min)  and  also  in  dialysis-dependent  patients  and  the  dose  should  be reduced in case of moderate renal impairment. No dose adjustment is needed in patients with hepatic impairment.  Pharmacokinetic studies indicate that hepatic metabolism of bivalirudin is limited; therefore the safety and efficacy of bivalirudin have not been specifically studied in patients with hepatic impairment. The  use  of  bivalirudin  in  patients  with  HIT/HITT  appears  to  be  safer  and  beneficial.  The  major bleeding reported in some patients and unrelated deaths should be seen in light of no alternative to heparin in these groups of patients should they need PCI. There  is  a  problem  with  increased  occurrence  of  thrombosis  in  patients  treated  with  gamma brachytherapy. These patients should be given heparin rather than bivalirudin. Angiox should be used with caution during beta brachytherapy procedures. Occasional  cases  of  allergy  to  bivalirudin  have  been  reported.  Although  anaphylactoid  reaction  in bivalirudin group is of some concern, its occurrence is rare considering the number of patients who received the drug. Nevertheless, necessary preparations should be made in the clinical setting to deal with this. Patients should be informed of the early signs of hypersensitivity reactions including hives, generalised urticaria, and tightness of chest, wheezing, hypotension and anaphylaxis.  In the case of shock,  current  medical  standards  for  shock  treatment  should  be  applied.  Anaphylaxis,  including anaphylactic shock with fatal outcome has been reported very rarely in post-marketing experience. Regarding  immunological  events,  pre-dose  and  post-dose  antibody  results  were  available  for  494 subjects.  Treatment-emergent  positive  bivalirudin  antibodies  are  rare  and  have  not  been  associated with clinical evidence of allergic or anaphylactic reactions.  Caution should be exercised in patients previously treated with lepirudin who had developed lepirudin antibodies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There are no safety concerns regarding drug-drug interactions but there was no safety advantage with bivalirudin  as  regards  bleeding  when  given  together  with  GPIIbIIIa  inhibitor  as  observed  in  study TMC-BIV-00-01.  Drug-drug  interaction  studies  have  been  conducted  with platelet inhibitors, including  acetylsalicylic  acid,  ticlopidine,  clopidogrel,  abciximab,  eptifibatide,  or  tirofiban.    The results do not suggest pharmacodynamic interactions with these medicinal products.

From the knowledge of their  mechanism of action, combined  use  of anti-coagulant drugs  (heparin, warfarin, thrombolytics or antiplatelet agents) can be expected to increase the risk of bleeding.

In any case, when bivalirudin is combined with a platelet inhibitor or an anticoagulant drug, clinical and biological parameters of haemostasis should be regularly monitored.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Post-marketing experience, like experience in clinical trials, indicated an association between gamma brachytherapy  and  an  increased  incidence  of  intraprocedural  thrombus.  In  the  REPLACE-2  study, event rates for MI, Death/MI/Urgent Revas and bailout stent were much higher among brachytherapy patients.

The safety and effectiveness of bivalirudin in patients under 18 years have not been studied.

The potential safety  concerns,  which  require  post-authorisation  surveillance  are  anaphylactic  deaths and immune reaction, use during gamma brachytherapy and major bleeding episodes. The Applicant has committed to monitor for immunological reactions, anaphylaxis and major bleeds post-marketing and  put  particular  emphasis  on  bleeding  events  in  the  PSURs.  Adverse  events  during  gamma brachytherapy  will  also  be  monitored.  Additionally,  the  Applicant  will  expedite  serious  bleeding events for a period of one year.

Bivalirudin  is  a  direct  and  specific  thrombin  inhibitor  that  binds  both  to  the  catalytic  site  and  the anion-binding  exosite  of  fluid-phase  and  clot-bound  thrombin.  In  healthy  volunteers  and  patients, bivalirudin  exhibits  dose-  and  concentration  dependent  anticoagulant  activity  as  evidenced  as prolongation of the ACT, aPTT, PT, INR and TT. Intravenous administration of bivalirudin produces measurable anticoagulation within minutes.

5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology The pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profile of bivalirudin has been extensively characterised. Toxicity in animals upon repeated or continuous exposure (1 day to 4 weeks at exposure levels of up to 10 times the clinical steady state plasma concentration) was limited to exaggerated pharmacological effects.    Comparison  of  the  single  and  repeated  dose  studies  revealed  that  toxicity  was  related primarily to duration of exposure.  All the undesirable effects, primary and secondary, resulting from excessive pharmacological activity were reversible.  Undesirable effects that resulted from prolonged physiological stress in response to  a non-homeostatic state  of coagulation  were not seen  after short exposure  comparable  to  that  in  clinical  use,  even  at  much  higher  doses.  Based  on  this,  no  special hazard is foreseen in humans. Bivalirudin  is  intended  for  short-term  administration  and  therefore  no  data  on  the  long-term carcinogenic  potential  of  bivalirudin  are  available.    However,  bivalirudin  was  not  mutagenic  or clastogenic in standard assays for such effects. All  non-clinical  data  considered  relevant  to  clinical  safety  have  been  included  in  the  Summary  of Product Characteristics (SPC) for Angiox. Efficacy Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  clinical  studies  bivalirudin  has  been  shown  to  provide  adequate  anticoagulation  during  PCI procedures.  The  clinical  efficacy  of  bivalirudin  as  an  anticoagulant  in  the  setting  of  PCI  has  been shown  based  on  the  30-day  results  based  on  quadruple  and  triple  endpoints  from  the  randomised, double blind trial of over 6,000 patients undergoing PCI (REPLACE-2).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Safety

Angiox has demonstrated an acceptable safety profile. There are no major safety concerns related to the use of bivalirudin in the context of PCI, however, there is a problem with increased occurrence of thrombosis in patients treated with gamma brachytherapy. Angiox should be used with caution during beta  brachytherapy  procedures.  It  is  also  worth  pointing  out  that  adverse  events  were  higher  in females, in patients &gt;65 years of age and in severe renal impairment in addition to those observed with gamma brachytherapy. A single death with anaphylaxis has been reported. Angiox is contraindicated in patients with severe renal insufficiency (GFR &lt;30ml/min) and also in dialysis-dependent patients.

The potential safety  concerns,  which  require  post-authorisation  surveillance  are  anaphylactic  deaths and immune reaction, use during gamma brachytherapy and major bleeding episodes. The Applicant has committed to monitor for immunological reactions, anaphylaxis and major bleeds post-marketing and  put  particular  emphasis  on  bleeding  events  in  the  PSURs.  Adverse  events  during  gamma brachytherapy  will  also  be  monitored.  Additionally,  the  Applicant  will  expedite  serious  bleeding events for a period of one year. Benefit/risk assessment Bivalirudin is an anticoagulant and direct thrombin inhibitor. The pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of the product has been well defined. The efficacy of the product has been demonstrated in a well-designed large clinical trial. Bivalirudin is non-inferior to a combination of heparin with GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor. The product can be used in patients with HITT and causes less major bleed. Following the review of the submitted documentation, and the final SPC and Letter of Undertaking, the CHMP agreed that efficacy has been shown that is clinically relevant and that an acceptable safety profile has been demonstrated, which allow a conclusion on an acceptable benefit/risk ratio for the use of Angiox (bivalirudin) as an anticoagulant in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The Applicant has committed to monitor for immunological reactions, anaphylaxis and major bleeds post-marketing and put particular emphasis on bleeding events in the PSURs. Adverse events during gamma brachytherapy will also be monitored. Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the benefit/risk ratio of Angiox for the use as an anticoagulant in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised