---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:46:24
document_pages: 37
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/atryn-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: atryn-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 12.224163
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-14 21:45:31.905418
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1. Introduction

ATryn contains recombinant human antithrombin (rhAT), purified from the milk of transgenic goats.

<!-- image -->

Thromboembolic  events  in  congenital  AT  deficient  patients  are  uncommon  prior  to  puberty,  but increase thereafter, particularly during periods of high risk, such as pregnancy, surgery, or bed rest. Regular  prophylactic  substitution  of  antithrombin  in  patients  with  congenital  deficiency  is  not necessary. However, substitution with antithrombin in congenitally deficient individuals is considered for  prophylaxis  of  thrombosis  in  certain  risk  situations  such  as  the  peri-partum  period  or  major surgery, or for treatment of thrombosis:

Antithrombin (AT) is a serine protease inhibitor that is the principal inhibitor of the blood coagulation serine  proteases  thrombin  and  Factor  Xa,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  Factors  IXa,  XIa,  XIIa,  trypsin, plasmin, and kallikrein. AT neutralizes the activity of thrombin and other serine proteases by forming a  complex  between  enzyme  and  inhibitor.  This  complex  is  rapidly  cleared  from  the  circulation  by internalization into liver cells. In the absence of heparin, complex formation occurs at a relatively slow rate. When heparin or heparin sulfate on the vessel wall is present, however, it binds to lysyl residues on  AT  and  dramatically  accelerates  the  rate  of  complex  formation.  The  ability  of  AT  to  inhibit thrombin can be enhanced by greater than 1000 fold when AT is bound to heparin.  Antithrombin has also  been  referred  to  as  a  heparin  cofactor.  Localization  of  a  fraction  of  the  AT  on  the  endothelial surface, where enzymes of the intrinsic coagulation cascade are commonly generated, enables AT to rapidly  neutralize  these  activated  clotting  factors  and  protect  natural  surfaces  against  thrombus formation. Normal human plasma AT concentrations range between 12.5 - 15 mg/dl. The AT activity of 1 ml of pooled normal human plasma in a thrombin or factor-Xa inhibition assay is defined as 1 IU/ml. AT activity levels are often reported as a percentage of the activity of normal human plasma and therefore set to 100%. Normal ranges for the assays mostly are between 80% and 120%. Congenital AT deficiency is a heterozygous autosomal dominant disorder with a prevalence of about 1 in 3,000 to 5,000 in the general population, characterized by a decrease in antithrombin (type I) or the presence of a dysfunctional form (type II-a: reactive site defects: Type II-b: heparin binding defects; Type  II-c:  pleiotropic  effects).  In  type  I  deficiency,  AT  activity  and  plasma  AT  concentration  are concordantly reduced, indicating that no protein is produced by the mutant allele. In type II deficiency, the  AT  concentration  is  (near-)  normal,  but  the  AT  activity  is  discordantly  reduced,  indicating  a functional  impairment  of  the  molecule  produced  by  the  mutant  allele.    Distinction  between  the subtypes  of  antithrombin  deficiency  is  of  clinical  relevance,  since  the  incidence  of  thrombosis  is higher in association with type I deficiency and type II-a deficiency, where the mutation affects the reactive site, as compared to type II-b deficiency where the mutation affects the heparin-binding site. The  genetic  defect  of  the  AT  gene  is  located  at  chromosome  1q23-25.  Type  I  deficiencies  are produced by major gene deletions or point mutations. Single base substitutions within coding regions giving rise to variant antithrombins are the basis of all type II AT deficiencies identified to date. Homozygotism (total deficiency of antithrombin) is very rare and thought to be not compatible with life. The majority of affected individuals are heterozygous. A partial (heterozygous) deficiency with a biological  activity  around  50%  of  normal  levels  may  be  associated  with  familial  thrombophilia, predisposing up to 70% of affected family members to suffer from thrombosis, before they reach an age of 40 years. In patients with type I congenital AT deficiency, AT levels are usually between 40 and  50%  of  normal.  The  prevalence  of  congenital  AT  deficiency  in  the  general  population  of asymptomatic  subjects  is  unknown.  Reported  estimates  of  the  prevalence  of  type  I  congenital  AT deficiency in blood donors range from 0.02% to 0.14%. In unselected patients presenting with venous thrombosis, the prevalence of AT deficiency is around 1% but in patients with deep vein thrombosis who have a family history of venous thromboembolism the reported prevalence of AT deficiency is between 4% and 7%. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Surgical  procedures  are  often  accompanied  by  temporary  immobility  of  the  patient,  which increases  the  risk  of  thromboembolism.  Also,  depending  on  the  extent  of  tissue  damage  and hemorrhage, AT levels decline during surgery, which amplifies the deficiency in congenital AT deficient patients. Major surgery like orthopedic procedures, abdominal surgery or major vascular surgery  is  clearly  associated  with  a  high  risk  for  thromboembolic  events  and  consequently thromboprophylaxis  is  normally  administered  to  subjects  undergoing  these  procedures.  This prophylaxis often consists of unfractionated (UF) or low molecular weight (LMW) heparin. The anticoagulant  effect  of  either  UF  or  LMW  heparin,  however,  can  only  be  established  in  the presence of sufficient levels of AT.

Table 1

| Name of Ingredient   | Concentration   | Composition per vial   |
|----------------------|-----------------|------------------------|
| Active Ingredient    |                 |                        |
| antithrombin alfa    | 175 IU/ml       | 250 mg (1750 UI)       |
| Other Ingredients    |                 |                        |
| Glycine              | 133mM           | 104.8 mg               |
| Sodium Chloride      | 10mM            | 82.8 mg                |
| Sodium Citrate       | 135mM           | 27.1 mg                |

<!-- image -->

-Pregnancy  is  also  a  risk  because  it  is  typically  a  hypercoagulable  state,  due  to  a  physiologic increase in coagulation factors and a decrease in fibrinolytic activity. Therefore, pregnant women with  congenital  AT  deficiency  are  often  given  anticoagulant  prophylaxis.  Warfarin  is  usually avoided during pregnancy, particularly during the first 3 months due to teratogenic potential, and during the last few weeks prior to delivery due to bleeding risk or the fetus. A heparin is often the anticoagulant of choice, as it does not cross the placenta. Rarely administration of AT concentrate in  addition  to  a  heparin  may  be  necessary  to  achieve  adequate  anticoagulation.  The  use  of antithrombin III concentrate during pregnancy in women can circumvent the problems associated with both warfarin therapy and prolonged high-dose heparin therapy. It  has  been  stated  in  literature  that  replacement  therapy  with  AT  concentrate  (either  alone  or  in combination with heparin therapy) would be beneficial when heparin therapy alone is not effective (i.e. heparin resistance), during acute thromboembolic episodes or when antithrombotic prophylaxis is needed  in  high-risk  situations  for  both  thrombotic  and  bleeding  complications,  such  as  delivery, surgery  or  trauma.  The  approved  indications  of  AT  concentrate  in  congenital  AT  deficiency  are perioperative, post-surgical prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis, acute thrombo-embolism, pregnancy (delivery and abortion) and neonates with congenital AT deficiency. In the re-examination documentation the applicant discussed that eight EU countries (with a total populations of 23 million) do not have approved  hpAT product, which limits the availability of AT concentrates to treat those patients 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition ATryn  contains  recombinant  human  antithrombin  (rhAT).  The  active  moiety  in  ATryn  is  a recombinant form of the naturally occurring human antithrombin (AT) glycoprotein and is produced in the milk of transgenic goats. ATryn is presented as a powder for intravenous infusion in a vial containing 250 mg antithrombin alfa. The 20 ml type I glass vial is closed with a siliconised bromo-butyl rubber stopper, sealed with an aluminium  seal  and  a  flip-off  cap.  ATryn  is  at  a  concentration  of  175  IU/ml  (25  mg/ml)  after reconstitution with 10 ml water for injection. The composition of the product is the following table: Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Active substance

## Manufacturing process

Antithrombin alfa is purified from transgenic goat milk (source material).

## - Transgenic herd and collection of the source material

The transgenic goat was obtained after microinjection of the transgene in the pro-nucleus of a goat embryo.  This transgene is composed of the gene of interest (human AT cDNA) and the regulatory regions of goat beta casein gene (CSN2) to direct tissue specific expression in goat mammary gland. The selection of the first transgenic goat F0 was based on its transgene status (mosaicism and germline transmission) and its capacity for producing large quantities of antithrombin alfa in its milk.

<!-- image -->

Antithrombin  is  a  58kDa  single  chain  glycoprotein  that  contains  432  amino  acids  and  has  a carbohydrate content of about 15%. The protein has 3 disulfide bridges and 4 N-linked glycosylation sites (Asn 96, 135, 155 and 192).

Goat  breeding  is  then  accomplished  through  a  combination  of  natural  breeding  and  artificial insemination.  The herd is predominantly constituted of 'Swiss breeds' dairy goats (namely Saanen, Alpine,  Toggenburg  breeds  and  mixtures  thereof).    Transgenic  goat  may  be  obtained  from  any combination of these breeds.  A 2-tiered banking system was established: the Master Transgenic Bank (MTB) is comprised of semen from qualified F0 and F1 males, and the qualified P0 and P1 females, and the Working Transgenic Bank (WTB) is comprised of qualified male and female animals from qualified animals, and the semen from these qualified males.  Considerable efforts have been made to identify the genotype of the goats, and to improve the \"genetic consistency\" of the herd. The qualification of a production doe, and production group is mainly based on the transgenic animal capacity to produce antithrombin alfa in sufficient quantity, and on microbiological screening.  Source material (milk) is then collected from qualified doe at GTC Biotherapeutics Inc., MA, USA, . Source material is then shipped to Cambrex, MA, USA for further processing. In  order  to  increase  the  consistency  of  the  source  material,  which  shows  variability  in  amounts  of specific  proteins,  lactose,  total  protein  and  fat  levels,  the  milk  pooling  strategy  has  been  revised. Compositional  analysis  of  the  Cambrex  batches  (old  pooling  strategy)  is  compared  with  batches prepared with the new pooling strategy and demonstrates that greater consistency is achieved. - Active substance manufacturing process The  purification  process  begins  with  the  thawing,  pooling  and  clarification  of  the  source  material. Purification is accomplished by a series of column chromatography steps and filtration through a virus filter.   The formulated bulk of drug active is shipped to MedImmune BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Several modifications have been introduced in the active substance and finished product manufacturing process between 1991 and 2003. The active substance is manufactured at Cambrex BioScience, USA; batch analyses of 3 consecutive batches and their in-process controls analyses were provided to support the process consistency. The  validation  of  removal  of  goat  milk  impurities  by  the  purification  process  has  been  adequately addressed by conducting further analysis on the raw materials and products from the first validation study, and by performing a second validation study. More than 4 logs of removal are observed for all measured impurities, except for goat AT (2.9 logs). Suitable validated analytical methods were used assess removal of these impurities. Characterisation Medicinal product no longer authorised

The protein structure  of  antithrombin  alfa  is  consistent  with  published  data  and  hpAT.    N-terminal variability (N-2 and N-3) is observed ( ≤ 10%); larger truncation has not been clearly detected, although

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

SDS-PAGE analysis (Coomassie reduced conditions) reveals faint presence of low molecular weight species.  Four methionines have been identified as potential oxidation sites (Met314, 315, 17 and 20)  .

The comparison of recombinant human AT (rhAT) to plasma-derived AT (hpAT) shows significant differences in glycosylation profiles and affinity to heparin.  The glycosylation profile of antithrombin alfa  differs  from  hpAT  in  terms  of  monosaccharide  composition  (fucosylated,  less  sialylated,  high proportion  of  NGNA),  oligosaccharide  population,  as  well  as  glycoform  species  (different  pI distribution).  Differences are observed on heparin binding affinity analysis.  Plasma derived hpAT is usually composed of ~90% alpha isoform (low binding affinity to heparin) and ~10% beta isoform (high  binding  affinity  species).    The  antithrombin  alfa  demonstrates  an  hpAT  'beta-like'  affinity without any detectable impact on the in-vitro bioassay (assay performed in excess of heparin).

<!-- image -->

The  controls  performed  on  the  finished  products  are  similar  to  the  one  performed  on  the  active substance. Biological activity is based on an antithrombin inhibition test using an excess of heparin. The Thrombin Inhibitory Activity assay is consistent with the Ph.Eur monograph on Assay of Human antithrombin III. The specification of release are that the calculated potency (IU) is not less that 80 % nor more than 120 % of the potency stated and the confidence interval (p=0.95) is not greater than 90 % to 110 % of the estimated potency. ATryn and hpAT behave differently in this thrombin inhibitory analysis (without heparin and with progressive amounts of heparin), even though the potency of both is expressed in international units (IU). Therefore, a statement is included in the SPC indicating that both products are not interchangeable.

Active substance specifications Satisfactory specifications and validation of analytical methodology have been provided for control of the active substance. Each batch of active substance is tested for identity, purity and potency. The specifications according to which the tests are performed are justified by batch data as well as data obtained for batches used in preclinical studies and clinical trials. All routine methods used as control or release tests of starting materials, process intermediate, drug product and stability samples were validated when appropriate. No compendial reference standard of antithrombin alfa is currently available . The company has developed its own reference standards for product testing purposes. Milk contaminants are known allergens and may be present in trace amounts in the product. Therefore, they are monitored with a series of assays.  A special warning in the SPC has been added to preclude patients with hypersensitivity to goat proteins or goat milk components. Based on the stability data provided, a shelf life for the active substance of 80 days at 2-8 °C may be accepted. Other ingredients The other ingredients in the product are glycine, sodium chloride and sodium citrate. All of them are pharmacopoeial grade. Product development and finished product Pharmaceutical Development The product was formulated at the active substance level, and no other excipient is added during the finished product manufacture. Manufacture of the Product The product is manufactured by MedImmune Pharma BV, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Upon receipt from Cambrex Bio Science MA, the integrity of the drug substance vessel is inspected, and stored at 2 to  8°C.  The  formulated  antithrombin  alfa  is  filtered  (0.22µm)  and  aseptically  filled.  The  product  is then lyophilized and subjected to heat inactivation. Finished Product Specification Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Viral safety

The viral safety of this product mainly relies on:

- 1The quality of starting materials (health status of animals, the quality of milk)
- 2The capacity of the production process to remove or inactivate viruses.

<!-- image -->

In order to ensure viral particle inactivation, a heat treatment step has been introduced. Nevertheless, the  formulations  used  in  preclinical  studies  with  the  exception  of  prenatal  and  postnatal  toxicity studies  were  non-heat  treated.  Additional  data  submitted  indicate  there  appear  to  be  only  minor biochemical differences between the non-heat treated, the heat treated and the nanofiltered heat treated antithrombin alfa products, which may not impact on the pharmacokinetics, distribution or activity of the antithrombin alfa in animals or humans. Definitive evidence of bioequivalence has been gained from the clinical PK study (GTC AT PK 011-04).

The viral safety strategy of starting materials relies on a closed herd of selected and limited origins, together with a health monitoring program, and some viral screenings. During the process, specific viral  removal  and  inactivation  steps  were  introduced  in  the  form  of  nanofiltration  and  dry  heat treatment. Viral safety and TSE aspects are well addressed and documented.  Several measures have been taken at the GTC farm to ensure health status and monitoring of transgenic animals (closed herd, controlled farm, good manufacturing practices, virological controls on animals).  In case a confirmed infections occurs, the company commits to communicate the description of the case and the subsequent decisions to  the  competent  authorities.  Adventitious  agents  are  searched  on  bulk  milk.    The  only  biological material used during the purification process is heparin of porcine origin.  Global reduction factors were satisfactory regarding the virus removal/inactivation for enveloped viruses as well as for nonenveloped viruses. Regarding TSE aspects, the goats were maintained in a closed herd in the USA.  All GTC goats were certified scrapie-free by the USDA.  Milk is considered as a product with no detectable infectivity. Moreover,  some  steps  of  the  production  process  were  subjected  to  scrapie  removal/inactivation studies.    The  applicant  committed  to  further  investigate  the  use  of  a  systematic  scrapie  search  by ELISA or Western Blot on the CNS of each slaughtered animal, in order to implement an acceptable health  monitoring  program.  The  CHMP  will  be  kept  updated  on  this  investigation.    As  soon  as  a validated test is available, this test will be implemented. Stability of the product Stability studies were performed on 3 lots of product stored at 2-8°C.  Results of the studies support an expiry period of 18 months. A photodegradation study has been conducted: the product does not seem to be light sensitive.  In-use stability study was conducted after dilution of the reconstituted product into infusion bags and infusion syringes stored at room temperature. Based upon the results of these studies, diluted solution prepared in infusion bags or syringes should be administered within 8 hours of preparation. In order to obtain lower particulates levels, the SPC mentions the need to bring the vial to room temperature prior to reconstitution and to limit the agitation. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects The  non-clinical  program  was  performed  according  to  the  ICH  S6  guideline  'Preclinical  Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology Derived Pharmaceuticals'. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

Pharmacological properties of antithrombin alfa were investigated in both in vitro and in vivo studies.

## Primary pharmacodynamic studies

The  anticoagulant  activity  of  antithrombin  alfa  has  been  studied  and  compared  to  hpAT  (human plasma-derived antithrombin)) in several in vitro studies: in vitro thrombin and factor Xa inhibition assay,  effect  on  fibrinogen  levels  in  blood  obtained  from  Sprague-Dawley  rats  and  humans,  and in vitro coagulation in blood from cardiac surgical patients. These studies showed that antithrombin alfa and  hpAT  had  equivalent  activity.  Heparin  binding  studies  indicated  that  heparin  affinity  is  4  fold higher for antithrombin alfa than for hpAT.

<!-- image -->

Both anticoagulant and anti-inflammatory properties of antithrombin alfa have been studied in other in vitro studies;  anti-  inflammatory  effect  of  antithrombin  alfa  on  tissue  factor  and  cytokines  and regulation of neutrophil migration were shown. In vivo studies have been carried out with several acquired AT deficiency models, including sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and organ transplantation. Some of these studies were reports from the published literature. In these studies, antithrombin alfa prevented sepsis and effects caused by septic shock. The results were similar between antithrombin alfa and hpAT. Secondary pharmacodynamic studies No secondary pharmacodynamics studies have been conducted. The applicant stated that due to the nature of antithrombin alfa and the lack of unexpected findings in the toxicity studies, these studies were  not  considered  necessary,  and  this  was  agreed  by  CHMP.  Anti-inflammatory  properties  of antithrombin alfa have been studied as part of the primary pharmacodynamic studies. Safety pharmacology programme No dedicated safety pharmacology studies have been conducted. However, effects on the CVS and respiration were monitored in a monkey study and a baboon toxicity study respectively. Also effects on respiration and on the CNS were monitored in a rat reprotoxicity study. From these studies there  is no indication of any adverse effects on cardiac, respiratory or cerebrovascular system. Pharmacodynamic drug interactions A pharmacodynamic drug interaction study has been carried out with heparin and antithrombin alfa or hpAT. The presence of heparin did not modify anticoagulant activity. Moreover, no differences were noted between antithrombin alfa and hpAT regarding the profile of effect on coagulation factors. Pharmacokinetics Very  few  pharmacokinetic  data  were  submitted.  Protein  binding,  metabolism,  metabolic  pathway, excretion balance studies have not been performed. However, in view of the type of molecule, thd lack of these data is acceptable. Five pharmacokinetic and three toxicokinetic (1 single, 2 repeated dose) studies were performed by intravenous route in mice, rats, dogs and monkeys. Two types of assays have been carried out in the pharmacokinetic assessment, antithrombin assay and antithrombin alfa antibody assay. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Regarding antithrombin assay, AT ELISA method, antithrombin activity assay and radiometry were used.  The  lack  of  specificity  (for  antithrombin  alfa)  of  the  thrombin  inhibition  assay  is  a  concern, however this is acceptable taking into account the aim of the studies in which this assay was used, ie measuring  clearance  rates  of  antithrombin  alfa.  For  the  thrombin  inhibition  assay,  a  posteriori validation has been performed, which is acceptable, given minor modification of the assay method.

Antithrombin alfa antibody assay, using an ELISA method was used in the repeat dose rat and monkey studies in order to investigate the production of antithrombin alfa antibodies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bioavailability - bioequivalence

A  study  has  been  performed  in  female  mice  in  order  to  compare  the  pharmacokinetic  profile  of different  lots  of  antithrombin  alfa.  Pharmacokinetic  parameters  have  been  determined  in  mice  (6 animals per group) following a single bolus intravenous injection at 6 mg/kg with three batches. These three lots of antithrombin alfa have been individually purified from the milk of three different female goats. Data indicated similar results. Nevertheless, the results of this study could only be considered as supportive data and not as a proof of bioequivalence because of the lack of power (small number of animals and samples and the lack of validation for this assay).

<!-- image -->

Distribution Distribution in the rat was generally similar for antithrombin alfa and hpAT however there was more drug related radioactivity associated with the gastrointestinal tract following 125 I-rhAT than 125 I-hpAT administration. Toxicokinetics In rat studies, AUC increased with dose in a non-linear manner. AUC were greater after 4 weeks of dosing compared with initial values. The  clearance  was  lower  for  hpAT  comparing  antithrombin  alfa  and  hpAT  dose  for  dose;  this difference could be the result of glycosylation differences between antithrombin alfa and hpAT. In cynomolgus monkey studies, AUC was generally about three times greater in this species than in the rat at all doses used. Some evidence of accumulation was noted at doses levels ≥ 300 mg/kg/day. Toxicokinetics  studies  did  not  show  gender  differences.  AUC  were  greater  for  hpAT  than  for antithrombin alfa, dose for dose. Half-life increased and clearance decreased with dose across the 3 species. Depending on the dose, half-life ranged from approximately 0.75-2 h at 36-360 mg/kg dose in the rat, 2-8 h at 21-210 mg/kg dose in the dog and 2-6 h at 36-360 mg/kg dose in the primate. The clearance values ranged (with increasing dose) from 46,74 to 16,14 ml/hr/kg in male rats and from 34,5 to 16,86 in female rats; 23,3 to 4,9 ml/hr/kg in male dogs and from 19,6 to 4,6 ml/hr/kg in female dogs; 15,7 to 5,8 ml/hr/kg in male primate and from 17,5 to 6,1 in female primates. Toxicology Toxicology  studies  have  been  performed  by  the  intravenous  route  in  rats  and  dogs  for  single  dose toxicity studies and in rats, dogs and cynomolgus monkeys for repeat dose toxicity studies. In two of the single dose studies and in the monkey repeated dose study, antithrombin alfa was administered by infusion. Single dose In the single dose toxicity studies in rats, doses up to 360 mg/kg were given (infusion/bolus). In the study in dogs, doses up to 210 mg/kg were given by infusion. The findings were limited to transient swellings observed in rats and dogs at the highest doses tested, and increased AST (with  top-dose on day 2) in the dog study. The swellings resolved after 6 to 12 hours. AST was possibly associated with minor tissue damage. Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) In  repeat-dose  toxicity  study  in  rats,  doses  up  to  360  mg/kg  were  given  for  28  days  (injection). Transient swellings have been observed at all doses tested. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

In the 14 days cynomolgus monkey study, dosing was over 1 hour at 0, 36, 120 or 360mg/kg/day for 14 days followed by a 7 day treatment-free recovery period for the control and top-dose groups.  The top dose was reduced to 300mg/kg/day on day 2 or 3 due to haemorrhage in one female (accidental piercing  of  the  femoral  artery  during  dosing/  sampling  on  day  1  in  the  presence  of  anticoagulant). Haematological disorders were noted in females at the highest dose tested. These effects included a decrease of red cells, haematocrit and haemoglobin and an increase in reticulocytes and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

polymorphonucleocytes. These changes could be due to multiple blood samples collected during the first  day  of  the  study.  On  day  15  increased  AST and  ALT were observed in top-dose animals. The AST increase was most likely associated with muscle trauma; ALT returned to normal by day 22.

Antibody  response  was  investigated  in  the  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  and  toxicokinetic studies

<!-- image -->

There was an antibody response in both rat and monkey upon repeated dosing with antithrombin alfa but no consistent pattern of response in terms of dose level or gender in any study. Genotoxicity Genotoxicity studies are not needed according to ICH S6. The genotoxic potential of antithrombin alfa has been investigated in an in vivo mouse micronucleus test up to 360 mg/kg/day and in two in vitro studies:  an  Ames test  in Salmonella typhimurium and E. coli strains  and  a  chromosomal aberration assay in Chinese hamster ovary cells. The results of these studies were all negative. Carcinogenicity In view of the origin of the product and the duration of the treatment, no studies have been conducted in order to assess the carcinogenic potential of antithrombin alfa, which is acceptable and in agreement with ICH S6. Reproduction Toxicity A full package reproduction toxicity studies is not required for this therapeutic indication. There  were  two  pre-  and  post-natal  studies  performed  in  rats  in  order  to  support  administration  of antithrombin alfa to patients during pregnancy. The first study investigated antithrombin alfa effects in dams and F1 and F2 offsprings. Pregnant rats (25/dose group) were given 0, 2.1, 21, 210 mg/kg/day by intravenous bolus from day 6 of gestation to day 20 of lactation (37 days). The NOAEL determined for maternal effects was 210 mg/kg/day. The NOAEL determined for F1 pup development is 21 mg/kg/day. Indeed, at the highest dose tested (210 mg/kg/day), a decrease of the pups viability index was observed in comparison with concurent and historical  controls.    In  the  second  study,  the  investigation  concerned  dams  and  only  F1  offsprings. Pregnant rats (30 animals/dose) were given 0, 52.5, 105, 210 mg/kg/day by intravenous bolus from day 20 of gestation to day 5 of lactation (8 days).  The NOAEL for F0 mothers and F1 pups was 210 mg/kg/day. The maternal effects were a dose dependant incidence of swelling in limbs and snouts. Local tolerance No specific tests for local tolerance have been performed. Good local tolerance was observed during toxicology studies, and in clinical studies. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment An environmental risk assessment has not been conducted. Since antithrombin alfa is a protein, the lack of an ERA is acceptable according to the draft ERA guideline. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects

Initially,  antithrombin alfa was developed for use in heparin resistant patients awaiting cardiac surgery requiring cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). Following EMEA scientific advice in 1999 and 2000, further development  focused  on  the  use  of  antithrombin  alfa  in  patients  with  hereditary  AT  deficiency  in situations at high risk for thromboembolic events.

<!-- image -->

The clinical development consists mainly of the following studies (see table 2): Pharmacokinetics To fulfil the EMEA Note for Guidance (CPMP/BPWG/2220/99) request of a pharmacokinetic (PK) study in at least 12 congenital AT deficient patients not in a high risk situation to determine the PK characteristics of the antithrombin alfa product, a clinical PK study (GTC AT III- 009-00) has been performed  in  15  patients  with  congenital  AT  deficiency  (specific  design  features,  timing  of  blood sampling and employment of three different lots of AT). In addition, two healthy volunteer PK studies were performed: GEN/G9601, to establish the PK characteristics of antithrombin alfa for the design of the acquired deficiency studies. Subsequently to the implementation of an active viral inactivation step in the production process of antithrombin alfa (heat treatment), a second healthy volunteer study (AT III-006-00)  was  then  performed  to  evaluate  whether  the  change  in  the  production  process  of antithrombin alfa had impacted on the pharmacokinetic properties of antithrombin alfa. In response to the LoQ, the Applicant performed a human PK study in healthy volunteers (GTC AT PK 011-04) in order to compare the heat-treated product with the to be commercialized heat-treated nanofiltered product in a standard cross-over design. Out of the 24 healthy volunteers (14 females and 10 males) included at the beginning of the study, a total of fourteen subjects (8 females and 6 males) completed the crossover part of the study. Efficacy and Safety As  required  by  the  EMEA  Note  for  Guidance  and  the  Scientific  Advice,  clinical  efficacy  data  are presented from a formal clinical trial, which was set up to include 15 congenital AT deficient patients in high risk situations to be treated with antithrombin alfa in the peri-operative or peri-partum period (GTC AT III 01002). In the initial submission, a full evaluation of safety and efficacy of the first 10 patients  enrolled  (up  to  and  including  the  Day  30  post  treatment  visit)  has  been  provided.  In  the submission of the D121 responses to the CHMP LoQ, the Applicant has submitted the final clinical study. Fourteen hereditary AT deficient surgery (n=5) and delivery (n=9) patients, who were at high risk  for  the  occurrence  of  a  thromboembolic  event,  have  been  treated  with  antithrombin  alfa replacement therapy. Another  study  presented  in  the  first  submission,  GTC  AT  III  011-003,  provides  retrospectively collected  efficacy  and  safety  data  from  5  congenital  AT  deficient  patients  undergoing  6  surgical procedures treated under a compassionate use program in the US. The applicant has also included in this application Phase II and III studies performed in acquired AT deficiency (although this development line was discontinued), mainly for purposes of the assessment of safety. Justification has been provided for the absence of controlled large trials. The prevalence of clinically significant  congenital  AT  deficiency  is  low  (1  in  3000  to  1  in  5000).  In  addition,  the  need  for  AT prophylaxis  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  thromboembolism  in  congenital  AT  deficient  patients  is limited to high-risk situations which is very difficult to predict and renders patient recruitment  for clinical trials more difficult. A tabular listing of all clinical studies is presented below in table 5. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The initially proposed indication of ATryn was for patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency for  the  prophylaxis  of  deep  vein  thrombosis  and  thromboembolism  in  clinical  risk  situations (especially during surgery or during the peri-partum period), in association with heparin if indicated. In  the  initial  Marketing  authorisation  one  dosing  regimen  was  proposed  for  both  types  of  patients (pregnant  and  non-pregnant).  Thoughout  the  initial  evaluation  and  re-examination  the  proposed

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

indication  and  posology  changed  several  times  based  on  difficulties  with  the  dosing  regimen  in pregnant patients.

The final approved indication (section 4.1 of the SPC, Therapeutic Indications) is:

ATryn is indicated for the prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in surgery of patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency. ATryn is normally given in association with heparin or low molecular weight heparin.

<!-- image -->

Section  4.2  of  the  SPC,  Posology,  will  match  the  dosing  and  monitoring  as  applied  in  the  pivotal study: The therapeutic  goal  of  treatment  with  ATryn  is  to  increase  to,  and  maintain  antithrombin activity between 80 - 120% (0.8 - 1.2 IU/ml) for the duration of treatment. Initial treatment starts with a loading dose of ATryn targeting an antithrombin activity level of 100%. This initial loading dose is based on body weight and on the pretreatment antithrombin activity level. In  the  applicant's  posology  proposal  the  required  loading  dose  is  determined  using  the following formula : Loading Dose (IU) = [(100 - patient's pre-treatment AT activity level in %) /2.28] x Body Weight in kg The usual loading dose in surgical patients (baseline AT activity 50%, bodyweight 75 kg) with congenital antithrombin deficiency in clinical risk situations is 20-25 IU/kg bodyweight. The loading dose should be given as a 15 minute infusion immediately followed by initiation of the maintenance infusion. The required maintenance dose for surgical patients is given as a continuous infusion and is determined using the following formula : Maintenance Dose (IU/hour) = [(100 - patient's pre-treatment AT activity level in %) /10.22] x Body Weight in kg The usual maintenance dose in surgical patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency in clinical  risk  situations  is  4-5  IU/kg/h.  During  consumptive  states  (e.g.  major  surgery, concomitant use of heparin) the actual dose may be higher. See therapeutic monitoring and dose adjustment recommendations below. There is no paediatric development programme for this product. The main trial was performed in compliance with Good Clinical Practice as claimed by the applicant. A GCP inspection of trial GTC-AT PK 011-04 was performed due to unexpectedly low variability of the PK parameters calculated during the trial. Overall, the observations of the inspection do not appear liable to jeopardise the acceptability of the trial data. The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Type of Study                 | Study Identifier              | Objective(s) of the Study                                                              | Study Design and Type of Control        | Test Product(s); Dosage Regimen; Route of Administration                                    | Number of Subjects            | Healthy Subjects or Diagnosis of Patients   | Duration of Treatment              | Study Status; Type of Report   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Human Pharmacokinetics longer | Human Pharmacokinetics longer | Human Pharmacokinetics longer                                                          | Human Pharmacokinetics longer           | Human Pharmacokinetics longer                                                               | Human Pharmacokinetics longer | Human Pharmacokinetics longer               | Human Pharmacokinetics longer      | Human Pharmacokinetics longer  |
| Comparative BA and BE         | AT III- 006-00                | Compare PK of non-heat - treated with heat - treated rhAT                              | Randomized, cross-over study            | rhAT; single dose 75 IU/kg; IV administration                                               | 26                            | Healthy Subjects                            | Two administrations, 28 days apart | Complete; Full                 |
| PK                            | GEN/G 9601                    | Define PK                                                                              | Randomized, placebo controlled          | rhAT; single dose, dose escalation (saline, 10, 50, 100, 150, 200 IU/kg); IV administration | 20 (15 rhAT) (5 Placebo) no   | Healthy Subjects                            | Single Dose                        | Complete; Full                 |
| PK                            | AT PK 011-04                  | Compare PK of nanofiltered, heat - treated with non- nanofiltered, heat - treated rhAT | Randomized, two-period cross-over study | rhAT; single dose, 100 IU/kg; IV administration product                                     | 24 (Period 1) 14 (Period 2)   | Healthy Subjects                            | Two administrations                | Complete                       |

Table 2: Tabular listing of all clinical studies (1) Compare PK of non-heat - treated with heat - treated rhAT Complete; Full Randomized, placebo controlled Complete; Full Compare PK of nanofiltered, heat - treated with nonnanofiltered, heat - treated rhAT 24 (Period 2) Healthy Subjects 11/37 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| Type of Study                                        | Study Identifier                                     | Objective(s) of the Study                                                                   | Study Design and Type of Control                         | Test Product(s); Dosage Regimen; Route of Administration                                    | Number of Subjects                                   | Healthy Subjects or Diagnosis of Patients                            | Duration of Treatment                                | Study Status; Type of Report                         |
|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients                                        | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients     | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients                                        | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients                 | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients | Congenital Antithrombin Deficient Subjects &Patients |
| PK                                                   | AT III-009- 00                                       | Define PK                                                                                   | Randomized                                               | Three different lots of rhAT; 50, 100 IU/kg; IV administration                              | 15                                                   | Congenital AT Deficient Patients not in a high risk situation longer | Single Dose                                          | Complete; Full                                       |
| Efficacy Study                                       | GTC AT III 01002                                     | Efficacy of rhAT as prophylaxis in congenital AT deficient patients in high risk situations | Single Arm, Open Label with Blinded Evaluation           | rhAT; individualized dosing targeting a plasma AT activity of 80-120%; IV administration no | 14                                                   | Patients in a high risk situation (delivery/ surgery)                | 3-14 days, Continuous Infusion                       | Complete; Full                                       |
| Efficacy Study                                       | GTC AT III 011-003                                   | Efficacy of rhAT as prophylaxis in congenital AT patients in high risk situations           | Compassionate Use Program; Retrospective Data Collection | rhAT; Individualized dosing targeting a plasma AT activity > 80%; IV administration product | 6 treatment episodes                                 | Patients in a high risk situation (delivery/ surgery)                | 2-16 days                                            | Complete; Full                                       |

12/37 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Type of Study                            | Study Identifier                         | Objective(s) of the Study                                                                 | Study Design and Type of Control              | Test Product(s); Dosage Regimen; Route of Administration                          | Number of Subjects                       | Healthy Subjects or Diagnosis of Patients                  | Duration of Treatment                    | Study Status; Type of Report             |
|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients                                                  | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients      | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients                                          | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients                   | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients | Acquired Antithrombin Deficient Patients |
| Safety Study                             | GTC AT 96- 0801                          | Safety; Dose Finding                                                                      | Single Dose, Dose Escalation                  | Placebo or rhAT: 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, 200 IU/kg; IV administration | 36 (30 rhAT) (6 Placebo)                 | Acquired AT Deficient Patients (Heparin Resistance) longer | Single Dose                              | Complete; Full                           |
| Efficacy Study                           | GTC AT 97- 0502                          | Efficacy for Restoration of Heparin Sensitivity                                           | Single dose, placebo controlled, double blind | Placebo or rhAT: 75 U/kg                                                          | 54 (27 rhAT) 27 (Placebo) no             | Acquired AT Deficient Patients (Heparin Resistance)        | Single Dose                              | Complete; Full                           |
| Efficacy Study                           | GTC AT 97- 0504                          | Efficacy for Restoration of Heparin Sensitivity                                           | Single dose, placebo controlled, double blind | Placebo or rhAT: 75 U/kg product                                                  | 52 (28 rhAT) 24 (Placebo)                | Acquired AT Deficient Patients (Heparin Resistance)        | Single Dose                              | Complete; Full                           |
| Efficacy Study                           | GTC AT 97- 0903                          | Compare dose response of rhAT with plasma derived AT (hpAT) in heparin resistant patients | Randomised, double blind, active control      | rhAT 15, or 75 IU/kg, and hpAT 15 IU/kg                                           | 47 (33 rhAT) (14 hpAT)                   | Acquired AT Deficient Patients (Heparin Resistance)        | Single Dose                              | Complete; Full                           |

<!-- image -->

13/37 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

No pharmacodynamic studies were carried out either in healthy volunteers or in patients. This was accepted by CHMP, as the physiological action of antithrombin alfa is the inhibition of thrombin and factor Xa in the blood. AT levels in the PK studies reported are measured by activity assays that use thrombin  or  Factor  Xa  inhibition  as  a  measure  for  AT  activity,  which  is  a  surrogate  for  the  final pharmacodynamic action of antithrombin alfa: prevention of clot formation.

<!-- image -->

Pharmacokinetics Methods No specific bioanalytical methods were developed for the determination of antithrombin alfa activity levels.  Assays  used  for  the  determination  of  AT  activity  levels  were  commercially  available antithrombin activity assays based on either thrombin or Factor Xa inhibition activity. The validation experiments, the comparison of the central lab and local lab values in the patients, and the comparative testing between plasma derived and recombinant AT in different test methods, demonstrate that the commercially available assays seem to be accurate, reliable, and suitable for the measurement of AT activity in plasma of patients treated with antithrombin alfa. Despite the several strategies  managed  by the Applicant, it  appears  that  it  has  not  been  possible  to develop a bioanalytical method to specifically measure antithrombin alfa protein levels and/or activity. Since antithrombin alfa cannot be distinguished from native AT, the PK studies are complicated by the presence of a baseline AT activity, with its own variability. This influences the total AT activity used to assess the PK parameters. Therefore PK parameters are both assessed using the total AT activity and the AT activity obtained after subtraction of the average baseline value for a specific patient. In response to CHMP concerns on this matter, the Applicant argued that, as the patients will be dosed to reach  total  plasma  AT  activity  levels  of  80-120%  of  normal,  the  proportion  contributed  by  either antithrombin alfa or native AT is not clinically relevant. This was accepted by CHMP. One  of  the  major  safety  concerns  of  recombinant  products  is  the  potential  for  the  induction  of antibodies  directed  against  the  recombinant  product.  Although  antithrombin  alfa  is  very  similar  in structure  to  hpAT,  it  still  has  some  differences  in  glycosylation.  Therefore,  throughout  the  whole clinical development of antithrombin alfa, both normal healthy volunteers and patients (congenital and acquired  AT  deficient),  receiving  one  or  more  doses  of  antithrombin  alfa,  were  tested  for  the occurrence  of  an  immunological  response  to  antithrombin  alfa.  An  enzyme  linked  immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed to detect an IgG response to antithrombin alfa. Separate assays for both heat  treated  and  non-heat  treated  antithrombin  alfa  were  developed,  since  in  theory,  heat  treatment could result in new epitopes, to which antibodies can be induced, compared to the non-heat treated antithrombin alfa. Both assays were validated in 100 samples of healthy blood donors, providing the normal range of optical density (OD). All patient samples were screened using the ELISA and samples with  an  OD  above  normal  range  were  tested  with  a  confirmative  radioimmunoprecipitation  (RIP) assay (ITR-145-1200 and ITR-144-1200). Absorption, distribution and elimination ATryn is intended for intravenous administration, hence absorption studies are not applicable. Bioavailability Bioavailability studies are not applicable for this application, because recombinant antithrombin alfa is administered intravenously and a 100% bioavailability can be assumed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Bioequivalence

Study GTC AT III 006-00 (first submission), was performed in healthy volunteers to provide evidence that the addition of a heat treatment step in the production process of antithrombin alfa did not have a consequence for the PK characteristics of antithrombin alfa

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study  participants  were  randomized  to  receive  either  75  IU/kg  heat  treated  antithrombin  alfa  and subsequently  28  days  later  75  IU/kg  non-heat  treated  antithrombin  alfa  or  vice  versa.  Twenty-six subjects were enrolled, 3 subjects were excluded due to their withdrawal from the study after receiving only one treatment, 23 subjects completed both treatments and follow-up, including anti-antithrombin alfa antibody assessments.

Bioequivalence has been shown for AUC0-t, AUC0-inf, and Cmax only for the baseline uncorrected data. Half- life of the non-heat treated antithrombin alfa is approximately 4 to 6 hours. The studies with heat- treated antithrombin alfa showed half-lives ranging from 7.7 to 17.7 hours.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

|                                    | non-nanofiltered heat treated (n=14)   | non-nanofiltered heat treated (n=14)   | nanofiltered heat treated (n=14)   | nanofiltered heat treated (n=14)   |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                                    | non-baseline corrected                 | baseline corrected                     | non-baseline corrected             | baseline corrected                 |
| C max (%)                          | 353.6 (38.7)                           | 256.6 (36.6)                           | 343.3 (32.5)                       | 247.2 (30.2)                       |
| AUC 0-24 (%*h)                     | 3545.9 (266.73)                        | 1218.3 (158.04)                        | 3507.3 (291.15)                    | 1201.1 (149.23)                    |
| Incremental recovery (% per IU/kg) | NA                                     | 2.57 (0.366)                           | NA                                 | 2.47 (0.302)                       |
| T 1/2 (h)                          | NA                                     | 3.68 (1.01)                            | NA                                 | 3.97 (1.01.)                       |
| Kel (1/h)                          | NA                                     | 0.200 (0.0481)                         | NA                                 | 0.185 (0.0454)                     |
| Cl (L/hr/kg)                       | NA                                     | 0.00796 (0.00106)                      | NA                                 | 0.00798 (0.00093)                  |

In response to CHMP concerns raised in the LoQ, the applicant has performed a human PK study in healthy volunteers (GTC AT PK 011-04), which was initiated in the United States in order to provide evidence of bioequivalence of the nanofiltered, finished commercial material and the material used in the pivotal clinical trial GTC AT III 01002 (heat-treated product). This study is an open-label, singledose, randomized,  two-period  crossover  trial,  comparing  the  pharmacokinetics  of  intravenous administration of nanofiltered versus non-nanofiltered antithrombin alfa in normal healthy volunteers. For this study, 24 subjects received their first IV administration of study drug in mid September 2004. However, due to a regulatory delay before administration of the second dose to the subjects, results were presented as a parallel study initially. As a result, only PK and safety data obtained from the first administration  of  either  antithrombin  alfa  drug  product  were  available:  primary  (non-baseline corrected) and secondary (baseline corrected) endpoints have been met, the 90% confidence intervals of the ratio for Cmax and AUC0-24 being well within the bioequivalence range of 80% to 125%. In the  response  to  LoI,  the  final  pharmacokinetic  results  of  study  GTC  AT  PK  011-04  have  become available. Out of the 24 healthy volunteers (14 females and 10 males) included at the beginning of the study, a total of fourteen subjects (8 females and 6 males) completed the crossover part of the study. Seven subjects received non-nanofiltered heat-treated antithrombin alfa (reference) first, and nanofiltered heat treated antithrombin alfa (test) second. The other 7 subjects were randomized to the opposite  sequence.  Both  primary  and  secondary  endpoints  have  been  met,  and  bioequivalence  has been  shown,  the  90%  confidence  intervals  of  the  ratio  for  C max and  AUC0-24  being  well  within  the bioequivalence range of 80% to 125%, for the non-baseline corrected and baseline corrected data.  A GCP inspection concluded to the absence of concerns, making these results reliable. Therefore, the applicant's conclusion that bioequivalence between the product used in the clinic and the  to-be-commercialized  product  has  been  confirmed  by  the  analysis  of  the  completed  crossover study is endorsed. Table 3 describes the non-baseline corrected and baseline corrected pharmacokinetic results for both the test and reference product in study GTC AT PK 011-04. Table 3:  Pharmacokinetic Results (Mean (SD)) non-nanofiltered heat treated (n=14) non-baseline corrected baseline corrected Cmax (%) 353.6 (38.7) 256.6 (36.6) AUC0-24 (%*h) 3545.9 (266.73) 1218.3 (158.04) Incremental recovery (% per IU/kg) NA 2.57 (0.366) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study AT III-009-00, provided in the first submission, was an open-label, single dose pharmacokinetic study of 50 and 100 IU/Kg antithrombin alfa in 15 adult patients with confirmed hereditary AT III deficiency, currently not at high risk for or suffering from a thromboembolic event. The two primary pharmacokinetic  parameters,  calculated  based  on  the  observed  (baseline  corrected  and  uncorrected) AT  activity,  Cmax  and  AUC0-t,  had  higher  values  for  the  100  IU/kg  dose,  as  expected  (baseline corrected  data  are  presented  in  table  8  below).  For  baseline  uncorrected  data,  AUC0-t  and  Cmax increased 1.11 and 1.48 fold respectively with a two-fold increase in dose.

<!-- image -->

| Treatment            | # subjects M/F   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   | Mean (SD) PK parameters   |
|----------------------|------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|                      |                  | Incr. Rec. %/IU/k g       | C max %                   | T 1/2 h                   | AUC 0-t %xh               | Cl l/h                    | MRT h                     |
| Recombinant human AT | 2 M/ 13 F        | 2.07 (1.54)               | 132.73 (1.54)             | 10.16 (1.28)              | 587.88 (1.63)             | 0.665 (0.05)              | 8.57 (1.24)               |
| Human plasma AT      | 8                | 1.71 (1.21)               | 113.53 (1.57)             | 91.21 (1.19)              | 6508 (1.63)               | 0.091 (0.00)              | 110.6 (1.19)              |

<!-- image -->

To allow the determination of a dose recommendation for the efficacy study, a population PK analysis, has  been  performed  in  the  first  submission  in  order  to  calculate  an  optimal  dosing  regimen  for antithrombin alfa to obtain plasma AT activity levels within the 80-120% range] The population pharmacokinetic analysis was performed with pharmacokinetic data of antithrombin alfa and of hpAT: -The pharmacokinetics of antithrombin alfa were obtained from the previous study, AT III-009-00, performed in 2001-2002 (see above), with 15 congenital antithrombin deficient patients, following a short intravenous infusion of 50 or 100 IU/kg. -The pharmacokinetics of hpAT were obtained from a study performed in 1984 in the U.S.A. in 8 congenital AT deficient patients, following administration of a short intravenous infusion of 25 225 IU/kg hpAT marketed by Bayer Healthcare, Thrombate III. The  population  PK  analysis  was  performed  with  the  Non-linear  Mixed  Effect  Modeling  language NONMEM. Based on the results of the population PK modelling, the plasma AT activity during and after intravenous infusion was simulated by means of a Monte-Carlo simulation approach in a patient population of 100 subjects for both hpAT and antithrombin alfa. For hpAT, the dose recommendation of the Thrombate III package insert was followed. For antithrombin alfa, simulations were iteratively performed  to  calculate  the  optimal  antithrombin  alfa  infusion  regimen  that  results  in  plasma  AT activity between 80-120 % of the mean population level of endogenous AT in the healthy population. Pharmacokinetic analysis of the results of the two studies, on the basis of non-linear mixed effects modelling,  yielded  the  following  estimates  of  the  population  pharmacokinetic  parameters  for  hpAT and  antithrombin  alfa.  In  addition,  estimates  of  the  inter-individual  variability  in  these  parameters were obtained ( Table 4 ). Table 4: Population PK parameters for rhAT and hpAT Incr. Rec: Incremental recovery - MRT: Mean residence time Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5: Results of Pharmacokinetic Studies with rhAT (Baseline Corrected Data)

| Study Number    | Design                                                                                        | # subjects M/F   | HV/ P      | Treatment (dose)                    | Mean (SD)                      | Mean (SD)           | PK             | parameters        | Mean (SD)                | Mean (SD)      |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------|----------------|-------------------|--------------------------|----------------|
|                 |                                                                                               |                  |            |                                     | Incr. Rec. %/IU/kg             | C max IU/ml         | T 1/2 h        | AUC 0-t IU/ml • h | Cl ml/h/kg               | MRT h          |
| GEN/G 9601      | Randomized, placebo controlled, single dose, dose escalation; non- compartmental analysis     | 20M              | HV         | 10 IU/kg                            | 2.7                            | NA***               | NA***          | NA***             | NA***                    | NA***          |
| GEN/G 9601      | Randomized, placebo controlled, single dose, dose escalation; non- compartmental analysis     | 20M              | HV         | 50 IU/kg                            | 2.7                            | 1.06                | 2.6            | 4.4*              | 10.3                     | 4.1            |
| GEN/G 9601      | Randomized, placebo controlled, single dose, dose escalation; non- compartmental analysis     | 20M              | HV         | 100 IU/kg                           | 2.7                            | 2.27                | 4.4            | 14.2*             | 6.2                      | 6.7            |
| GEN/G 9601      | Randomized, placebo controlled, single dose, dose escalation; non- compartmental analysis     | 20M              | HV         | 150 IU/kg                           | 2.7                            | 3.27                | 4.8            | 22.1*             | 5.9                      | 7.0            |
| GEN/G 9601      | Randomized, placebo controlled, single dose, dose escalation; non- compartmental analysis     | 20M              | HV         | 200 IU/kg                           | 2.7                            | 4.46                | 4.3            | 30.1*             | 5.7                      | 6.3            |
| AT III 006-00   | Randomized, cross-over, heat treated vs. non-heat treated; non-compartmental analysis         | 13 M/ 13 F       | HV         | Heat treated; 75 IU/kg              | 1.601 (0.592) 1.412 (0.272) no | 1.256 (.334) longer | 7.7 (5.1)      | 9.441 (3.043)     | 0.139 (0.094) h -1 ****  | NA             |
| AT III 006-00   | Randomized, cross-over, heat treated vs. non-heat treated; non-compartmental analysis         | 13 M/ 13 F       | HV         | Non-heat treated; 75 U/kg           |                                | 1.179 (.232)        | 5.7 (5.6)      | 8.503 (3.787)     | 0.204 (0.129) h - 1 **** | NA             |
| AT III 009-00   | Two dose, single administration; non- compartmental analysis                                  | 2 M/ 13 F        | P          | 50 IU/kg                            | 2.24 (20.21)**                 | 1.120 (20.21**)     | 11.6 (84.70)** | 5.394 (38.47**)   | 9.6 (34.44)**            | 16.2 (74.90**) |
| AT III 009-00   | Two dose, single administration; non- compartmental analysis                                  | 2 M/ 13 F        | P          | 100 IU/kg                           | 1.94 (14.81)**                 | 1.938 (14.81**)     | 17.7 (60.91)** | 12.898 (.1631**)  | 7.2 (15.29)**            | 20.5 (40.25**) |
| GTC AT PK 11-04 | Randomized, cross-over, heat treated vs. nano- filtered heat treated rhAT, baseline corrected | 6M / 8F          | HV product | 100 IU/kg heat treated              | 2.60 (0.351)                   | 2.573 (0.351)       | 3.68 (1.01)    | 12.11 (0.157)     | 0.00795 (0.00106)        | NA             |
| GTC AT PK 11-04 | Randomized, cross-over, heat treated vs. nano- filtered heat treated rhAT, baseline corrected | 6M / 8F          | HV product | 100 IU/kg Nanofiltered heat treated | 2.47 (0.302)                   | 2.454 (0.302)       | 3.97 (1.01)    | 11.93 (0.157)     | 0.00798 (0.00093)        | NA             |

<!-- image -->

NA: Not Available   HV/P = Human volunteer (HV) or Patient (P) *: AUC0-∞ ; **: Coefficient of Variation (%); ***: Model independent parameters could not be calculated because all values were too close to the variation in baseline AT activity levels; ****: Kel given, no Clearance available

<!-- image -->

17/37 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In order to determine the optimal infusion rate for antithrombin alfa to bring the AT activity in patients into the 80-120% range, simulations with various infusions rates of antithrombin alfa were performed iteratively.  All  PK  parameters,  except  baseline  AT  activity,  were  fixed  according  to  the  population mean estimates derived from the PK model. A dosing schedule employing an initial 15 minutes IV loading infusion followed by a continuous infusion was calculated as being the best way to obtain and maintain the plasma AT activity levels within the target range. Loading dose and maintenance infusion rates were individually calculated using the patients pre-treatment AT activity and body weight. The dosing  schedule  with  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  as  derived  from  the  population  PK  analysis  and simulations, has been tested in the clinical trial AT III 01002 and is the proposed dosing schedule in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

•

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Dose proportionality and time dependencies Study GEN/G9601, presented in the first submission, was a Phase I randomised, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the safety, tolerance, pharmacokinetic profile, and pharmacodynamic effect of single increasing doses of antithrombin alfa when administered intravenously over 30 minutes in 20 healthy subjects.  Model  independent  parameters  T1/2,  MRT  and  clearance  indicate  that  there  is  an  effect  of dose on the clearance of AT III, which appears to saturate at doses &gt;86 IU I kg. At doses &gt;86 IU /kg, T1/2 is 4-5 hours, the MRT is 6-7 hours and the clearance is approximately 6 ml/hr/kg.  Maximum plasma concentrations of AT III increased 0.27 IU/ml for each 10 IU/kg of AT III infused. The results of this study are presented in Table 5 . Special populations No studies were done in special populations. Clinical efficacy A table of studies and enrolled patients has been presented above ( Table 2 ). Dose-response studies and main clinical studies Dose response studies Data derived from the PK study performed in the target population (AT hereditary deficiency) were in addition to the classical PK calculations evaluated by population PK modelling, in order to establish the most optimal dose to be used in the clinical study to evaluate the efficacy of antithrombin alfa as a prophylactic treatment during high risk periods in congenital AT deficient patients (see Pharmacokinetic part of this assessment). Main studies A Phase 3 Study to Assess the Incidence of Deep Vein Thrombosis (DVT) Following Prophylactic Intravenous Administration of Recombinant Human Antithrombin (rhAT) to Hereditary AT Deficient Patients in High risk Situations (GTC AT III 01-002) Study Participants -This study was a multi-center, multinational (Italy, United-Kingdom, France, Germany  and  USA)  open-label  treatment  with  independent  blinded  evaluation  of efficacy data. -15 hereditary AT deficient patients were planned to be enrolled in the study with the expectation that 12 of the patients would be evaluable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Inclusion criteria required that study patients are :

- -congenital AT deficient patients with a personal or family history of venous thrombotic events ;
- -with a history of congenital AT deficiency that includes 2 or more plasma AT activity levels ≤ 60% of normal ;
- -who  are  scheduled  to  have  an  elective  procedure  known  to  be  associated  with  high  risk  for occurrence  of  acute  DVT.  This  includes  surgical  patients  or  pregnant  patients  scheduled  for cesarean section or delivery induction. In addition, hospitalized pregnant patients in active labor were to be allowed entry into the study ;

Loading Dose (IU) = [(100 - X)/2.28] x Patient Weight

-and who are at least 18 years of age, not exceeding 70 years of age. Exclusion criteria: -patients who had a diagnosis of another hereditary APC resistance/Factor V Leiden, Protein S or C deficiency, prothrombin gene mutation (G20210A), or acquired (lupus anticoagulant) thrombophilic disorder ; -patients who were scheduled for a neurosurgical procedure or open-heart surgery ; -patients who had an underlying medical condition, which in the opinion of the investigator could complicate the interpretation of the primary efficacy endpoint ; -patients who had a known allergy to goats or goat products ; -patients who had participated in a study employing an investigational drug within 30 days of the start of their participation in the current trial ; -patients  using  fondaparinux  sodium  or  were  expected  to  be  treated  with  fondaparinux  sodium during the study period. · Treatments Treatment administration -All  patients  were  administered  an  initial  intravenous  (IV)  loading  dose  of  antithrombin  alfa designed to increase AT activity to a level expected to result in a therapeutic range between 80% and 120% of normal. AT activity levels measured prior to the initial dose and patient weight were the basis for the initial intravenous loading dosing. Continuous intravenous infusion of antithrombin alfa, intended to maintain AT activity levels between 80% and 120% of normal, was initiated immediately following administration of the loading dose. -Treatment  was  intended  to  start  approximately  24  hours  prior  to  initiation  of  their  scheduled procedure and continue for a minimum of 3 days and a maximum of 14 days. AT activity levels were used to monitor and adjust dosing. End of treatment was determined when the investigator judged  that  the  patient  was  no  longer  at  high  risk  for  the  occurrence  of  a  thromboembolic complication. -In pregnancy patients not scheduled for caesarean section or induction of delivery, treatment was initiated only when the patient was hospitalized and in active labor. Investigational product -This trial was a single arm open-label treatment, blinded evaluation study. -The product administered was heat treated antithrombin alfa ( batch numbers T8011 and T8015). -The  vials  of  lyophilized  antithrombin  alfa  were  reconstituted  with  10  ml  of  sterile  water  for injection (WFI), to provide a 25mg/ml solution. Selection and timing of dose for each patient For  a  patient  with  a  pretreatment  baseline  AT  activity  of  X%,  the  dose  required  to  increase  and maintain the AT activity level at 100% would be as follows : Medicinal product no longer authorised

The loading dose  was  to  be  given  as  a  15  minutes  infusion  immediately  followed  by  maintenance dosing.

Maintenance Dose (IU/day) = [(100 - X)/0.426] x Patient Weight

Therapeutic Monitoring and Dose Adjustment

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

After the start of the maintenance dose infusion , blood for AT activity levels had to be drawn at 0.5 hour (i.e. this is 45 minutes after the start of the loading dose infusion).

Based on the result of this AT activity level, the infusion rate (and consequently the dose) had to be adjusted using the following guideline :

1.  If  the  AT  activity  level  was  between  80%  and  120%,  no  dose  adjustment  was  needed.  An  AT activity level 4 hours calculated from the time of the previous AT activity blood draw had to be taken.
2.  If  the  AT activity level was less than 80%, the maintenance infusion rate had to be increased by 50% and a blood AT activity level to be taken 0.5 hour after the infusion rate adjustment.

3. If the AT activity level was greater than 120%, the infusion rate had to be decreased by 30% and a blood AT activity level taken 0.5 hour after the infusion rate adjustment. When the next AT activity level was available, based on these results the dose was adjusted again using the following guideline: 1. If the AT activity level was between 80% and 120%, no dose adjustment was needed. -In case this was the second consecutive AT activity level that was within the target range, the next blood sample had to be taken at least every 24 hours later (calculated from the start of treatment) for the duration of treatment with antithrombin alfa. -In case this was the first AT activity level that was within the target range, an AT activity level had to be taken 4 hours calculated from the time of the previous AT activity blood draw. 2.  If  the  AT activity level was less than 80%, the maintenance infusion rate had to be increased by 50% and a blood AT activity level taken 0.5 hour after the infusion rate adjustment. 3. If the AT activity level was greater than 120%, the infusion rate had to be decreased by 30% and a blood AT activity level taken 0.5 hour after the infusion rate adjustment. This  cycle  of  AT  activity  checking  was  repeated  until  there  were  2  consecutive  samples  that showed an activity in the target range of &gt;80% and &lt;120%, and at least every 24 hours afterwards (calculated from the start of treatment) for the duration of treatment with antithrombin alfa. It was possible that the procedure or delivery would influence AT activity levels. Therefore, an additional check of the AT activity level was to be done approximately one hour after the surgery or delivery. In case the activity level was below 80%, a 15 minutes bolus infusion of AT could be given to quickly restore the AT activity level. The dose was calculated with the formula : Bolus Dose (IU) = [(100 - Y)/2.28] x Patient Weight where 'Y' is the patient's post-surgery or delivery AT activity level. In order to check the effect of this, an AT activity level blood sample was recommended 0.5 hour after the bolus dose administration was stopped. All administrations of antithrombin alfa were carefully documented in the patient's CRF. Maintenance dosing was to continue for all patients until the study investigator determined that the patient  was  no  longer  at  high-risk  for  the  occurrence  of  a  thromboembolic  complication  up  to  a maximum of 14 days. It was expected that this would generally occur at the time when the investigator established  effective  chronic  anticoagulation  therapy  and  the  patient  was  mobilized  and  ready  for hospital discharge · Objectives The objectives of this study were: -to  assess  the  incidence  of  deep  venous  thrombosis  (DVT)  following  prophylactic intravenous  administration  of  antithrombin  alfa  to  congenital  AT  deficient  patients during high risk situations for the occurrence of DVT ; Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -to  perform also clinical and diagnostic monitoring for thromboembolic events other than DVT;
- -to assess the safety of antithrombin alfa.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Outcomes/endpoints

## Primary efficacy endpoint :

- -The incidence of acute DVT at any time point after start of study drug treatment as assessed by a blinded, independent central review of duplex ultrasonography and/or venography testing, if the study investigator felt that duplex ultrasound were inconclusive. The incidence of acute DVT is defined  as  the  percentage  of  patients  with  acute  DVT  among  the  total  number  of  evaluable patients.

A detailed statistical plan was developed prior to the completion of patient enrollment. Prior to locking the  database,  decisions  were  made  regarding  the  evaluability  of all  patient  data  for  inclusion  in  the statistical analysis. The rationale for excluding any data from the analysis was prospectively defined, and classification of all or part of a patient's data as non-evaluable was completed and documented before the statistical analysis began. All data collected in this study was documented using summary tables and patient data listings. Demographic, efficacy, and safety data are summarized overall and by subgroup. The subgroups were non-pregnant surgery patients and pregnant patients. For categorical

-The incidence of acute DVT at the last day of dosing, 7 (± 1) days post dosing, and 30 (± 2) days post dosing is also summarized. -The central evaluation of the presence or absence of acute DVT was based on the interpretation by two  independent  reviewers  of  all  scheduled  and  unscheduled  duplex  ultrasounds  and,  when clinically  indicated,  venograms.  Ultrasound  evaluations  included  each  leg  and  5  different  vein segments in each leg. Venography evaluations included each leg and 7 different vein segments in each leg. Potential outcomes for each section by both methodologies included normal, acute DVT, indeterminate,  chronic  changes,  and  not  done.  If  the  two  reviewers  agreed  on  their  initial venogram assessments, the conclusion was final. If the two reviewers disagreed on their initial venogram interpretations for any examination time point, a third reviewer reviewed all venograms for that patient in a blinded fashion. Secondary efficacy endpoints : -the combined incidence of acute DVT and other thromboembolic events after start of study drug treatment as assessed by the independent central review ; -the  incidence of acute DVT after start of study drug treatment as assessed by local (study site) review -the incidence of thromboembolic events other than acute DVT after start of study drug treatment as assessed by local (study site) review ; -the combined incidence of acute DVT and other thromboembolic events after start of study drug treatment as assessed by the local (study site) review. · Sample size -The  applicant  determined  sample  size  for  this  study  based  on  the  'Note  for  Guidance  on  the Clinical  Investigation  of  Plasma  Derived  Antithrombin  Products  (CPMP/BPWG/2220/99)' distributed by CPMP and additional Scientific Advice from the EMEA. -15 hereditary AT deficient patients were planned to be enrolled in the study with the expectation that 12 of the patients would be evaluable. -An interim  clinical  study  report  submitted  with  the  initial  MAA  presented  detailed safety  and  efficacy  data  from  the  first  10  patients  treated  in  the  study.  The  patient enrollment cut-off date for this report was 4 August 2003. · Randomisation No randomisation of patients was performed. All study patients received antithrombin alfa. · Blinding (masking) All  patients  were  to  receive  antithrombin  alfa.  However,  an  independent  review  of  the  serial imaging scans was performed in a manner such that the independent evaluators were blinded to the treating physician`s assessment of treatment or treatment outcome. · Statistical methods Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

variables,  frequencies  and  percentages  are  presented.  For  continuous  variables,  descriptive  statistics (n, mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum) are presented. The statistical analysis of the data derived from this study was to be performed using SAS Version 8.0 or higher.

## Results

<!-- image -->

· Participant flow Fourteen (14) patients having documented hereditary AT deficiency (HD) were enrolled based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria outlined in the study protocol and completed their 30-day post dosing visit. · Recruitment The first  patient  entered  study  GTC  ATIII  01002 on December 2, 2002, the last patient entered on November 3, 2003 and completed on February 16, 2004. · Conduct of the study -Amendment 1 was to correct the calculations for the loading dose and continuous infusion rate. No patients were enrolled before the implementation of Amendment 1. -Amendment  2  was  implemented  to  clarify  which  data  were  to  be  obtained  regarding  the outcome  of  the  pregnancy  (including  the  status  of  the  newborn)  and  surgical  procedure  and correct some inconsistencies in the protocol. For all patients included in the study, the additional data that were requested in Amendment 2 were collected. -Amendment 3 was implemented to include an additional safety assessment intended to identify potential bleeding events and include an extension of the follow-up period to 90 days after last study drug administration (instead of 30 days). · Baseline data / AT Activity levels Of the 14 patients enrolled, 5 were surgery patients and 9 were delivery patients. Patients` ages ranged from 21 to 74 years, with a mean of 36.7 years. As expected the mean age of delivery patients (29.7) was lower than that of surgery patients ( 49.4). Two patients were male and 12 patients were female. Four of the surgical patients were scheduled for prosthesis implants involving the hip; the fifth was scheduled for a bilateral breast reduction. Table 6 provides  the  data  necessary  for  calculating  the  initial  bolus  dose,  the  initial  dose  that  was administered,  in  parentheses  the  dose  that  was  to  be  given  based  on  the  dosing  formula,  and  the procedure for which each of the patients had been scheduled. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Table 6: Patient Weight and Local Laboratory Baseline AT Activity Levels (Safety Population)

| Patient Number            | Patient Weight (kg)   | Local Laboratory Baseline AT Activity Level (%)   | Initial Bolus Dose IU Given (Calculated)   |
|---------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Surgery Patients (N = 5)  |                       |                                                   |                                            |
| Patient 1601              | 84                    | 37*                                               | 2500 (2321)                                |
| Patient 3001              | 85                    | 42                                                | 2000 (2162)                                |
| Patient 3002              | 57                    | 53                                                | 1425 (1174)                                |
| Patient 3003              | 57                    | 62                                                | 1000 (950)                                 |
| Patient 3501              | 82                    | 57                                                | 1726 (1546)                                |
| Mean                      | 73                    | 50                                                | 1730 (1631)                                |
| Median                    | 82                    | 53                                                | 1726 (1546)                                |
| Delivery Patients (N = 9) |                       |                                                   |                                            |
| Patient 0401              | 75                    | 33                                                | 442 + 2400 (2203)                          |
| Patient 1501              | 105                   | 52                                                | 2210 (2210)                                |
| Patient 2201              | 67                    | 44                                                | 1800 (1647)                                |
| Patient 2401              | 61                    | 38 longer                                         | 1659 (1659)                                |
| Patient 3401              | 66                    | 55                                                | 1303 (1303)                                |
| Patient 4001              | 84                    | 45                                                | 1989 (2026)                                |
| Patient 8101              | 97                    | 33**                                              | 3900 (2888)                                |
| Patient 8102              | 79                    | 58*** no                                          | 2000 (1455)                                |
| Patient 8301              | 77                    | 53                                                | 1564 (1587)                                |
| Mean                      | 79                    | 46                                                | 2141 (1664)                                |
| Median                    | 77                    | 45                                                | 1989 (1659)                                |

<!-- image -->

In most of the cases, the doses actually given differ from the calculated doses, particularly for delivery patients. Also, the individual response to the proposed therapeutic dose regimen for antithrombin alfa varies extremely. One to fifteen dose adjustments have been needed among the delivery patients and 1 to 8 among the surgery patients. The starting dose ranges from 20 to 81 IU/kg and the further daily injections  between  79  and  451  IU/kg.  For  three  patients  in  the  delivery  group,  despite  increased repeated doses of antithrombin alfa, the target of a 80 % mimimal AT III activity has been reached with difficulties.

* A baseline value (local laboratory) taken approximately 45 minutes later was 118% but was not used by the Study Investigator for calculation of the initial bolus dose. ** Screening value taken approximately 3 days prior to initiation of rhAT administration. *** Screening value taken approximately 1 day prior to initiation of rhAT administration. Patient weight and AT activity level measured at Baseline were used to calculate the initial bolus dose for each patient according to the following formula : Initial Bolus Dose (IU) = [(100 - Baseline AT Activity)/2.28] x Patient Weight Patients received antithrombin alfa treatment for periods of time ranging from 3.0 to 18.6 days and received total  doses  from  37,884  IU  up  to  227,817  IU.  Infusion  rates  ranged  from  3360  IU  per  24 hours to 64800 IU per 24 hours for varying periods of time. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  therapeutic  schedule  used  for  the  pivotal  study,  based  upon  the  population  pharmacokinetic analysis performed from PK data in patients not in high risk situations, did not take into account the realities  of  the  intended  use.  Therefore,  further  to  the  CHMP  LOQ  the  Applicant  has  performed

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

additional  pharmacokinetic  analyses  from  study  GTC  AT  III  01002.  These  revealed  that  the  initial pharmacokinetic  model  overestimated  the  expected  plasma  AT  activity  levels  in  pregnant  women. This was due to a higher Clearance and Volume of Distribution as compared to non-pregnant patients. Therefore the dosing regimen applied in the study GTC AT III 01002 was not appropriate for delivery patients. For surgical patients the model predicted the AT activity very well.

## · Numbers analysed

<!-- image -->

Per Protocol (PP) population was used for the evaluation of antithrombin alfa efficacy and includes all patients who satisfy the following criteria (efficacy-evaluable): -Have congenital AT deficiency with a personal or family history of venous thrombotic events (Protocol Inclusion Criteria 1). -Have a history of congenital AT deficiency that includes 2 or more plasma AT activity levels ≤ 60% of normal (Protocol Inclusion Criteria 2). -Have at least one evaluable post baseline ultrasound in the period up to 7 days post dosing after last study drug administration. -Do not have a diagnosis of another hereditary APC resistance/Factor V Leiden, Protein S or C deficiency, prothrombin gene mutation (G20210A), or acquired (lupus anticoagulant) thrombophilic disorder. -Do not have an acute DVT diagnosed at baseline. Of  the  14  patients  who  received  antithrombin  alfa,  one  patient  was  excluded  from  the  efficacy evaluation since an acute DVT was detected by central evaluation at baseline ultrasound. One patient (Patient 1601) had a protocol deviation based on age (74-years-of-age). However, as this is not considered a protocol violation, this patient was not excluded from the evaluation of efficacy. Patients received antithrombin alfa treatment for periods of time ranging from 3.0 to 18.6 days and received total  doses  from  37,884  IU  up  to  227,817  IU.  Infusion  rates  ranged  from  3360  IU  per  24 hours to 64800 IU per 24 hours for varying periods of time. · Outcomes and estimation Primary efficacy endpoint The  incidence  in  the  PP  population  of  acute  DVT  diagnosed  by  central  evaluation  is  summarized overall and by subgroup in Table 10. The incidence of acute DVT on the last day of dosing, 7 (± 1) days post dosing, and 30 (± 2) days post dosing are also summarized in Table 7 . Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7: Incidence of Acute DVT Based on Independent Central Review (PP Population)

| Time Point            | Evaluable Patients 1 N   | Patients Having Acute DVT N (%)   |
|-----------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Any Time Point        |                          |                                   |
| Overall               | 13                       | 2 (15.4)                          |
| Surgery Patients      | 5                        | 1 (20.0)                          |
| Delivery Patients     | 8                        | 1 (12.5)                          |
| Last Day of Dosing    |                          |                                   |
| Overall               | 12                       | 1 (8.3)                           |
| Surgery Patients      | 4                        | 1 (25.0) 2                        |
| Delivery Patients     | 8                        | 0 (0.0)                           |
| 7 Days Post Dosing    |                          |                                   |
| Overall               | 13                       | 2 (15.4)                          |
| Surgery Patients      | 5                        | 1 (20.0) 2                        |
| Delivery Patients     | 8                        | 1 (12.5) 3                        |
| 30 Days Post Dosing * |                          |                                   |
| Overall               | 2                        | 0 (0.0)                           |
| Delivery Patients     | 2                        | 0 (0.0)                           |

<!-- image -->

* Unscheduled (not per protocol) ultrasound between 7-30 days post dosing 1 Patients who were not evaluable by independent central review (Patient 1601 on last day of dosing) or who had an acute DVT at Baseline (Patient 2201) are excluded. 2 Patient 3003 (left total hip replacement) 3 Patient 8301 (DVT detected 7 days after discontinuation of rhAT treatment) Among  the  13  evaluable  patients,  2  patients  (15.4%)  had  an  acute  DVT  diagnosed  by  central evaluation. A pregnant patient (Patient 8301; caesarean section) experienced acute DVT 7 days after discontinuation  of  antithrombin  alfa  (in  this  patient,  the  assessment  differed  between  the  central reviewers  and  local  assessor).  A  non-pregnant  patient  (Patient  3003)  had  an  acute  DVT  diagnosed during antithrombin alfa dosing by central and local review. Secondary efficacy endpoint 9 Central Review: Combined Incidence of Acute DVT and Other Thromboembolic Events As previously discussed there was only one delivery patient (Patient 8301) and one surgery patient (Patient  3003)  who  had  an  acute  DVT  or  other  thromboembolic  event  based  on  the  central independent review. 9 Local  Review  (Study  Site):  Individual  and  Combined  Incidence  of  Acute  DVT  and  Other Thromboembolic Events Local evaluation for thromboembolic events included clinical and diagnostic imaging assessments. Of the 13 evaluable patients, 1 patient (patient 3003) had an acute DVT diagnosed on day 13 of treatment and 1 patient (patient 3501) had crural vein thrombosis diagnosed by the ultrasound performed at day 7 after stop of antithrombin alfa treatment at local review, but not at central review. Both patients had had hip replacement surgery. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  only  one  of  the  3  cases  described  above  an  asymptomatic  DVT  was  diagnosed  and  treated  by antithrombotic  therapy  in  order  to  prevent  clinical  symptoms  of  DVT  (patient  3003).  In  one  case (patient 3501) the finding was regarded not relevant, and the other (patient 8301) was diagnosed only at central review, a week after the administration of study treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Data illustrating antithrombin alfa dosing and AT activitly levels for each patient taken prior to, during and post-treatment with antithrombin alfa are given in the study report.

## Clinical studies in special populations

No studies were performed.

-

-

Supportive studies An  Assessment  of  the  Incidence  of  DVT  Following  Prophylactic  Administration  of  rhAT  to Hereditary AT Deficient Patients in High-risk Situations; A Compassionate Use Program (GTC AT III 011-003) This study describes the clinical course of 5 congenital AT deficient patients undergoing 6 surgical procedures treated under a compassionate use program in the US. Safety and efficacy data on these patients  have  been  obtained  retrospectively,  using  a  standardised  data  collection  protocol.  Patients were all prophylactically treated with antithrombin alfa during and just after a high risk period for the occurrence of thromboembolic events. Efficacy was assessed clinically and in 5 of the 6 procedures through ultrasonography. Safety follow-up up to approximately 30 days post treatment included the occurrence  of  adverse  events  and  the  assessment  of  the  immunogenicity  of  antithrombin  alfa  by testing for the presence of anti-antithrombin alfa antibodies. Neither DVT nor any other thromboembolic event was diagnosed based on clinical symptoms or by duplex ultrasound.  In addition, dosing with antithrombin alfa resulted in an increase in AT activity level close to and within the normal AT activity range. Studies in acquired AT deficiency were performed, in patients with heparin resistance scheduled for coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) with the use of cardio-pulmonary bypass (CPB) machines. Patients treated with heparin prior to the CABG procedure often show a diminished response to the large heparin dose administered to prevent clotting in the extracorporeal circulation. This diminished response  is  due  to  the  consumption  of  AT  during  prolonged  heparin  use  prior  to  surgery.  In  these studies  the  effect  of  antithrombin  alfa  on  the  activated  clotting  time  (ACT),  a  marker  of  the  anticoagulative effects of heparin, was investigated. The general design of these studies was as follows : Patients  received  a  standard  dose  of  heparin,  and  when  the  ACT  did  not  reach  the  required  value, patients  received  a  standard  dose  of  antithrombin  alfa  or  placebo.  Efficacy  was  assessed  by  the response of the ACT value to the administration of antithrombin alfa (percentage of patients reaching the required ACT value). A total of 189 patients were enrolled in 4 studies : -GTC AT 96-0801: A Phase I-II Open, Dose Escalation Study of the Safety  of  Recombinant Human  (transgenic)  Antithrombin  III  in  Patients  Scheduled  for  Primary  Cardiac  Surgery Requiring Cardiopulmonary Bypass  (36 acquired AT deficient patients ; 10, 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, 200 IU/kg or placebo) GTC AT 97-0502: A Phase III, Double Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Multi-Center Study of the Safety and Efficacy of rh AT III in Heparin Resistant Patients Scheduled for Cardiac Surgery Requiring  Cardiopulmonary  Bypass  (54  acquired  AT  deficient  patients;  either  75  IU/kg antithrombin alfa or placebo) Medicinal product no longer authorised

- GTC AT 97-0504: A Phase III, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study of the Safety and Efficacy of rh AT III in Heparin Resistant Patients Scheduled for Cardiac Surgery Requiring  Cardiopulmonary  Bypass    (52  acquired  AT  deficient  patients;  either  75  IU/kg antithrombin alfa or placebo)
- -GTC  AT  97-0903:  A  Phase  III,  Double  Blind,  Randomized  Study  Comparing  Transgenic Antithrombin III and Plasma Antithrombin III in Patients Undergoing Elective Cardiac Surgery Requiring  Cardiopulmonary  Bypass    (47  acquired  AT  deficient  patients;  compared  a  single

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

administration  of  two  different  dosages  of  antithrombin  alfa  (75  IU/kg  and  15  IU/kg)  with  a single administration of 15 IU/kg human plasma derived AT).

These four studies are conducted in a patient population different from the intended clinical population claimed  in  the  SPC.  These  patients  display  an  acquired,  and  not  hereditary  AT  III  deficiency. Furthermore, most of these patients have a median age &gt; 63 years. Therefore these studies could only be taken into account for the safety evaluation, but not for the efficacy evaluation.

<!-- image -->

A major issue was the large variability in dose requirements during treatment of pregnant patients with ATryn and the difficulties  to  maintain  therapeutic  AT  levels  in  some  of  these  patients.  In  order  to address  this,  the  applicant  proposed  in  the  submission  of  the  responses  to  the  Consolidated  List  of Questions  (day  121)  a  new  dosing  regimen  and  therapeutic  monitoring  schedule  for  the  pregnant patients).  As  no  prospective  clinical  data  had  been  provided  regarding  the  newly  proposed  dosing schedule,  the  Applicant  agreed  with  the  CHMP  that  since  this  has  not  been  tested  in  a  controlled

Discussion on clinical efficacy In total, 19 hereditary AT deficient patients (14 patients from study GTC AT III 01002 and 5 patients in the compassionate-use treatment GTC AT III 011003) were treated during and after 20 high risk situations: -the Compassionate Use Study (GTC AT III 011-003), retrospective collection data performed on 5 patients (6 treatments) with non-heat treated antithrombin alfa administered by multiple daily infusions (due to a shortage of hpAT in the US), -the  Efficacy  Study  (GTC  AT  III  01002),  prospective  study  performed  on  14  hereditary  AT deficient  surgery  (n=5)  and  delivery  (n=9)  patients  with  heat  treated  antithrombin  alfa administered  by  continuous  infusion  and  central  independent  evaluation  of  standardised ultrasound examinations for detection of DVT. The incidence of DVT was assessed both locally and  centrally  by  an  independent  group  of  reviewers.  One  patient  in  the  Efficacy  Study  was excluded since an acute DVT was detected by central evaluation at baseline ultrasound. Patients received  antithrombin  alfa  treatment  for  periods  of  time  ranging  from  3.0  to  18.6  days  and received total doses from 37,884 IU up to 227,817 IU. Infusion rates ranged from 3360 IU per 24 hours to 64800 IU per 24 hours for varying periods of time. According to the  study  GTC  AT  III  01002  protocol,  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  defined  as 'incidence of acute DVT at any time point after start of study drug treatment as assessed by a blinded, independent central review of duplex ultrasonography and/or venography testing'. In this context, 3 out of 13 efficacy-evaluable patients thromboses were diagnosed by ultrasonography (2 asymptomatic DVT, confirmed by central review, and 1 superficial vein thrombosis). Nevertheless, in only one of these 3 cases, an asymptomatic DVT (patient no. 3003) was diagnosed and treated by antithrombotic therapy  in  order  to  prevent  clinical  symptoms  of  DVT.  In  one  case  the  finding  was  regarded  not relevant, and the other was diagnosed only at central review, weeks after the administration of study treatment. The  discrepancies  observed  between  local  and  central  review  questioned  the  relevance  of  central examination, as no DVT occurred in the follow-up of patients with acute DVT reported by central review. In addition, two of the three ultrasound findings were made at seven days after the stop of treatment with antithrombin alfa (with a half-life of approximately 10 hours). In  the  meta-analysis  of  low  molecular  weight  heparin  and  unfractionated  heparin  in  thrombosis prophylaxis published by Koch et al. in 2001 provided by the Applicant, an incidence of DVT of about 27%,  especially  in  orthopaedic  surgery  was  reported  in  the  large  comparative  studies  in  noncongenital AT deficient patients treated with currently approved effective anticoagulants (LMWH and heparin). Therefore, in the applicant's opinion efficacy of antithrombin alfa has been established in patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency for the prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis and thromboembolism in clinical risk situations. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

environment  of  a  clinical  study,  this  can  not  be  supported  yet  for  use  in  the  marketed  situation. Improvements in the dosing regimen for pregnant women and the therapeutic drug monitoring need to be confirmed in a prospective manner before being applied in clinical practice. The applicant therefore agreed to limit the indication for use of antithrombin alfa to non-pregnant surgical patients with the dosing and therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) schedule as applied in the pivotal study where it has shown to maintain the AT-activity well in the desired therapeutic range.

<!-- image -->

From the initial evaluation several points were highlighted: -In the context of limiting the indication for use of antithrombin alfa to surgical patients, the assessment of the clinical efficacy of ATryn took into account the data resulting from the high-risk surgical situation in the pivotal study for non-pregnant patients only, i.e. only 5 surgical patients among 14 patients in the pivotal study GTC AT III 01002. Therefore the  initial  evaluation  concluded  that,  for  the  proposed  indication  (i)  efficacy  has  been investigated  in  only  5  surgical  patients,  a  very  small  number  that  makes  efficacy assessment impossible, (ii) this is far from the level of 12 patients recommended by the EMEA  scientific  advice  and,  (iii)  not  in  accordance  with  the  Note  for  Guidance CPMP/BPWG/2220/99. The results from the five patients treated in the compassionateuse program must be considered as a supportive data set, as in this retrospective collection of  data  no  well  defined  dosing  instruction,  nor  the  desired  targeted  AT  level  could  be given. -Two out of the three thromboses diagnosed by ultrasonography were in surgical patients and  the  only  case  needing  an  antithrombotic  therapy,  in  order  to  prevent  clinical symptoms of DVT, was administered in a hip replacement surgical patient. -While the Applicant stated, that the original TDM schedule, applied in the pivotal study, should be improved in order to provide a simpler and more practical approach, the original TDM (with very close and heavy monitoring) as applied in the pivotal study, would need to  be  followed,  as  long  as  no  prospective  clinical  data  have  been  provided  with  the 'improved' TDM in surgical patients (proposed by the Applicant in the response to the CHMP List of Questions - 2 nd submission-). -Despite the fact that bioequivalence between the product used in the clinic and the to-becommercialized product has been confirmed in healthy volunteers (see pharmacokinetics part), the proposed finished commercial product - nanofiltered antithrombin alfa - was not yet used in the patient population. In order to provide appropriate data, the CHMP considered that the post-marketing safety monitoring study  proposed  by  the  Applicant  should  be  performed  before  any  marketing  authorization  of  the product. The aim of this study was to provide sufficient prospective clinical efficacy and safety data in surgical and pregnant patients population using the finished intended to market product, nanofiltered antithrombin alfa.  This study should include patients with confirmed hereditary AT deficiency in a high  risk  situation,  prospectively  investigating  a  the  new  dosing  regimen  for  pregnant  women,  and updated  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  for  all  treated  patients.  The  inclusion  of  patients  who  have previously been treated with antithrombin alfa, would be encouraged, enabling to obtain safety data on repeat  administration  of  antithrombin  alfa  in  patients.  According  to  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  the clinical  investigation  of  plasma  derived  antithrombin  products  (CPMP/BPWG/2220/99), which also applies  for  recombinant  products  with  regard  to  efficacy,  the  occurrence  of  deep  vein  thrombosis should be actively assessed by objective measures, such as doppler sonography. Diagnostic imaging should therefore be performed in each patient at baseline, at the last day of dosing and 7 days post dosing, and, if needed, additionally at 42 days in order to follow up any signs and symptoms indicative of a thromboembolic event. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

At  the  February  2006  CHMP  meeting  the  CHMP  issued  a  negative  opinion  for  ATryn  in  surgical patients  with  congenital  antithrombin  deficiency  for  the  prophylaxis  of  deep  vein  thrombosis  and thromboembolism in clinical risk situations, i.e. during the peri-surgical period.

One ground for refusal, related to the evaluation of efficacy, was that 'efficacy data within the claimed indication are limited to only 5 patients (5 surgical, non-pregnant patients out of 14 patients treated

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

overall  with  antithrombin  alfa  in  the  single  pivotal  study  submitted)  making  an  assessment  of  the efficacy impossible and also being below the number recommended by the EMEA scientific advice (12  patients).  The  CHMP  felt  that  the  data  obtained  in  patients  treated  in  the  compassionate  use programme  and  at  childbirth  could  not  support  the  results  obtained  in  the  5  surgical  patients. Furthermore, the CHMP considered that ATryn could not be granted a marketing authorisation under exceptional  circumstances,  as  proposed  by  the  applicant  during  the  oral  explanation,  due  to  the absence of objective and verifiable reasons'.

<!-- image -->

In  the  re-examination  documentation,  the  applicant  argumented  that  all  patients,  pregnant  and  nonpregnant,  from  the  pivotal  trial  and  the  Compassionate  Use  programme    (19  in  total)  should  be considered for the evaluation of efficacy. With regard to the dosing recommendations, the applicant refers to the well established use of antithrombin treatment in patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency, and states that in the development of Atryn, a similar approach was taken as for human plasma  derived  AT  concentrates,  ie  initial  dose  recommendation  followed  by  individualised  dose titration based on actual plasma AT levels. While it may be possible to improve the dosing paradigm (and  hence  dosing  convenience  for  the  treatment  of  pregnant  women),  safety  and  efficacy  were demonstrated when patients were treated using the dosing instructions specified in the pivotal trial. The  difference  in  dosing  convenience  between  surgical  and  pregnant  patients  is  attributable  to  a difference in volume of distribution and clearance. The applicant believes that the indication should be congenital deficiency as a whole, and that there are  no  grounds  to  regard  pregnant  congenital  AT  deficient  patients  as  a  separate  subtype,  in  which safety and efficacy has not been established. The indication proposed by the applicant together with the grounds for the re-examination (SPC section 4.1. Therapeutic indication) is : 'ATryn is indicated in patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency for the prophylaxis of deep vein thrombosis and thromboembolism  in  clinical  risk  situations  (especially  during  surgery  or  during  the  peri-partum period),  in  association  with  heparin  if  indicated.'    Text  to  indicate  that  there  may  be  differences between  surgical  and  pregnant  patients,  requiring  more  frequent  monitoring  in  pregnant  women treated with Atryn, was proposed for SPC section 4.6 (Pegnancy and lactation). The CHMP considered that the indication proposed by the applicant together with the grounds for the re-examination differs from that which was subject of the negative CHMP opinion of February, but is in line with the originally proposed wording at the time of submission of the Marketing Authorisation Application.  The limited experience in the target population (non-pregnant surgery patients on one hand, and patients in the peri-partum period on the other hand), along with the large variability in dose requirements  during  treatment  of  pregnant  patients  with  ATryn  and  the  difficulties  to  maintain therapeutic AT levels in some of these patients remained a concern to CHMP. The CHMP consulted an ad-hoc expert group. The view expressed by the consulted experts during the ad-hoc expert meeting was that the surgical subpopulation (5 patients from the single pivotal trial), considered  separately,  was  insufficient  to  establish  the  efficacy  of  ATryn  in  the  surgical  setting. Likewise, the 9 peri-partum patients considered separately were insufficient to establish efficacy in that  clinical  setting.  However,  in  the  opinion  of  the  experts,  for  the  evaluation  of  efficacy  the important issue is the thrombotic risk, and not the specific situation determining such a risk (surgery or delivery). As the level of thrombotic risk for both clinical settings is high, and in both situations the target  AT  level  is  the  same,  in  the  experts  view  the  entire  population  from  the  pivotal  trial  can  be considered as a whole for the evaluation of efficacy. Therefore the experts agreed that the available data would allow for proper dosing recommendations in non-pregnant surgical patients, and this view was accepted by CHMP. Whether the available data would be sufficient for use in pregnant patients was questioned by some experts and by the CHMP members, in view of the uncertainties with the dose recommendations in this group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Another  ground  for  refusal  (related  to  both  efficacy  and  safety)  was  that  'the  proposed  finished commercial product, nanofiltered antithrombin alfa, was not the one used in the patient population'. The  applicant's  response  to  this  point  was  that  although  nanofiltered  ATryn  was  not  used  in  the pivotal  clinical  trial,  no  material  differences  were  observed  in  the  physico-chemical  and  activity properties  between  the  nanofiltered  and  non-nanofiltered  product  (used  in  the  pivotal  trial).    No

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

material  differences  were  shown  in  a  nonclinical  pharmacokinetic  and  biodistribution  study  in  rats. Furthermore, a two-period cross-over human pharmacokinetic study was performed which demonstrated comparable safety and bioequivalence between the products.

In conclusion, in the opinion of CHMP only 14 subjects have received the nanofiltered antithrombin alfa  (pharmacokinetic  study),  none  of  them  repeated  doses.  Data  obtained  in  this  clinical  trial  can support that the pharmacokinetic profile of both products is similar but do not allow to conclude that the clinical safety, particularly in terms of immunogenicity, or clinical efficacy is the same. Changes in  the  manufacturing  process  of  biotechnology-derived  proteins  may  have  an  influence  on  the occurrence of an immunogenic response. CHMP therefore requests that safety and efficacy data of the nanofiltered antithrombin alfa should be provided; these should be obtained post-authorisation from the ongoing clinical trial and from a post-authorisation surveillance program.

<!-- image -->

Clinical safety Patient exposure All patients who took at least one dose of the product are included in the safety analysis. A total of 217 subjects  were  included,  exposed  to  the  recombinant  product,  of  which  35  had  congenital  AT deficiency and 118 had acquired deficiency (relating to supportive studies and are not relevant to this application). The remainder included healthy volunteers. All 35 congenital AT III deficient patients received antithrombin alfa. Among them, 9 patients received 50 IU/kg, 6 patients received 100 IU/kg, 14 patients received continuous antithrombin alfa infusion, and  6 patients received multiple antithrombin alfa infusions over multiple days. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths Congenital AT deficient population In the congenital AT deficient population, the most frequently reported adverse events were anaemia (17% of patients), hypotension (14% of patients), nausea (14% of patients), and abdominal pain /post operative  pain/  fever  (each  11%  of  patients).  Severity  of  adverse  events  was  generally  mild  to moderate  (45.5%  and  27.3%  of  the  patients  with  at  least  one  adverse  event  respectively).  Adverse events were severe in 9.1%, and unknown in 18.2% of the patients with at least one adverse event.  No dose relationship was seen for any adverse event in the congenital AT deficient patients. One patient experienced bronchospasm and rash erythematous at the second administration. One patient in a PK study  reported  one  related  adverse  event  coded  to  Preferred  Term    'Pruritis'.  This  event  was considered not serious with mild severity. Following review of the case this was considered to be an 'Injection Site Reaction'. Acquired AT deficiency population In the acquired AT deficiency population, the most frequently reported adverse events in antithrombin alfa  treated  patients  were  post  operative  pain  (43%  of  patients),  hypotension  (24%  of  patients), haemorrhage, Not Otherwise Specified (NOS, 24% of patients), fever (20% of patients), fibrillation atrial  (14%  of  patients),  nausea  (13%  of  patients),  pleural  effusion  (12%  of  patients),  hypertension (11% of patients), anaemia (11% of patients), hyperglycaemia (10% of patients). Healthy volunteers Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the initially submitted healthy volunteer studies, the most commonly reported adverse events were headache (13% of patients), dizziness (11% of patients), and injection site reaction (11% of patients). Related  adverse  events  reported  in  the  healthy  volunteers  were  injection  site  reaction  (3.1%  of patients),  injection  site  pain  (4.7%  of  patients),  dizziness  (4.7%  of  patients),  headache  (7.8%  of patients),  and  nausea  (6.3%  of  patients).  Chest  pain,  hot  flushes,  pallor,  and  gastrointestinal  reflux were all reported only once.

In the human PK bioequivalence study (GTC AT PK 011-04 1) performed in healthy volunteers in order to compare the heat-treated product with the heat-treated nanofiltered product, the adverse event profile for the two treatments are very similar, and no apparent safety concerns have arisen with any of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the two test drugs. Also, in the serum samples taken to determine an immune response to antithrombin alfa, no IgG or IgM antibodies directed against antithrombin alfa were found.

## Immunogenicity

In response to concerns expressed by the  CHMP  regarding  the  immunological  potential  of antithrombin alfa (including the limited duration of follow-up, lack of data on repeated exposure and antibody testing methodology), the applicant showed that the follow-up of subjects postadministration varies from 23 days to 90 days in patients and from 14 to 90 days after a break of 5 months (cross-over PK study) in healthy volunteers. For the repeated administration concern, in the human volunteer PK cross-over study, comparing the to-be-commercialized nanofiltered, heat-treated, product with the heat-treated, non-nanofiltered product (GTC AT PK 011-04), the follow-up for antiantithrombin alfa antibodies and AT-activity levels was until 90 days after the second administration (5  months  after  the  first  part  of  the  study).  All  the  retained  samples,  previously  tested  only  for  the presence of IgG antibodies, were tested again in the newly developed IgG antibody test, as well as with the new IgM assay, both fully validated.  No IgG, nor IgM antibodies against antithrombin alfa were detected in these retained samples.

<!-- image -->

Therefore, on the basis that among the different studies performed in healthy volunteers and patients with antithrombin alfa, no inhibiting antibodies to antithrombin alfa have been detected, nor events that might indicate an immunological reaction, the applicant requested the repeated administration of antithrombin alfa to be allowed. In order to warn treating physicians to be cautious in case of repeated administration  of  antithrombin  alfa,  since  the  experience  is  limited,  the  following  statement  was proposed  in  section  4.8  of  the  SmPC:  'No  antibodies  have  been  detected  up  to  90  days  following treatment with ATryn. However, the experience with repeated doses is limited.' Despite reassuring data from the bioequivalence PK study, regarding the repeat-use of antithrombin alfa, the CHMP considers that the available experience concerns 38 subjects of which 37 are healthy volunteers and only one hereditary AT deficient patient, included in the compassionate use protocol. From an immunological point of view, it appears very difficult to extrapolate limited safety data from use  of  the  nanofiltered  antithrombin  alfa  in  healthy  volunteers  (14)  to  congenital  AT  deficiency patients, where their deficiency in AT could play a role in the susceptibility to develop inhibiting antiantithrombin alfa antibodies. In haemophilia A and B, it is well known that mutations resulting in the absence or severe truncation of the factor VIII / factor IX proteins are associated with highest risk for inhibitor formation, indicating that a major driving force in inhibitor development is the presentation of a novel antigen to the patient's immune system. During the oral explanation held on 21 February 2006, the applicant `s argumentation that the total absence of normal factor VIII / factor IX proteins presents a different situation from hereditary (heterozygous) antithrombin deficiency, where AT levels are usually between 40%- 50% of normal was accepted. Another aspect regarding immunogenicity came from the Quality Assessment Report, which clearly stated  that  'the  amount  of  goat  AT,  which  may  potentially  cause  cross-reactive  immune  response against human AT, cannot be quantified as the level is below the limit of detection of 2.5ng/mg. Based on  process  performance,  gAT  may  be  estimated  to  be  near  0.3µg/250mg  dose,  which  is  below  the limit  of  detection  of  the  method  (LOD  correspond  to  0.625µg  /  250  mg  dose).    The  presence  of residual goat AT in the product is drawn to the attention of the clinical assessors.' The clinical assessors referred to a Letter to the Editor published by L.T. Spencer et al. in NEJM of the May 12, 2005. In this article, the authors describe that they observed systemic antibody responses to non  human  protein  that  was  present  in  very  low  concentrations  (&lt;100  ppm)  in  a  sheep-derived transgenic human alpha-1 antitrypsin formulation: 24% of patients with a positive response to sheep alpha-1 antitrypsin, and 78% of patients with a positive response to sheep alpha-1 antichymotrypsin. Among subjects who withdrew from the study (4), there was a possible relationship between drugrelated adverse events (dyspnea and a decline in lung function) and a high-titer antibody response. The clinical  symptoms  (exertional  dyspnea  and  hypoxemia)  and  secondary  antibody  responses  that occurred in the one subject who participated in both studies suggest that re-exposure could result in intolerance of non human proteins for therapeutic use. Medicinal product no longer authorised

These findings, reported by L.T. Spencer, raised concerns for ATryn application, as the manufacture concept appears similar and the amount of contaminant non-human proteins observed compatible with those  expected  in  the  Quality  Assessment  report  for  ATryn,  i.e.  near  0.3µg/250mg  dose,  which  is below the limit of detection of the method.   Furthermore, as stated in the Letter to the Editor, these

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

findings  underline  the  concern  of  re-exposure  to  contaminant  non-human  proteins  and  the  possible resulting intolerance.

Until  the  time  of  the  Day  210  rapporteurs`s  assessment  report  in  January  2006,  no  tests  had  been developed by the Applicant in order to detect potential immunogenicity to contaminant goat proteins, and notably goat AT, in subjects receiving antithrombin alfa.

In the oral explanation held on 21 February 2006, the applicant presented summary of results from a new  immunodot  blot  assay  for  antibodies  to  goat  AT  and  goat  milk  proteins.  The  documentation submitted  with  the  grounds  for  re-examination  included  the  detailed  results  and  a  report  on  the validation of the assay.

<!-- image -->

Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events Five treatment emergent serious adverse events were reported in 3 (12% of patients) congenital AT deficient  patients,  all  from  study  GTC  AT  III  01002.  Of  these  three  patients,  1  was  reported  in  a pregnant  female  and  2  were  reported  in  male  or  non-pregnant  females.  Fever  in  a  pregnant  female patient was considered not related. Hypotension and haemorrhage NOS in a non-pregnant female, and convulsions Grand Mal and fracture trauma in a male, were all considered as being remote/unlikely. Two  additional  SAEs  were  reported  in  neonates  (congenital  malformations,  unrelated).  No  deaths were reported from this study. Serious  adverse  events  were  reported  in  29  acquired  AT  deficient  patients  (24.6%)  treated  with antithrombin alfa, in 3 patients (21.4% of patients) treated with hpAT and in 11 patients (19.3% of patients) in the placebo group.  For patients who received antithrombin alfa, there were seven patients (6%) who reported ten related serious adverse events.  These included 5 events of Haemorrhage NOS, of  which  4  were  considered  as  being  possibly  and  1  probably  related  and  1  case  of  concomitant anaemia, considered as possibly related. Two cases of myocardial infarction were considered to be possibly related, as were 2 events of hallucination and psychosis in 1 patient. All patients recovered from  these  events.  For  patients  who  received  hpAT,  there  was  one  patient  (7%)  who  reported  two related serious adverse events but recovered.  No placebo patients reported any related serious adverse events. With regard to SAE myocardial infarction, discrepancies in causality assessments, between the integrated  summary  of  safety  and  the  text  in  the  study  report,  were  confirmed  by  the  applicant  in responses to LOI, and were attributed to differences between the initial SAE report, discharge letter ad the CRF. Three  patients  died  in  the  antithrombin  alfa  treatment  group,  one  in  placebo  and  one  in  hp-AT treatment group. Death was considered not related to study drug in the 5 cases (cardiogenic failure, arterial occlusion, cerebral infarct, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, cardiogenic shock). Laboratory findings No clinically significant laboratory changes were identified. Safety in special populations No difference in the adverse event profile was found between the pregnant females and the male/nonpregnant females. None of the neonates delivered from women participating in the Efficacy Study had any adverse event that could be attributed to maternal antithrombin alfa treatment. Discussion on clinical safety Safety data are very limited: only 14 patients with congenital deficient AT were included in the pivotal trial and 5 in the compassionate use group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The two safety populations (congenital and acquired deficient AT) were not comparable at baseline as the demographic parameters (age, sex) were different. Congenital deficient AT is mainly represented by  young  pregnant  females  while  the  acquired  deficient  concerned  old  male  patients  scheduled  for cardiac surgery with a history of cardiovascular underlying diseases and concomitant treatments.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Haemorrhage  was  the  main  AE  in  acquired  deficient  AT  patients.  This  is  understandable  as  those patients  underwent  surgery  and  had  a  concomitant  anticoagulant  therapy  (mainly  heparin).  The bleeding events observed in acquired deficient AT patients, but also to a lesser extent in congenital deficient  AT  patients  (three  bleeding  events  in  two  patients:  one  vaginal  haematoma  in  a  pregnant patient, and a wound haemorrhage and haematoma in a patient with a hip replacement surgery), raise the safety issue of haemorrhage occurrence, which could be increased by the difficulties encountered in  some patients with the posology adjustment of antithrombin alfa in order to achieve AT activity between  80  and  120%.  Headache,  hypotension,  nausea  and  fever  were  also  observed  in  this  study population.

<!-- image -->

At  the time of the initial  CHMP  Opinion  (February  2006)  the  safety  concern  of  potential immunogenicity of antithrombin alfa had not been resolved by the additional information  provided during the assessment. Indeed neither IgG, nor IgM antibodies against antithrombin alfa were detected in  the  patient  studies  nor  in  the  human  volunteer bioequivalence PK finalized study. However, it is difficult  to  extrapolate  these  limited  safety  data,  particularly  on  the  repeated  administration  of  the product and namely the nanofiltered antithrombin alfa, only tested in healthy volunteers (14), to the situation of congenital AT deficiency patients. Furthermore, there was uncertainty about the validation of the new immunodot blot assay for antibodies to goat AT and goat milk proteins. Thus the CHMP concern  of  re-exposure  to  contaminant  non-human  proteins  and  the  possible  resulting  intolerance could  not  be  resolved,  leading  to  the  following  ground  for  refusal  (in  addition  to  the  2  grounds discussed  in  the  section  on  Efficacy):  the  safety  database  for  patients  with  congenital  antithrombin deficiency is felt insufficient considering the observed safety signals and the potential problem with immunogenicity. The Applicant responded that 'the observed safety signals' for ATryn (bleeding events, hypotension, fever) are the same as those described in the package inserts for hpAT products marketed in Europe. These  alleged  signals  are  related  to  the  pharmacological  class  of  antithrombin,  to  concomitant medications (e.g., induction of anesthesia) and to the procedures patients undergo while being treated with  AT  (ATryn  or  hpAT).    The  Applicant  has  assessed  patients  for  IgM  and  IgG  (all  subtypes) antibodies to Atryn, as well as for antibodies to potential residual goat milk proteins (including goat AT)  using  validated  assays.    To  date,  the  Applicant  has  not  observed  any  clinical  or  laboratory evidence for an immune response in over 200 patients treated on one or more occasions with ATryn. Furthermore,  AT  activity  levels  following  treatment  returned  to  baseline  indicating  a  lack  of neutralizing antibodies. The CHMP sought input from an ad-hoc expert group on the issue of limited safety data, especially with  regard  to  concerns  for  possible  immunogenicity  of  antithrombin  alfa  and  of  remaining  goat proteins  in  the  product.  The  vast  majority  of  the  (over  200)  individuals  tested  for  IgG  and  IgM antibodies  to  ATryn  were  given  a  single  Atryn  dose.  Immunodot  Blot  Assay  (for  remaining  goat proteins)  has  only  been  carried  out  in  24  subjects.    To  the  experts,  the  concerns  raised  related  to possible immunogenicity of ATryn would not be an issue precluding clinical use, provided appropriate surveillance  would  be  in  place.  The  lack  of  clinical  experience  in  the  patient  population  with  the nanofiltered  product  was  identified  as  an  element  of  uncertainty  (please  refer  to  the  discussion  on Efficacy). CHMP therefore considers the potential problem with immunogenicity does not preclude granting a marketing authorisation, provided that the applicant addresses these points as part of postauthorisation activities. This also includes questions raised during the expert meeting regarding test methodology (the positive controls used, and IgE testing). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Pharmacovigilance

## Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system

The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements.

<!-- image -->

Risk Management Plan The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. Summary of the risk management plan for ATryn Hypotension, fever Potential medication error · The need for a correct dosing, will be clearly mentioned in all communications to health care professionals. All marketing material will have the dosing regimen listed, and where appropriate the distinction with plasma derived AT will be mentioned. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Safety concern             | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                        | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bleeding                   | • Routine Pharmacovigilance • Additional information from ongoing trials • Additional information from post-marketing surveillance programme                                 | • Warning in SmPC Section 4.4 'Special warnings and special precautions for use' • Warning in SmPC Section 4.5 'Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction' • Haemorrhage listed in the SmPC Section 4.8 'Undesirable effects'. longer                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Immunogenicity             | • Routine Pharmacovigilance • Additional information from ongoing trials • Additional information from post-marketing surveillance programme • Immunosurveillance program no | • Report results of immunosurveillance program to treating physicians • Contraindication in section 4.3 for patients with hypersensitivity to goat proteins or goat milk components • SmPC includes following text in section 4.4 'Special warnings and special precautions for use': Patients treated with ATryn should be monitored for possible clinical immunological reactions. Antibody status should be monitored and reported. |
| Hypotension, fever         | • Routine Pharmacovigilance • Additional information from ongoing trials • Additional information from post-marketing surveillance product                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Potential medication error | • Routine Pharmacovigilance                                                                                                                                                  | • The SmPC, section 4.2 Posology and method of administration , contains a statement about the differences between plasma and recombinant AT. • The need for a correct dosing, will be clearly mentioned in all communications to health care professionals. All marketing material will have the dosing regimen listed, and where appropriate the distinction with plasma derived AT will be mentioned.                               |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 6. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment

## Quality

ATryn contains recombinant human antithrombin (AT) produced in transgenic goats.

Considerable  efforts  have  been  made  by  the  applicant  to  improve  the  genetic  consistency  of  the transgenic herd and the consistency of the goat milk (source material).

<!-- image -->

Testing of the drug substance include elaborate monitoring of goat milk contaminants and glycoprotein consistency. Trace amounts of goat AT (up to 0.3 µg/dose) and other goat proteins in the product raises concern regarding  (i) the potential cross-reactive immune response of residual goat AT against endogenous human AT and (ii) hypersensitivity reactions against other goat proteins and milk components. The latter concern is addressed adequately in the SPC. The specifications for the drug substance and drug product will be reviewed when an appropriate number of commercial scale batches have been produced. It  can  be  concluded  that  the  applicant  has  provided  evidence  that  ATryn  is  manufactured  in  a consistent  way  and  is  tested  satisfactorily.  All  outstanding  quality  issues  can  be  resolved  on  an ongoing basis. Appropriate measures are in place to assure the viral and TSE safety of ATryn. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology The  non-clinical  studies  were  limited.  Non-clinical  data  demonstrated  the  anticoagulant  activity  of antithrombin alfa and revealed no special hazard for humans based on studies of single dose toxicity, repeated dose toxicity, genotoxicity and reproductive toxicity. In non-clinical studies, exposure to antithrombin alfa was similar or higher (up to 2-fold) than in the clinical  situation.  The  formulations  used  in  most  non-clinical  studies  were  non-heat  treated.  Minor biochemical differences with the heat treated, and finally nanofiltered heat treated antithrombin alfa products  are not thought  to impact  on  the  pharmacokinetics,  distribution, or activity of the antithrombin alfa in animals and humans. Efficacy The proposed clinical use of ATryn is for the prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in surgery of patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency. ATryn is normally given in association with heparin or low molecular weight heparin. In total, 19 hereditary AT deficient patients were treated during and after 20 high risk situations:  Five (5)  patients  /6  treatments  with  non-heat  treated  antithrombin  alfa  in  the  Compassionate  Use  Study (GTC AT III 011-003), and 14 hereditary AT deficient patients in the context of surgery (n=5) and delivery (n=9) with heat treated antithrombin alfa in the pivotal Efficacy Study (GTC AT III 01002). The initial CHMP opinion was negative on the following grounds: Medicinal product no longer authorised

Efficacy data within the claimed indication are limited to only 5 patients (5 surgical, non-pregnant  patients  out  of  14  patients  treated  overall  with  antithrombin  alfa  in  the single  pivotal  study  submitted)  making  an  assessment  of  the  efficacy  impossible  and also  being  below  the  number  recommended  by  the  EMEA  scientific  advice  (12 patients). The CHMP felt that the data obtained in patients treated in the compassionate use programme and at childbirth could not support the results obtained in the 5 surgical patients.  Furthermore,  the  CHMP  considered  that  ATryn  could  not  be  granted  a marketing authorisation under exceptional circumstances, as proposed by the applicant during the oral explanation, due to the absence of objective and verifiable reasons;

- The proposed finished commercial product, nanofiltered antithrombin alfa, was not the one used in the patient population

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further to the applicant`s request for re-examination, during  the ad-hoc expert meeting held within the re-examination procedure, the experts considered that the entire population could be used for the evaluation of the efficacy of ATryn. The expert also agreed that the available data would allow for proper dosing recommendations in surgical patients. Whether the available data would be sufficient for use in delivery patients was questioned by some experts, in view of the uncertainties with the dose recommendation. The lack of experience with the nanofiltered product in the patient population is an element of uncertainty.

<!-- image -->

The company provided a justification why no user consultation was performed:

Taking into account the recommendations from the ad-hoc expert meeting, CHMP agreed that the efficacy data from 13 evaluable patients (pregnant and non-pregnant) in the pivotal trial can be considered to support the claimed indication. Further data on efficacy of the nano-filtered product from the ongoing study and from post-authorisation surveillance are required, these can be provided post-authorisation. Safety The  safety  database  for  patients  with  congenital  antithrombin  deficiency  is  limited  considering  the observed safety signals and the potential problem with immunogenicity. The other patient population studied, patients with acquired AT deficiency, has different demographic parameters. Bleeding events observed in patients with acquired AT deficiency, and to a lesser extent in patients with congenital deficiency, raise the safety issue of haemorrhage occurrence, which could be increased by  the  difficulties  encountered  with  antithrombin  alfa  posology  adjustment  needed  to  achieve antithrombin activity between 80 and 120 %. Headache, hypotension, nausea and fever were also observed in the study population. There is  a  potential  risk  of  an  immune  response  to  the  antithrombin  alfa  or  residual  goat  proteins, including goat AT. Such an immune response could potentially scross-react with human AT. Neither IgG,  nor  IgM  antibodies  against  antithrombin  alfa  were  detected  even  after  repeated  exposure. Nevertheless,  it  appears  very  difficult  to  extrapolate  the  limited  safety  data,  particularly  on  the repeated administration of the product and namely the nanofiltered antithrombin alfa (only tested in 14 healthy volunteers), to the situation of congenital AT deficiency patients. In the oral explanation the applicant presented a new immuno dot blot assay for antibodies to goat AT and goat milk proteins. In the initial opinion CHMP concluded that the safety database for patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency is felt insufficient considering the observed safety signals and the potential problem with immunogenicity. In  the  re-examination  documentation  the  applicant  provided  further  details  on  the  immuno-assay methodology. The ad-hoc experts concluded that the concerns raised related to possible immunogenicity of ATryn would not be an issue precluding clinical use, provided appropriate follow-up would be in place. The lack of clinical experience in the patient population with the nanofiltered product was identified as an element of uncertainty. CHMP therefore considers the potential problem with immunogenicity does not preclude granting a marketing authorisation, provided that the applicant addresses these points as part of postauthorisation activities. This also includes questions raised during the expert meeting regarding test methodology (the positive controls used, and IgE testing). Close monitoring for haemorrhage and signs of immunogenicity and systematic serum sample collection to study immunogenicity should be performed User consultation Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -The  targeted  patient  population  group  (hereditary  antithrombin  deficient  patients undergoing surgery) is very limited;
- -The product will be administered intravenously and in a hospital setting. The package leaflet will only be seen by the patient upon their personal request;

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -As there is no patients association for people with hereditary antithrombin deficiency, it is very difficult to find relevant people to conduct a user consultation.

The justification provided by the company is acceptable.

Benefit/risk assessment Considering the available data submitted in the Marketing Authorisation Application, the Marketing Authorisation Holder`s answers to the grounds for refusal, the recommendations expressed at the adhoc expert group meeting, and the oral explanations provided by the applicant, the CHMP conclusions at the end of the re-examination were that: · The  applicant  has  provided  evidence  that  ATryn  is  manufactured  in  a  consistent  way  and  is tested satisfactorily. Appropriate commitments have been taken by the applicant to resolve all outstanding quality issues on an ongoing basis. · Adequate measures are in place to assure the viral and TSE safety of ATryn. · Due  to the rarity of this clinical condition, the efficacy in terms of prevention of thromboembolic events cannot be fully established · Some EU countries do not have approved hpAT product, which limits the availability of AT concentrates to treat those patients · From the data provided it can be reasonably concluded that the proposed dosing schedule for Atryn will allow to bring antithrombin levels in the target range (80 - 120%), which in the view of the experts would be the immediate treatment target. · Further data are necessary to draw conclusions on the most suitable dosing schedule in pregnant women with congenital AT deficiency. · Although the safety database is limited and there are remaining concerns regarding the potential immunogenicity  of  Atryn,  the  CHMP  feels  that  this  should  not  preclude  the  clinical  use  of Atryn. Surveillance of immunogenicity (to Atryn or residualt goat proteins), together with other relevant  safety  signals  (bleeding,  hypotension,  fever,  hypersensitivity  reactions)  should  be addressed by the marketing authorisation holder as specific obligations. Therefore  the  CHMP  agrees  that  based  on  the  quality  data  submitted,  the  efficacy  data  from  13 evaluable  patients  (pregnant  and  non-pregnant)  in  the  pivotal  trial,  and  based  on  the  overall  safety database  of  Atryn,  a  restricted  indication  (limited  to  non-pregnant  surgery  patients)  can  be  granted under exceptional circumstances. A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that: · pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns · no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information. ATryn is  indicated  for  the  prophylaxis  of  venous  thromboembolism  in  surgery  of  patients with congenital antithrombin deficiency. ATryn is normally given in association with heparin or low molecular weight heparin. Recommendation Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of ATryn for the prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in  surgery  of  patients  with  congenital  antithrombin  deficiency,  was  favourable  and  therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation under exceptional circumstances.