---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:13:56
document_pages: 36
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/avaglim-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: avaglim-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 11.4385888
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 20:03:38.32719
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1. Introduction

Medicinal product no longer authorise Type  2  diabetes  (T2D)  is  a  chronic  progressive  disease  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia,  that contributes to a massive social and economic burden globally. In industrialised countries the incidence of T2D is expected to rise as obesity and a sedentary lifestyle become more common. In early stages T2D can be managed through diet and exercise alone, however most patients need oral glucose-lowering medicinal products after some time and some of them require insulin. The treatment guidelines recommend to start with diet and exercise, and to add antihyperglycaemic agents, first as monotherapy and in combination if no-control is achieved. T2D is often associated with micro-and macrovascular complications. In order to reduce the risk of developing such complications, a multifactorial approach to the management  of  diabetes is recommended,  with  important  risk factors such as progressive hyperglycaemia, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, obesity and physical inactivity highlighted as important targets for intervention. Metformin (MET) is considered the first choice in type 2 diabetic patients with obesity although the choice of initial oral glucose-lowering agents is influenced by the medical history and characteristics of the patient as well as their expected susceptibility to the various side effects. Within 3 years of onset around 50% of patients require multiple therapy, and after nine years this number increases to 75%. Current  guidelines  recommend  the  addition  of  sulphonylurea  (SU)  as  first  line  combination  with metformin. In Europe, thiazolidines are licensed for combination with either metformin, particularly in overweight patients, or sulphonylureas (SUs) in patients who are intolerant of, or in whom metformin is contraindicated. As  the  compliance  with  treatment  is  an  important  factor  in  order  to  achieve  the  target  glycaemic control and the combination of two different classes of antihyperglycaemic agents in a single tablet can simplify the importance of combination use is increasingly recognised. Fixed dose combinations medicinal products with metformin have been developed. However in subjects for whom metformin is inappropriate because of contraindication or intolerance, these fixed dose combination treatments are not an option. AVAGLIM is an oral fixed dose combination (FDC) of rosiglitazone (RSG) and glimepiride (GLIM) for the second line treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D).  Intensive management of T2D and associated co-morbidities, such as hypertension and dyslipidaemia, means that patients often receive long-term polypharmacy. The proposed RSG/GLIM FDC offers a convenient single daily tablet of a potential  combination  treatment  for  T2D  and  the  possibility  for  increased  compliance  and  hence potentially improved long term glycaemic control. RSG is a thiazolidinedione which acts as a selective and potent agonist at the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ (PPAR γ ), and has been marketed in the EU since 2000.  RSG is indicated for oral combination  treatment  in  subjects  with  T2D  with  insufficient  glycaemic  control,  despite  maximal tolerated oral monotherapy with either metformin or a sulphonylurea (SU), and in subjects who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated.  In addition, it is also indicated for monotherapy in T2D subjects, particularly the overweight, who are intolerant to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated.  The worldwide-marketed exposure from launch to September 2004 is estimated to be over 6 million patients.  The current total  marketed exposure to RSG is in excess  of  5 million  unique  patients.    Therefore  the  widespread  use  of  this  product  in  humans,  in conjunction  with  an  acceptable  toxicological  profile  at  therapeutic  doses,  provides  evidence  of  its safety and efficacy.

GLIM is a second generation SU marketed in the EU since first approval in 1995 in most European countries.  GLIM has been shown to improve glycaemic control in patients with T2D when used as first-line  monotherapy  or  as  an  add-on  to  metformin  or  insulin  treatment.    Since  first  launch,  it  is estimated that exposure exceeds 17 million patient years.

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The dosage regimen proposed for the RSG/GLIM FDC is consistent with that currently approved for the two drugs when administered concomitantly.  The maximum recommended daily dose of the RSG/GLIM FDC is 8 mg/4 mg (RSG/GLIM). The accepted strengths for this product are 4mg/4mg and 8mg/4mg RSG/GLIM.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The proposed indication for the RSG/GLIM FDC is treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients who are  unable  to  achieve  sufficient  control  on  optimal  dosage  of  sulphonylurea  monotherapy,  and  for whom metformin is inappropriate because contraindications or intolerance. 2. Quality aspects Introduction Avaglim is a fixed dose combination containing rosiglitazone (as maleate) and glimepiride as active substances. Two strengths are proposed containing 4 mg or 8 mg of rosiglitazone (as free base) and 4 mg of glimepiride. They are presented as film coated tablets. Apart from this difference in strength, the formulations are identical, excipients include in the tablet core: sodium  starch glycollate, hypromellose, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose  monohydrate, magnesium stearate, and in the film coat: hypromellose, titanium dioxide, macrogol and colorants. Film coated tablets are supplied in PVC/PVdC/aluminium blisters. Active substance Rosiglitazone maleate Rosiglitazone  maleate  was  assessed  in  previous  applications  for  both  Avandia  tablets  (rosiglitazone monoproduct, MA  number  EU/1/00/137) and more recently Avandamet  film coated tablets (rosiglitazone/metformin  combination  product,  MA  numbers  EU/1/03/258.  The  currently  submitted information on rosiglitazone maleate is identical to that for Avandamet. The route of synthesis, site of manufacture, and control of rosiglitazone maleate active substance are the same as accepted earlier in the approved EC Dossiers. Adequate  In-Process  Controls  are  applied  during  the  manufacture.  The  specifications  and  control methods for intermediate products, starting materials and reagents, were presented. Batch analysis data of the three batches of rosiglitazone maleate are provided. The three lots are within the specifications and consistent from batch to batch. Rosiglitazone  maleate  specifications  includes  description,  identity  (IR,  HPLC),  assay  (HPLC  ,  98102%),  maleic  acid  content  (HPLC),  related  substances  (HPLC),  residual  solvents  (GC),  water content, sulphated ash, heavy metals, particle size, and specific rotation. The tests and limits in the specifications are considered appropriates for controlling the quality of this active substance. The stability studies concern the same studies and batches for which result already were provided for rosigliltazone/metformin  fixed  combination  (Avandamet).  Additional  stability  results  have  been provided: data on 4 commercial batches (36 months at 25°C/60% RH and 6 months at 40°C/75% RH) and data on 3 qualification batches (36 months at 25°C/60% RH and 12 months at 40°C/75% RH) . The  proposed  re-test  period  is  the  same  as  approved  earlier  for  the  other  strengths  of  Avandamet, based  on  full  stability  data  of  three  commercial  batches.  No  significant  changes  in  assay,  impurity levels  or  solid  state  form  from  the  initial  time  point  were  observed.  Therefore,  the  re-test  period proposed is acceptable according to the stability data submitted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Glimepiride

Information on glimepiride has been supplied in the form of Active substance master file (ASMF).

Medicinal product no longer authorise Glimepiride  is  a  white  powder.  No  asymmetric  carbon  atom  is  present.  The  active  substance  is practically  insoluble  in  water,  it  is  soluble  in  dimethylformamide  and  dimethyl-sulfoxide,  slightly soluble  in  diluted  alkalines  and  acids  as  well  as  in  common  organic  solvents  such  as  methanol, acetonitrile, acetone and methylene chloride. The solubility in water was found to be dependent on the pH value: at high pH values, the solubility of glimeperide is better in water than at lower pH values. Two  crystalline  polymorphic  forms  of  glimepiride  are  known,  the  applied  manufacturing  process yields to the thermodynamically more stable form.  The presence of this form is controlled routinely in the scope of batch analysis. The  manufacturing  and  control  information  on  glimepiride  was  provided  in  the  form  of  an  ASMF (Active Substance Master File) and was evaluated as satisfactory . Adequate In-Process Controls are applied  during  the  synthesis.  The  specifications  and  control  methods  for  intermediate  products, starting materials and reagents, have been presented. Glimepiride  specifications  include  tests  for  appearance,  identification  (IR,  HPLC),  appearance  of solution, related substances, polymorphic form, sulphated ash, assay (HPLC, 98.0% - 101.0%), heavy metals, residual solvents, water content (Karl Fisher), microbial contamination, and specific surface area (BET). The tests and limits in the specifications are considered appropriates for controlling the quality of this active substance. Batch analysis data of the three production batches glimepiride are provided. The three batches are within the specifications and consistent from batch to batch. The stability of glimepiride was evaluated for 3 full scale batches stored under normal and accelerate stability conditions at 5ºC (48 months), 25ºC / 60% RH (48 months), 30ºC / 60% RH (48 months), 40ºC/dry (6 months), and 40ºC / 75% RH (6 months). The  parameters  tested  were  appearance,  appearance  of  solution  (clarity,  colour),  HPLC  related substances, water (GC), HPLC assay, specific surface area (BET), and particle size distribution. The re-test period proposed was considered acceptable according to the stability data submitted. Finished product As the product is a combination of two existing oral antidiabetics , the formulation was developed to provide fast release of both active substances, matching as closely as possible the release profiles of the commercial products containing the individual active substances and to be bioequivalent to this commercial individual substances. To investigate  the  potential  for  interactions  between  the  drug  substances  and  other  ingredients  that might be used in tablet formulations, the binary compatibility of the active substances with each other and the excipients used for the finished product dosage forms was studied. Good compatibility was demonstrated between all of them. The  excipients  used  are  sodium  starch  glycolate,  hypromellose,  microcrystalline  cellulose,  lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, macrogol and colorants. The excipients are conventional and meet the  requirements  in  Ph.  Eur.  Lactose  monohydrate  is  manufactured  from  bovine  milk.  The  supplier confirms that the milk used in the manufacture of the lactose is sourced from healthy animals under the same conditions as for human consumption The primary packaging chosen was PVC/ PVdC/ aluminium blisters. · Manufacture of the Product

The manufacture of rosiglitazone / glimepiride film coated tablets tablets, comprises conventional tabletting and aqueous film-coating processes.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  manufacturing  process  has  been  validated  by  a  number  of  studies  for  the  major  steps  of  the manufacturing process in three production-scale  batches of  each and is  satisfactory.  The  in  process controls are adequate for this film coated tablet preparation.

The batch analysis data show that the film coated tablets can be manufactured reproducibly according to the agreed finished product specification, which is suitable for control of this oral preparation.

Medicinal product no longer authorise · Product Specification The  product  specifications  include  tests  by  validated  methods  for  description,  identification  of  the active substances (HPLC), identification of colorants, uniformity of dosage of the active substances (Ph Eur), dissolution of the active substances, uniformity of content of the active substances (HPLC), assay of the active substances (95-105%, HPLC), related substances (HPLC), and microbial limit (Ph Eur). Degradation products are controlled and their limits are justified by reference to stability studies and toxicology studies. The tests and limits of the specifications for the finished product are appropriate to control the quality of the finished product for their intended purpose. Batch analysis data confirm satisfactory uniformity of the product at release. · Stability of the Product 24 months primary stability data are presented for three pilot scale batches of Avaglim 4 mg strength stored at 30°C/65% RH and at 25ºC/60% RH, and 6 month stability data at 40°C/75% RH. Six month stability data for three commercial scale batches of the 4 mg strength tablets stored at 30°C/65% RH and at 40ºC/75% RH were also provided. Additionally, 12 month stability data were presented for three pilot scale batches of rosiglitazone / glimepiride tablets 8 mg strength stored at 30°C/65% RH and at 25ºC/60% RH, and 6 months at 40°C/75% RH. All stability batches were manufactured at the proposed commercial site in the proposed primary packaging. In addition, data are presented following short-term storage of one batch of the 4 mg and 8 mg tablet strengths under stress conditions of exposure to light. The batches were tested for description, rosiglitazone content and drug related impurities by HPLC, glimepiride content and drug-related impurities by HPLC, rosiglitazone/glimepiride dissolution using. Some additional non-specified parameters are tested at defined time points of the studies: hardness, disintegration, water content and rosiglitazone isomer ratio. Based on available stability data, the proposed shelf life and storage conditions as stated in the SPC are acceptable. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Information on development, manufacture and control of the active substances and finished product have been presented in a satisfactory manner. The results of tests carried out indicate satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important product quality characteristics, and these in turn lead to the conclusion that the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. At the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a number of unresolved quality issues without impact on the clinical efficacy or safety of the product, therefore the applicant made a commitment to resolve these as post-opinion follow-up measures

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Non-clinical aspects

## Introduction

Medicinal product no longer authorise With the exception of two new secondary pharmacology studies, all nonclinical data for RSG were submitted  and  reviewed  as  a  part  of  the  original  Avandia  (rosiglitazone)  marketing  authorisation application,  with  additional  data  submitted  t  and  Avandamet  (rosiglitazone/metformin)  marketing application.    The  assessment  of  RSG  was  based  upon  the  non-clinical  overview  and  previous assessments for Avandia and Avandamet. GLIM  is  marketed  in  all  EU  countries  after  approval  via  the  Mutual  Recognition  procedure. Consequently,  cross-reference  to  these  submitted  reports was  not  possible  in this centralised application.  Therefore, data to assess the nonclinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and toxicology of GLIM were described by reference to the literature and other published information.  Additionally, the  assessment  of  GLIM  was  based  upon  the  written  summaries  of  the  studies  provided  by  the applicant. Pharmacology The primary and secondary pharmacodynamics and the safety pharmacology of both RSG and GLIM have been investigated in a series of non-clinical studies, in vitro and in vivo .  In these investigations, RSG and GLIM were administered individually.    No  non-clinical  pharmacology  studies  have  been performed with these drugs administered as the fixed combination. · Primary pharmacodynamics The  individual  efficacies  of  RSG  and  GLIM  in  the  treatment  of  T2D  patients  have  been  clearly demonstrated. RSG is claimed to be a potent and selective agonist at the nuclear peroxisomal-proliferator-activated receptor  gamma  (PPAR γ )  and  has  shown  to  be  a  potent  and  orally  active  insulin  sensitizer  with  a marked  antihyperglycaemic  activity  mediated  by  improvements  in  insulin  resistance  which  is  a common feature characterising the pathogenesis of T2D.  The antidiabetic activity of RSG has been demonstrated in animal models of T2D in which hyperglycaemia and/or impaired glucose tolerance was  associated  with  insulin  resistance  in  target  tissues.    Its  antidiabetic  activity  was  shown  to  be mediated by increased sensitivity to insulin's action in the liver, muscle and adipose tissues. RSG did not  induce  hypoglycaemia  in  animal  models  of  T2D  and/or  impaired  glucose  tolerance.  Long  term studies in mice and rats clearly demonstrate that RSG has a durable β cell  protective action, due to prevention of β -cell depletion of insulin and net β -cell loss. The slow onset of action of RSG is in line with the theory that the synthesis of the active products such as lipoprotein lipase and Glut4 induced by activation of PPAR γ -responsive genes needs time. The antidiabetic action of RSG in nonclinical rodent models is seemingly closely aligned with its ability to reduce elevated plasma free fatty acids. At high concentrations, free fatty acids are known to impair insulin action in skeletal muscle, and they also stimulate hepatic gluconeogenesis.  The mechanism whereby RSG treatment of insulin-resistant rodents results in a reduction of plasma free fatty acids is incompletely understood, but may involve changes in adipose tissue expression and activity of the cytokine, TNF α . The effect of GLIM on glucose and insulin has been investigated in detail, both in vitro and in vivo . The pancreatic (insulin release) and extrapancreatic effects (non-insulin secretion dependent) involve hepatic  glucose  (uptake,  metabolism,  disposal  and  incorporation)  and  insulin  homeostasis.  The pancreatic effect of GLIM is dependent upon functioning of β -cells in the pancreatic islets. Single oral doses of GLIM lowered blood glucose concentrations in fed normal and diabetic rats, and in normal non-diabetic dogs. Tests in the dog showed this effect to be dose-dependent. Additional extrapancreatic  actions,  which  have  an  influence  on  glucose  utilisation,  metabolism  and  transport, have  been  identified  in  nonclinical  studies  and  are  hypothesised  to  contribute  to  the  blood  glucose lowering effect of GLIM, although the clinical significance of these actions is contentious.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Secondary pharmacodynamics

Medicinal product no longer authorise The effects of RSG on body weight as well as its protective actions against tissue damage associated with chronic diabetes therapy have been investigated in detail. Its antihyperglycaemic activity seems associated  with  an  increase  in  body  weight  and  hyperphagia.  It  has  been  shown  that  RSG  has  a pancreatic  protective  action  (prevention  of β -cell  depletion),  that  early  drug  intervention  protects against  renal  damage  (blood  pressure  changes)  and  that  long-term  treatment  protects  against  the impairment of vascular endothelial cell function. It has also been demonstrated that RSG prevents the formation of cataracts. The antidiabetic action of RSG is closely linked with its ability to reduce fatty acids  (plasma  triglycerides).  Two  new  studies  in  diabetic  rats  clearly  showed  that  RSG  treatment resulted in cardiac injury protection to ischemia-reperfusion and improved cardiac contractile function. These  actions  were  accompanied  by  a  decreased  infarct  size  and  apoptosis,  increased  glucose metabolism,  and  insulin  signalling.  Also,  RSG  treatment  inhibited  ischemia-reperfusion  leukocyte adhesion and reduced inflammatory biomarkers. The new studies have demonstrated its cardiac injury protection and improved cardiac contractile function as well as its protection against ischemia/reperfusion-induced leukocyte adhesion (atherosclerosis) in diabetic rats. The predictability of these findings for humans is yet unknown. GLIM has a much lower propensity to cause effects in the cardiovascular system compared to other sulphonylureas.  The  beneficial  effects  of  myocardial  protective  effects  of  ischemic  reperfusion (reduced  infarct  size,  prolonged  action  potential  duration  and  preserved  diastolic  function)  and reduction  of  cardiac  functional  loss  are  examples.  GLIM  produced  little  systemic  haemodynamic changes (slight increase in blood pressure), has potent anti-atherogenic and anti-inflammatory effects. Even though GLIM markedly reduced the ischemia-induced cardiac functional loss, a quite marked and dose-dependent reduction in coronary blood flow (from 97 to 45.8%) was observed in vitro . In vivo , however, the effects of GLIM on coronary blood flow were less marked (only 21%). · Safety pharmacology programme RSG There  were  no  toxicologically  significant  findings  in  oral  single  dose  safety  pharmacology  studies with  RSG  that  examined  its  potential  effects  on  the  cardiovascular,  renal,  respiratory,  nervous  and gastrointestinal systems at the doses tested (up to 80 mg/kg).  From a safety pharmacological point of view,  although  safety  pharmacology  studies  after  single  dose  administration  revealed  no  unwanted effects, it has been generally recognised that RSG exerts its pharmacological effect only after multiple dosing. Clinical safety data and animal repeated dose toxicity studies indicate that RSG might cause liver toxicity and heart failure (due to fluid retention) GLIM Central  Nervous  System. The  overt  effects  of  GLIM  were  recorded  during  a  single  dose  toxicity study in Wistar rats.  Following the oral administration of GLIM at doses up to 10000 mg/kg to rats, no  symptoms  or  deaths  were  recorded.    Following  a  series  of  behavioural  studies  in  mice  it  was reported that GLIM, at oral doses of up to 100 mg/kg, did not affect general behaviour, spontaneous activity or pentobarbital anaesthesia, and had neither an anticonvulsive nor an analgesic effect. Cardiovascular and Respiratory Systems. In  vivo In  addition,  it  does  not  seem  likely  that  GLIM will induce QT-interval prolongation in humans. Relatively high i.v. administration of GLIM in rats (40 mg/kg) caused minor ECG effects (ST-interval changes signifying ischemia), hypotension and two deaths. Nevertheless, these effects were clearly much lower than those observed after glibenclamide. Following  intraduodenal  administration  of  GLIM,  at  doses  up  to  1 mg/kg  in  cats,  there  were  no reported  effects  on  systemic  blood  pressure,  arterial  blood  flow,  left  ventricular  contractility  and spirogram.  Similarly,  intraduodenal  administration  of  GLIM  at  doses  up  to  10 mg/kg  in  dogs  was reported  not  to  affect  systemic  blood  pressure,  arterial  blood  flow,  heart  rate,  ECG  and  respiratory frequency. During long-term general toxicity studies in male and female beagle dogs, in which GLIM was orally administered at doses up to 320 mg/kg/day for up to 12 months, ECGs were recorded, and heart rate and PR, QRS, QT intervals documented.  No changes in the ECG and derived parameter values  were  reported. In  vitro. The  effects  of  GLIM  on  hERG  potassium  channels,  present  in  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

plasma  membrane  of  cultured  neuroblastoma  cells,  were  assessed in  vitro using  whole  cell  patch clamp  methods.    At  the  maximum  concentration  tested  (500 µ M),  which  was  limited  by  the compound's  solubility,  GLIM  inhibited  hERG  channel  currents  by  approximately  45%.    This concentration therefore approximates to the IC50 value for GLIM in this system.  GLIM did not affect hERG  channel  currents  at  the  lowest  concentration  tested  of  10 µ M.  The  estimated  IC 50  value (500 µ M,  equivalent  to  245 µ g/mL)  and  the  no-effect-level  (10 µ M,  equivalent  to  4.9 µ g/mL)  for GLIM  in  this  hERG  assay  is  approximately  595  and  12 times  higher  than  the  highest  Cmax  value recorded in patients (0.412 µ g/mL) orally administered the maximum proposed dose of 4 mg GLIM in the FDC.  However, more relevant is the fact that due to the high level of plasma protein binding of GLIM (99.5%) the IC50 value and no-effect-level are at least 110000 and 2300 times higher than the highest plasma concentration of free GLIM observed in humans, respectively.

The in vitro binding of 14 C-RSG to plasma proteins was high (&gt; 98%) in mouse, beagle, rabbits, rats. In  rats  and  beagles,  the  volume of  distribution  of  unchanged  RSG was  considerably lower than the volume of total body water suggesting limited distribution into tissues. The tissue concentrations of drug-related material were generally lower than the corresponding plasma concentration. Virtually no radioactivity was found in the brain. In pregnant rats having received a single dose of 14 C-RSG, some radioactivity  was  found  in  fetal  tissues.  These  tissue  levels  were  considerably  lower  than  maternal plasma concentrations of radioactivity. In lactating rats, some excretion into the breast milk was seen after a single administration of 14 C-RSG. The phase I metabolism of RSG in rats, mice, beagles and

Medicinal product no longer authorise Autonomic  nervous  system  and  smooth  muscle. At  concentrations  up  to  100 µ M,  GLIM  was reported to have no effect on motility of the isolated guinea pig ileum. Renal system . In rats, GLIM, at doses up to 100 mg/kg, was reported to have no effect on the volume or pH of the urine, or concentration of Na + , K + and Cl -in the urine. Gastrointestinal system. Following oral administration at doses up to 100 mg/kg in mice, GLIM was reported to have no effect on intestinal charcoal transport.  GLIM did not affect gastric emptying after oral  doses  of  up  to  1 mg/kg  in  rats.    Additionally,  following  intraperitoneal  administration  in  rats, doses  of  GLIM  of  up  to  1 mg/kg  had  no  effect  on  exocrine  pancreatic  secretion,  bile  secretion  or histamine-induced gastric secretion. In  conclusion  major  general  pharmacodynamics  effects  of  GLIM  or  RSG  in  the  central  nervous, autonomic nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory and gastrointestinal system were not noted at relevant doses or oral doses up to 80 mg/kg. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions GLIM shows partial agonistic activity at PPAR γ receptors. However, because of the difference in the in  vitro affinities  of  GLIM  and  RSG  to  PPAR γ ,  pharmacodynamic  interactions  between  RSG  and GLIM  are  unlikely  at  therapeutic  dose  levels.  Only  at  a  concentration  of  10  µM,  which  is approximately 30 times higher than the maximum clinical plasma concentration, did GLIM displace RSG in an in vitro competition-binding assay. The IC50 of GLIM that displaced RSG (0.04 µ M) from PPAR γ receptors (27 µ M) was 90-times higher than the maximum plasma concentration of GLIM in clinical studies. From the original MAA  for  RSG,  interaction with the antidiabetic drugs glibenclamide (SU), voglibose ( α -glucosidase inhibitor) and human insulin was assayed in a 1-month toxicity study in the rats.  There was no evidence of other unexpected or synergistic effects arising from  the  combination  apart  from  the  synergistic  increase  in  brown  fat  weight  observed  upon  coadminstration with insulin or glibenclamide. Pharmacokinetics There were no new pharmacokinetic studies with the FDC or with RSG.  For GLIM pharmacokinetic data  were  extracted  from  published  literature.  Details  of  the  methods  used  in  all  pharmacokinetic studies  performed  with  RSG  and  its  major  metabolites  were  submitted  and  reviewed  in  the  former European MAA's for RSG.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

humans proceeds via N -demethylation and pyridine ring hydroxylation. In addition, oxidative cleavage of RSG occurs to yield a phenoxyacetic acid derivative. Phase II metabolism results in the formation of sulphate and glucuronide conjugates. In vitro studies employing human liver preparations showed that cytochrome P450-2C8 is the main enzyme responsible for phase I metabolism of RSG in humans. In 14-day repeated dose studies, liver enzyme induction was demonstrated both in rats (CYP3A and CYP4A) and in beagles (CYP4A). In rats, mice and beagles, radioactivity is mainly excreted in the faeces (approximately 62-63%) upon administration of 14 C-RSG, the remainder being excreted in the urine. Most of the radioactivity excreted into the faeces of rats was shown to undergo biliary excretion. In contrast, the urine is the main route of excretion in humans.

Acute toxicity was low for both RSG and GLIM. RSG was slightly toxic after oral dosing in mice and rats. The calculated LD50 value in male and female animals was &gt; 1500 mg/kg. LD50  of RSG after i.v. dosing in male and female mice and rats was &gt; 120 mg/kg. In dogs, the LD50 after oral dosing was &gt; 320  mg/kg.  Observed  effects  in  mice  were  reduced  activity,  abnormal  breathing,  slight  ataxia, convulsions,  and  lens  and/or  corneal  lesions  (this  was  observed  in  a  few  mice  at  dosages ≥ 1000

Medicinal product no longer authorise Bioavailability of GLIM in the rat was 60 to 70%. In dogs and rabbits, similarity in the extent of renal elimination following oral or intravenous dosing provided evidence that most of the dose is absorbed in  these  species.  Clearance  was  higher  in  male  rats  than  in  females  and  this  resulted  in  a  shorter terminal half-life in the males. Maximum observed blood/serum concentrations of total radioactivity in rats  and  dogs  occurred  at ca. 3  to  5  hours  after  oral  dosing,  suggesting  a  relatively  slow  rate  of absorption.  Blood/serum concentrations declined quite rapidly thereafter in the rat and were generally not  measurable  beyond  8  hours  after  dosing.    In  the  dog,  however,  concentrations  declined  more slowly and were still measurable at 96 hours.  There was also evidence that exposure to drug-related material was about 50% higher in male dogs than in females. At doses of up to ca. 30 mg/kg, close to dose-proportional  increases  in  exposure  with  increasing  dose  were  observed  in  the  rat,  whereas  at higher  doses  increases  in  exposure  were  notably  less  than  dose-proportional.  In  dogs,  there  were subproportional increases in GLIM serum concentrations with increasing dose (0.8 to 320 mg/kg). The highest  concentrations  in  tissues  were  observed  at  4  hours.    Radioactivity  levels  were  higher  than blood only in the liver.  Other  organs  and  tissues  investigated  generally  contained  concentrations  of radioactivity similar to, or lower than, that in blood. Studies in pregnant rats demonstrated that drugrelated material crossed the placenta and reached the foetal tissues.  The concentrations were notably lower in foetal tissues than in maternal tissues and blood.  In lactating rats, drug-related material was secreted in the milk, the maximum concentrations being approximately one third of those in the blood. Serum protein binding of GLIM in the rabbit and dog, and in humans was in excess of 99%. CYP2C9 is considered the most important enzyme in the metabolism of GLIM. The main routes of metabolism were oxidation of the methyl group on the cyclohexyl ring to the alcohol (MI) and further to the acid (MII). MI and MII were the predominant radio-components in human urine and faeces (where they accounted for the majority of the dose) whereas, in animals, a more extensive range of metabolites was present. In mice, rats and dogs, faeces was the predominant route of excretion of drug-related material with  at  least  80%  of  an  orally  administered  radioactive  dose  excreted  by  this  route  and  urine accounting for most of the remainder.  Conversely, in the rabbit and in humans, more than half of a radioactive dose was eliminated by the renal route, with faeces being the secondary route. No  information  was  provided  regarding  possible  pharmacokinetic  interactions  between  RSG  and GLIM.  However,  different  enzymes  metabolize  RSG  and  GLIM,  the  combination  has  been investigated clinically and there was no evidence for pharmacokinetic interactions. Toxicology No non-clinical toxicity studies have been performed using RSG/GLIM FDC. Therefore, the general toxicological  profile  of  RSG  and  GLIM  has  been  investigated  for  both  drugs  when  administered individually.  For GLIM data were extracted from published literature and the expert report from the original MAA. Combination studies of RSG and GLIM were considered to be not necessary because of extended clinical data with co-administration of both components of the combination. · Single dose toxicity

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mg/kg). Rats showed convulsions, abnormal breathing, and dilated pupils. In dogs, emesis, a slight decrease in blood cell parameters and increase in ALT were observed.

In  the  mice  and  rats,  single  oral  doses  of  GLIM  of  up  to  10000 mg/kg  were  well  tolerated.    The intraperitoneal median lethal values for single doses of the GLIM metabolites, MI and MII in the mice were  reported  to  be  greater  than  2000 mg/kg.    In  dogs,  the  median  lethal  dose  of  GLIM  and metabolites MI and MII was between 2000 and 10000 mg/kg.

| Type of test/Study ID/GLP                                | Test system                                                                   | no Concentrations/ Concentration range/ Metabolising system   | Results Positive/negative/equivocal   |
|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Gene mutations in bacteria/ TF- 1017/BRL- 049653/1       | product Salmonella strains TA98, 100, 1535, 1537, 1538 E.coli strain WP2 uvrA | 312.5 - 5000 µg/plate +/- S9                                  | Negative                              |
| Gene mutations in mammalian cells/ TF-1006/BRL- 049653/1 | Mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells TK locus                                          | 12.5 - 400 µg/ml +/- S9                                       | Inconclusive                          |
| Chromosomal aberrations in vitro/ TF-1034/BRL- 049653/1  | Human lymphocytes                                                             | 20 - 540 µg/ml +/- S9                                         | Negative                              |
| In vivo micronucleus/ TF- 1015/BRL- 049653/1             | Mice, bone marrow                                                             | 0, 350, 700 mg/kg                                             | Negative                              |
| Unscheduled DNA synthesis                                | Hepatocytes from rats                                                         | 0, 470.6, 1488 mg/kg                                          | Negative                              |

Although  no  data  were  obtained  from  the  published  literature,  the  Pharmacological-Toxicological Expert  Report  on  GLIM  discussed  a  number  of  genetic  toxicology  studies  performed  with  GLIM. GLIM was also non-mutagenic in a battery of in vitro and in  vivo mutagenicity studies (Ames test, somatic  cell  mutation,  chromosomal  aberration,  unscheduled  DNA  synthesis,  mouse  micronucleus test).

Medicinal product no longer authorise · Repeat dose toxicity Repeated dose toxicity studies with RSG revealed increased food and water consumption, body weight gain, increased fat deposition with displacement of haemopoetic tissue in bone marrow, an increased plasma  volume  which  caused  increased  heart  weight  and  left  ventricular  hypertrophy  at  exposure levels  comparable  to  the  human  therapeutic  exposure,  and  at  higher  dosages,  hydrothorax  in  rats. These effects of RSG are well known and have already been discussed. After repeated administration of GLIM, the only noticeable effects were of a pharmacological nature and consisted of degranulation in the β cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas and changes in the serum glucose concentrations. Cataracts as were found in some high dose dogs, were shown to be not drug dependent in bovine lenses and in rats and were observed only at very high exposures. · Genotoxicity Both RSG and GLIM do not pose a genotoxic risk to humans. Table TX1 summarises the results of genotoxicity studies of RSG. Table TX 1  Results of genotoxicity studies of RSG

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Carcinogenicity

An increased number of lipomas were observed in a 2-year carcinogenicity study of RSG in rats. In previous evaluations of RSG it was concluded that it is likely the result of persistent stimulation of adipose  tissue.  In  an  8-week  study  in  APC Min mice,  an  increase  in  the  incidence  of  large  intestine adenomas was observed. In wild type mice, colon tumour incidence was not increased at an exposure approximately 10 times the human exposure. The results in the APC Min mice indicate a possible higher risk  for  patients  with  familial  adenomatous  polyposis  (FAP).  However,  additional  evidence  was provided  that  this  model  can  be  considered  as  extremely  sensitive  to  colon  tumours.  Furthermore, patients with FAP are nowadays preventively treated by prophylactic colectomy and if not, the risk for colon cancer is high irrespective of drug treatment.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Regarding  the  possibility  of  interactions  between  RSG  and  GLIM,  it  is  unlikely  that  GLIM  will adversely influence the carcinogenic potential of the combination, because of the far lower affinity of GLIM for the PPAR γ receptor.  Results  from  studies  with  GLIM  showed  that  indeed  there  were  no PPAR γ specific effects (either pharmacological or toxicological) caused by GLIM, indicating that it is unlikely  that  at  clinically  relevant  doses,  the  combination  of  RGS  and  GLIM  would  result  in synergistic or additive effects on carcinogenic activity mediated via PPAR γ . In GLIM carcinogenicity studies, islet cell adenomas were observed which were ascribed to chronic pancreatic stimulation. Bronchio-alveolar adenomas were observed in mice and uterine adenocarcinomas in rats. For these tumours, the safety margin was considered to be large enough. · Reproduction Toxicity In fertility studies, RSG caused decreased plasma progesterone and estradiol levels, resulting in altered oestrous  cyclicity  in rats  and  in monkeys,  as  well  as  a  reduced  female  fertility  in  rats.  In embryotoxicity  studies,  RSG  caused  placental  abnormalities,  increased  embryo-foetal  death,  and intrauterine growth retardation and decreased skeletal ossification. After administration of RSG preand  postnatally,  an  increased  number  of  stillborn  pups,  a  lower  pup  survival  rate  and  a  delayed physical development were observed. No  effect  from  GLIM  on  fertility  was  observed  in  male  mice  and  in  male  and  female  rats.  In embryotoxicity studies, GLIM caused several defects in small numbers of foetuses (eye and skeletal effects  in  rats  and  rabbits  and  abortions  in  rabbits),  however  not  dose related.  In  pre-  and  postnatal studies, GLIM caused an increase in foetal death rate and skeletal defects, the latter also during the lactation period. In  a  RSG  juvenile  toxicity  study  in  rats,  there  were  no  target  organs  unique  to  juvenile  rats.  No juvenile  toxicity  studies  were  provided  for  GLIM,  which  is  acceptable  because  the  product  is  not indicated for children. · Local tolerance RSG was mildly irritant to rabbit skin and moderately irritant to rabbit eye. RSG was no sensitiser in guinea pigs. No local tolerance studies were provided for GLIM, which was considered appropriate because the product is in tablet form only. · Other toxicity studies The extent of irreversible binding of RSG to human serum albumin was assessed in an in vitro study, in which was found that there was some irreversible binding to serum (up to 6.7% of the added RSG). Subsequently, antigenicity studies were conducted. No antigenic potential was observed in the active systemic anaphylaxis test in guinea pigs and in the passive cutaneous anaphylaxis test in both guinea pigs and mice.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The Expert Report for GLIM describes that tThe results of an active systemic anaphylaxis test,  and a homologous  4 hour  passive  cutaneous  anaphylaxis  test  in  guinea  pigs  and  the  a  4 hour  passive cutaneous  anaphylaxis  test  in  rats  were  negative  is  assays  with  GLIM.    .  GLIM-sulphonamide presented no evidence of sensitizing properties when tested in the Magnusson and Kligman model.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment An  environmental  risk  assessment  was  provided.  The  company  committed  to  provide  further information as a follow-up measures. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects Pharmacology. RSG  is  a  selective  agonist  at  the  PPAR γ nuclear  receptor  and  is  a  member  of  the thiazolidinedione class of antidiabetic agents.  RSG is currently used in the clinical treatment of T2D. It reduces hyperglycaemia by reducing insulin resistance in adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver. The antihyperglycaemic activity of RSG has been demonstrated in several animal models with insulin resistance, and early treatment in genetically susceptible rodent strains has been shown to prevent the onset of overt diabetes. RSG did not stimulate pancreatic insulin secretion or induce hypoglycaemia in rodents.  The  major  metabolite  (a  para-hydroxy-sulphate),  which  has  high  affinity  for  the  soluble human PPAR γ ,  exhibited  relatively  high  potency  in  a  glucose  tolerance  assay  in  obese  mouse.  The clinical  relevance  of  this  observation  has  not  been  elucidated.  RSG  administration  influences  body weight, although the specific effects are dependent upon the model used. Long-term studies in rodents have clearly demonstrated that RSG has a durable β -cell protective action. RSG has also been shown to  protect  against  renal  damage  in  rats,  rises  in  systolic  blood  pressure  seen  in  untreated  fatty  rats, impairment of vascular endothelial cell function ex-vivo, and the formation of cataracts, which occur at  a  high  incidence in untreated diabetic rats. There were no significant findings in oral single dose safety  pharmacology  studies  that  examined  potential  effects  of  RSG  on  the  cardiovascular,  renal, respiratory, nervous and gastrointestinal systems. No findings of concern were reported in a limited number of pharmacodynamic drug interaction studies conducted with RSG. GLIM is an oral hypoglycaemic agent and a SU currently used in the treatment of subjects with T2D. It  lowers  plasma  glucose  levels  acutely  by  stimulating  insulin  release  from  the  pancreas.    This  is dependent upon functioning β -cells in the pancreatic islets since Single oral doses of GLIM lowered blood glucose concentrations in fed normal and diabetic rats, and in normal non-diabetic dogs. Tests in the dog showed this effect to be dose-dependent.  Repeat administration of GLIM in diabetic KK-Ay mice  ameliorated  hyperglycaemia  and  hyperinsulinaemia  associated  with  this  strain.  The  primary mechanism of action of GLIM is considered to be via the inhibition of opening of ATP-sensitive Kchannels (KATP-channels) found in the cell membrane of pancreatic β -cells, which ultimately results in the  release  of  insulin.    Additional  extrapancreatic  actions,  which  have  an  influence  on  glucose utilisation, metabolism and transport, have been identified in nonclinical studies and are hypothesised to contribute to the blood glucose lowering effect of GLIM, although the clinical significance of these actions  is  contentious.  Overall,  nonclinical  studies  have  demonstrated  that  GLIM  possesses a  lower propensity to cause effects in the cardiovascular system compared to other SUs. A number of studies have shown that GLIM does not affect the myocardial protective effects of ischemic pre-conditioning in rat and rabbit isolated heart preparations and in vivo in rabbits. There were no findings of concern reported in safety pharmacology studies that examined the potential effects of GLIM on the nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal and gastrointestinal systems. GLIM has been demonstrated to have partial PPAR γ agonist activity with a potency 16-25% of that of pioglitazone.

Pharmacokinetics. The bioavailability of RSG was approximately 100% and 60% in the rat and dog, respectively.  Absorption was rapid with Tmax values generally being 0.5 to 2 hours.  The elimination of RSG was rapid; the elimination half-life was 2 hours and 1 hour in the rat and dog, respectively. Exposure  to  RSG  (Cmax  and  AUC)  in  animals  increased  with  increasing  dose.    There  was  no accumulation or decrease in AUC values on repeat dosing, and differences in exposure between the sexes were seen only in the rat where AUC values in females were about 50 to 100% higher than in males. Tissue distribution studies with 14 C-RSG in the rat indicated that the highest observed tissue concentrations of drug-related material occurred at about 1 hour post-dose, and were generally lower

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

than the corresponding plasma concentration.  Tissue concentrations declined rapidly in most tissues; some degree of melanin binding was noted.  Blood cell association was limited in rat, dog and human samples, and plasma protein binding was high in mouse, rat, rabbit, dog and humans samples. The routes of metabolism were similar in the mouse, rat and dog, and in humans.  The sulphate conjugates of N-demethylation and pyridine ring hydroxylation products were the major circulating components in all species, after the parent compound. In the mouse, rat and dog, the major route of elimination of drug-related material was via the faeces (at least 60%) with the remainder being excreted in the urine. In humans, the majority of drug-related material was excreted in the urine.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The oral bioavailability of GLIM in rats was 60 to 70%; Tmax was approximately 2 hours.  Females exhibited  higher  exposure  (Cmax  and  AUC  values)  compared  to  males  (generally  about  two  fold). Following  oral  administration  of 14 C-GLIM,  absorption  of  radioactive  drug-related  material  was virtually  complete  in  rats,  rabbits  and  dogs.  At  doses ≤ 30 mg/kg/day  in  rats,  systemic  exposure increased approximately proportionately with increasing dose.  At doses of GLIM above 30 mg/kg/day in  rats,  and  at  all  doses  tested  in  the  dog  (0.8  to  320 mg/kg/day),  systemic  exposure  increased subproportionately to increasing dose.  Female rats exhibited significantly higher serum levels than males.  This difference was not seen in immature rats or in dogs.  No accumulation of drug-related material was noted. Following the oral administration of 14 C-GLIM in rats, the highest concentrations of radioactivity were recorded in the liver and gastrointestinal tract.  Twenty-four hours after dosing, only these organs contained detectable levels of radioactivity; no radioactivity was detectable at 7 days post-dose.  The distribution pattern following 10 day repeat oral dosing was similar to that noted after single administration.  In vitro, 14 C-GLIM was &gt; 99% bound to plasma proteins. Following the oral administration of 14 C-GLIM in pregnant rats, drug-related radioactivity was found to distribute to the foetus.  At all time points, concentrations of radioactivity in the foetal tissues were lower than those recorded in the corresponding tissues of the dam. Two major metabolites, termed MI and MII, and a variety of other minor metabolites were identified in the plasma, urine and faeces of the mouse, rat, rabbit, dog (not MII) and monkey.  MI and MII were the major metabolites detected in human urine and  faeces;  no  other  notable  metabolites  were  detected  in  human  samples.  Following  oral  or intravenous doses of 14 C-GLIM in the rat and dog, the majority of drug-related material was excreted in  the  faeces.    In  the  rabbit,  the  majority  of  drug-related  material  was  excreted  in  the  urine. Enterohepatic recirculation of drug-related material was demonstrated in the rat. Clinical data regarding the administration of  RSG  and  GLIM  in  patients  with  T2D,  either concomitantly or as the FDC, or RSG in combination with other SUs, are submitted in support of this application. In this perspective the lack of studies concerning the nonclinical pharmacokinetics of the drugs in combination was considered acceptable. Toxicology. Not  all  GLIM  data  were  covered  by  published  literature.  Data  on  toxicokinetics, genotoxicity, carcinogenicity, fertility, and pre-and postnatal development were completely based on the GLIM Expert Report, and the underlying studies were provided. Combination studies of RSG and GLIM were  considered  to  be  not  necessary  because  of  extended  clinical  data  on  this  combination available. Acute toxicity was low for both RSG and GLIM. Repeated dose toxicity studies with RSG revealed  increased  food  and  water  consumption,  body  weight  gain,  increased  fat  deposition  with displacement  of  haemopoetic  tissue  in  bone  marrow,  an  increased  plasma  volume  which  caused increased heart weight and left ventricular hypertrophy at exposure levels comparable to the human therapeutic exposure, and at higher dosages, hydrothorax. After repeated administration of GLIM, the only noticeable effects were of a pharmacological nature and consisted of degranulation in the β cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas and changes in the serum glucose concentrations. Cataracts as were found in some high dose dogs, were shown to be not drug dependent in bovine lenses and in rats and were observed only at very high exposures. Both RSG and GLIM have hepatotoxic potential. Because no repeat-dose toxicity studies have been done with the combination, it is not known whether a potentiation in hepatotoxicity is to be expected and the potential effect is supposed to be followed. Both RSG and GLIM were not genotoxic. An increased number of lipomas were observed in a 2-year carcinogenicity study of RSG in rats. In the evaluations of former RSG dossiers it was concluded that these were likely the result of persistent stimulation of adipose tissue. In an 8-week study in APC Min mice, an increase in the incidence of large intestine adenomas was observed. Since the APC Min mice were specifically sensitive to intestinal adenomas, the clinical relevance of the findings in this model is not  clear.  RSG  tumours  are  possibly  due  to  a  class  effect.  Regarding  the  possibility  of  interactions between RSG and GLIM, it is unlikely that GLIM will adversely influence the carcinogenic potential

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorise of the combination, because of the far lower affinity of GLIM for the PPAR γ receptor. Results from studies with GLIM showed that indeed there were no PPAR γ specific effects (either pharmacological or toxicological) caused by GLIM, indicating that it is unlikely that at clinically relevant doses, the combination of RGS and GLIM would result in synergistic or additive effects on carcinogenic activity mediated via PPAR γ . In GLIM carcinogenicity studies, islet cell adenomas were observed which were ascribed  to  chronic  pancreatic  stimulation.  Bronchio-alveolar  adenomas  were  observed  in  mice  and uterine  adenocarcinomas  in  rats.  For  these  tumours,  the  safety  margin  was  considered  to  be  large enough. In fertility studies, RSG caused decreased plasma progesterone and estradiol levels, resulting in  altered  oestrous  cyclicity in  rats  and  in  monkeys,  as  well  as  a  reduced  female  fertility  in  rats.  In embryotoxicity  studies,  RSG  caused  placental  abnormalities,  increased  embryo-foetal  death,  and intrauterine growth retardation and decreased skeletal ossification. After administration of RSG preand  postnatally,  an  increased  number  of  stillborn  pups,  a  lower  pup  survival  rate  and  a  delayed physical development were observed. No effect from GLIM on fertility was observed in male mice and in male and female rats. In embryotoxicity studies, GLIM caused several defects in small numbers of  foetuses  (eye  and  skeletal  effects  in  rats  and  rabbits  and  abortions  in  rabbits),  however  not  dose related.  In  pre-  and  postnatal  studies,  GLIM  caused  an  increase  in  foetal  death  rate  and  skeletal defects, the latter also during the lactation period. In a RSG juvenile toxicity study in rats, there were no target organs unique to juvenile rats. No juvenile toxicity studies were provided for GLIM, which is acceptable because the product is not indicated for children. RSG was mildly irritant to rabbit skin and moderately irritant to rabbit eye. RSG was no sensitiser in guinea pigs. No local tolerance studies were provided  for  GLIM,  which  is  acceptable  because  the  product  is  in  tablet  form.  No  evidence  for antigenicity potential was observed for RSG and GLIM. No immunotoxicity studies were provided for RSG and GLIM, but the clinical practice did not indicate that RSG and GLIM are immunotoxic. The impurity profile of RSG was similar to that of presented in previous dossier of RSG assessed via Centralised Procedure and thus adequately qualified. GLIM impurities GLIM-sulphonamide and the cis-isomer  were  sufficiently  qualified,  since  it  is  not  expected  that  in  the  combination  product,  the quantities of these impurities will be increased. Environmental Risk Assessment. An environmental risk assessment was provided. The company committed to provide results of the additional tests as a follow-up measures. 4. Clinical aspects Introduction Four clinical pharmacology studies were submitted with this application. These studies serve to bridge the clinical safety and efficacy data for RSG and GLIM used concomitantly as presented in this MAA to the FDC tablet. In addition, six clinical studies were submitted: four specific RSG+GLIM studies (one  with  the  FDC  tablets,  three  with  concomitant  RSG  and  GLIM)  and  two  sub-studies  from  the ongoing RECORD study, in which SU+RSG is compared to SU+MET. GCP The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. Pharmacokinetics

The clinical data to support the FDC includes 4 clinical pharmacology studies in healthy volunteers: (a bioequivalence study (study 797620/002), a food effect/bioequivalence study (study 797620/003), a dose-proportionality study (study 797620/001) and an interaction study between RSG and GLIM, that was  already  assessed  as  part  of  type  II  variation  for  AVANDIA  (EMEA/H/C/268/23,  approved February  2005)).  These  studies  demonstrated  notably  bioequivalence  between  RSG/GLIM  FDC tablets and concomitant administration of GLIM and RSG. Overall, the information provided was in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

accordance  with  that  included  in  the  SPC  in  the  UK  for  GLIM  and  in  the  SPC  for  RSG.  The demonstrated bioequivalence was used to bridge to further safety and efficacy studies where RSG and GLIM were administered concomitantly. The formulations of RSG/GLIM tablets used in the clinical studies were identical in formulation and method of manufacture to those proposed for commercial use.

Study SB-797620/001. There was one dose proportionality study performed with a combination tablet formulation  of  RSG  and  GLIM  (4mg/1mg;  or  4mg/2mg;  or  4mg/4mg)  in  healthy  subjects.  The objective  of  this  study  was  to  assess  the  dose  proportionality  of  GLIM  across  three  RSG/GLIM

Medicinal product no longer authorise · Bioequivalence Study  SB-797620/002 was  a  bioequivalence  study  with  a  FDC  of  RSG  and  GLIM  (4  mg/4  mg) compared to concomitant dosing of RSG 4 mg and GLIM 4 mg (4 mg+4 mg) commercial tablets in healthy subjects. The objective of the study was to demonstrate the bioequivalence of a combination formulation of RSG 4 mg/GLIM 4 mg relative to concomitant dosing of RSG 4 mg and GLIM 4 mg commercial tablets in the fasting state. Bioequivalence of the combination tablet formulation of RSG and GLIM (4mg / 4mg) relative to concomitant dosing of RSG and GLIM commercial tablets (4mg + 4mg)  was  demonstrated  for  the  RSG  component  (AUC  and  Cmax)  and  for  AUC  of  the  GLIM component, while 90% CI for the ratio A:B was not completely contained within the range 0.80 to 1.25  for  GLIM  Cmax.  The  GLIM  Cmax  was  estimated  to  be,  on  average,  12%  lower  following administration of the combination tablet, compared with values obtained after concomitant administration of the commercially available tablets. The lack of strict bioequivalence for GLIM Cmax was considered not clinically significant, as no safety issues would be associated with a reduction in Cmax. Efficacy should be unaffected as there was bioequivalence between GLIM AUCs. Study SB-797620/003 .  Because the SU and SU combination treatments are not dosed in the fasted state,  but  rather  dosed  at  mealtime,  a  study  SB-797620/003  was  designed  to  assess  the  relative bioavailability of the FDC compared to the separate components, in the more clinically relevant fed state. It was designed to assess the effect of food on the pharmacokinetics of a RSG 4 mg and GLIM 4 mg FDC tablet and to compare the pharmacokinetics of RSG 4 mg and GLIM 4 mg FDC tablet to concomitant  dosing  of  RSG  4  mg  and  GLIM  4 mg  commercial  tablets  in  the  fed  state  in  healthy subjects. When the combination tablet was administered with a meal, RSG AUC(0-∞ )  was unchanged compared to administration in the fasted state. The RSG  Cmax was moderately decreased approximately 32% with food, on average. Administration of the combination tablet (4mg/4mg) with food led to an increase in GLIM exposure relative to administration in the fasted state. GLIM AUC(0-t) and Cmax were increased by 30% and 55%, respectively, on average. This information was added to SPC of the FDC. For both RSG and GLIM, AUC and Cmax were similar following administration of the  combination tablet  compared to  concomitant administration of RSG and GLIM, both in the fed state. Tmax and t½ were also similar between the two formulations when each was given with a meal. Following administration of the RSG/GLIM (4mg/4mg) combination tablet, the extent of absorption of RSG was statistically significant different but considered not a clinically relevant different in the fed state compared to the fasted state, but the rate of absorption was reduced. The rate and extent of absorption of GLIM were modestly increased following administration of the combination tablet in the fed  state  compared  to  results  obtained  in  the  fasted  state.  Incomplete  or  a  decreased  rate  of  GLIM dissolution  at  4mg  in  the  fasted  state  might  explain  the  higher  (relative  to  fasting)  Cmax  and  AUC values observed in the fed state. The modest increases in GLIM exposure in the fed state (relative to the  fasting  state)  are  clinically  inconsequential,  given  that  dosing  with  meals  is  recommended  for thiazolidinedione/sulphonylurea combination therapy, and diabetic patients are titrated to an appropriate glycaemic response. The rate and extent of absorption of RSG and GLIM, in the fed state, were  equivalent  following  administration  of  the  combination  tablet  compared  to  concomitant administration  of  RSG  and  GLIM  as  the  currently  approved  commercial  formulations.  Under  fed conditions  RSG/GLIM  FDC  tablet  or  the  concomitantly  administered  RSG  and  GLIM  tablets  are considered bioequivalent, since the 90% confidence intervals for AUC(0-t) and Cmax for both RSG and GLIM were within the bioequivalence acceptance range of 0.80-1.25. · Dose proportionality and time dependencies

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

combination formulations 4mg/1mg, 4mg/2mg, and 4mg/4mg after a light breakfast. Four consecutive subjects  exhibited  pharmacokinetic  data  that  clearly  showed  inconsistency  between  observed  PK parameters and assigned dosing sequence. Their data were not consistent with the other 20 subjects in whom GLIM exhibited dose proportionality for AUC and Cmax over the dose range 1 to 4mg. Most probably these subjects received a different treatment sequence as was indicated by the clinical site. The clinical study site and bioanalytical site were inspected but there were no issues identified during the audits, which could have resulted in the problem identified. For these reasons, discussion of the pharmacokinetic results and conclusions are based primarily on results from the statistical analysis that excluded data from these four subjects (n=20); analyses of the full data set (including outliers, n=24) are  provided  in  the  study  report  for  completeness.  The  analysis  that  includes  the  outliers  (n=24) indicates that there is a less than dose-proportional increase in exposures, and thus there is no safety concern.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Based  on  dose-normalised  AUC(0-t)  and  Cmax  values  in  20  subjects,  the  pharmacokinetics  of  GLIM appears to be dose linear in the 1 mg to 4 mg dose range. This is in line with information on GLIM tablets,  for  which  dose-linearity  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  range  1-8  mg  for  AUC  values.  The composition of the 4 mg RSG FDC and 8 mg RSG FDC tablets are dose proportional (i.e. the ratio between RSG and excipients is the same except for the filler lactose to compensate for the increased amount  RSG  granulate),  dissolution  profiles  across  all  tablet  strengths  are  similar,  and  as,  the pharmacokinetics of RSG have been shown previously to be dose linear in the range 0.2 to 20 mg, also the RSG, the 8mg FDC tablets, for which no studies were submitted, can be considered bioequivalent with respect to extent and rate of absorption of RSG. · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies Results of the in vivo studies to date do not show any clinically relevant interactions between RSG and SUs,  and  they  are  frequently  used  concomitantly.  The  potential  for  a  clinically  relevant  druginteraction between RSG and GLIM is low since RSG and GLIM are predominantly metabolised via different enzyme systems (CYP2C8 and CYP2C9, respectively). Study  BRL-049653/340 in  healthy  male  and  female  volunteers  was  undertaken  to  investigate  the pharmacokinetic  interaction  between  8  mg  RSG  and  4  mg  GLIM.  This  study  has  been  assessed previously  in  the  type  II  variation  of  Avandia ® (EMEA/H/C/268-270/II/23).  Pharmacokinetic  data from this study showed that the concomitant administration of RSG in steady-state and single dose GLIM caused modest 22% and 24% decrease in GLIM AUC and Cmax respectively, accompanied by a decrease  of  t 1/2 by  1  to  3  hours.  This  decrease  is  considered  as  clinically  insignificant  since  GLIM requires individualised dosing to desired glucose-lowering response. RSG AUC decreased on average 17%  upon  repeated  administration,  which  is  consistent  with  previous  observations.  Cmax  and  Tmax values  were  similar  following  single  or  repeated  administration  of  RSG.  It  was  concluded  the pharmacokinetics  of  RSG  (8  mg)  in  combination  with  GLIM  (4  mg)  have  been  sufficiently investigated. · Pharmacokinetics using human biomaterials No studies have been identified from the GLIM published literature discussing use with other human biomaterials. No such studies have been carried out with RSG either. Absence of these studies did not hinder the evaluation of the safety or efficacy of the FDC. Discussion on pharmacokinetics Under fasted conditions, bioequivalence of the RSG/GLIM combination tablet (4mg / 4mg) relative to concomitant dosing of RSG and GLIM commercial tablets was demonstrated for the RSG component (AUC and Cmax)  and  for  AUC  of  the  GLIM  component.  The  GLIM  Cmax  was  estimated  to  be,  on average,  12%  lower  following  administration  of  the  4mg/4mg  FDC  tablet,  compared  with  values obtained  after  concomitant  administration  of  the  commercially  available  tablets.  However,  when administered  with  a  high  fed  breakfast,  RSG/GLIM  4mg/4mg  FDC  tablet  or  the  concomitantly administered RSG and GLIM tablets are considered bioequivalent, since the 90% confidence intervals for  AUC(0-t)  and  Cmax  for  both  RSG  and GLIM were within the bioequivalence acceptance range of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

0.80-1.25. The bioequivalence under fed conditions is clinically relevant, as RSG/GLIM combination should be taken with a meal (SPC section 4.2). When the combination tablet was administered with a meal, RSG AUC was unchanged compared to administration in the fasted state. The RSG Cmax was moderately decreased approximately 32% with food, on average. These RSG food-effect results with the fixed dose combination are consistent to those from previous pharmacokinetic studies examining the  effect  of  food  on  RSG  alone  submitted  with  the  original  marketing  application  for  RSG. Administration of the combination tablet (4mg/4mg) with food led to an increase in GLIM exposure relative to administration in the fasted state. GLIM AUC(0-t) and Cmax were increased by 30% and 55%, respectively, on average. GLIM has previously been reported to be 100% bioavailable relative to i.v. administration, however, this observation is based on a 1mg dose. In a previous food effect study, with an earlier formulation of GLIM 1mg, GLIM Cmax and AUC decreased 8-9%, and tmax increased 12% on average upon coadministration with food. Incomplete or a decreased rate of solubilisation of GLIM at the higher dose of 4 mg in the fasted state might cause the higher (relative to fasting) Cmax and AUC values observed in the fed state. Based on dose-normalised AUC(0-t) and Cmax values in 20 subjects, the pharmacokinetics of GLIM appears to be dose linear in the 1 mg to 4 mg dose range. This is in line with information on GLIM tablets, for which dose-linearity has been demonstrated in the range 1-8 mg for  AUC  values.  The  4mg/4mg  and  the  8mg/4mg  FDC  tablets  are  dose  proportional.  As  the pharmacokinetics of RSG have been shown previously to be dose linear in the range 0.2 to 20 mg, also the RSG 8mg FDC tablets, for which no studies were submitted, can be considered bioequivalent with respect to extent and rate of absorption of RSG.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Pharmacodynamics No new pharmacodynamic studies with FDC were submitted. Clinical efficacy The efficacy of RSG and GLIM were documented in their respective marketing applications, and both drugs  are  approved  for  use  in  the  treatment  of  T2D,  although  RSG  has  still  a  limited  indication. The clinical data package of this submission consisted of (1) a review of the scientific literature on GLIM, (2)  data  from  previously  submitted  for  RSG  studies  and  (3)  main  studies  (specific  data  on RSG+GLIM, both in combination and concomitant administration). (1) A review of the scientific literature on GLIM The review of the scientific literature included: 5 placebo-controlled studies, 6 active-controlled and 9 combination  studies.    The  placebo  and  active-controlled  studies  contributed  4238  subjects  to  the efficacy database with 2412 subjects receiving GLIM monotherapy. More than 500 further subjects were treated with GLIM in combination with other anti-diabetic medications such as TZDs, insulin and  MET.  In  addition,  3  observational/open-label  studies  are  discussed  which  include  more  than 22,000 subjects. Data from the placebo-controlled studies indicate that the dose response characteristics of GLIM appear to mirror those of other SUs, such as glipizide (GLIP), with a steep rectangular hyperbolic response to increasing drug dose. This dose response curve indicates that lower SU doses give the majority of the anti-hyperglycaemic effects such that half maximal doses of SUs appear to offer  essentially  all  of  the  long-term  glycaemic  benefit  in  most  subjects.  In  the  Goldberg study there was little additional benefit of 8mg GLIM compared to 4 mg GLIM (change in HbA1c at week 14 was 1.8% with 4 mg GLIM compared to 1.9% with 8 mg). In Rosenstock's study, statistically significant reductions in HbA1c were achieved with all GLIM dosage regimens (4 mg and 8 mg twice daily;  8  mg  and  16  mg  once  daily)  compared  with  placebo,  but  there  were  no  clinically  relevant differences among the four GLIM dose regimens.  HbA1c increased from 7.7% at baseline to 9.7% at week 14 (p&lt;0.001) in the placebo group whereas HbA1c values for the GLIM groups were 7.9-8.1% at baseline and 7.4-7.6% at week 14 across the 4 dose regimens. Active comparator studies with other SUs  have  demonstrated  no  significant  differences  in  glycaemic  efficacy  between  GLIM  and glibenclamide (GLIB). These studies had similar designs; dosages were titrated to target FPG values of 90-150 mg/dL over 8-12 weeks and treatment continued for between 27 and 52 weeks.  In the two studies comparing GLIM to GLIB, the doses used for both study medications were at the higher end of their respective dose-response curves.  In Dill's study, GLIM was up-titrated from 1mg to a maximum of 12 mg daily and GLIB from 1.25mg to a maximum of 15mg daily. The mean daily dosages were

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

GLIM 12.4 ± 3.5 mg and GLIB 15.0 ± 4.1 mg.  After a two-month dose titration phase in Draeger's study, the majority of subjects were taking GLIM 8mg od or GLIB 10mg bd. Although the dose of GLIM used in these studies was high, the dose of the comparator, GLIB, was also high, doses being above  the  half  maximal  dose  (4mg  GLIM  and  7.5  mg  glibenclamide)  of  each  agent.  Thus  in  the studies by Dills and Draeger both agents were being used at maximally clinically effective doses and hence similar glycaemic efficacy would have been seen at half-maximal doses of GLIM and GLIB to that seen at the higher doses used in these studies.

Medicinal product no longer authorise (2) Data from previously submitted RSG studies The key data from previously submitted RSG studies are those from the integrated dataset of studies, investigating 4mg and 8mg RSG given concomitantly with SUs, which were submitted as part of the recent Type II Variation to AVANDIA Tablets (EMEA/H/C/286/II/23). This dataset was made up of 9 double-blind studies and 3 open-label studies and included 3633 subjects. In  a  meta-analysis  across  the  double-blind  studies,  8mg  RSG  in  combination  with  SU  produced clinically relevant reductions in HbA1c and fasting plasma glucose (FPG) from baseline to 6 months. A dose-response was clearly demonstrated as greater decreases in HbA1c and FPG were observed at the 8mg RSG dose compared to the 4mg dose.  Furthermore, for those subjects that did not achieve adequate glycaemic control with 4mg RSG+SU, an increase in dose to 8mg was associated with an incremental improvement in glycaemia with a larger proportion of subjects achieving glycaemic goals. Additional significant data from the RSG+SU dataset are discussed as part of the discussion of the efficacy data from the clinical studies presented with this application (3) Main studies Efficacy  and  safety  data  relevant  to  the  RSG/GLIM  FDC  come  from  existing  RSG+SU  data (previously  submitted)  and  some  specific  data  on  RSG+GLIM  (both  combination  and  concomitant administration). The specific RSG+GLIM data come from four double-blind studies in T2D subjects; one  study  with  RSG/GLIM  FDC  tablets  and  three  studies  with  concomitant  RSG  and  GLIM administration. In addition, 18-month efficacy data and 12-month ABPM data are presented from twosub-studies from the ongoing, randomised, open-label study (study 231) comparing SU+RSG to the gold standard therapy SU+MET.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1. Overview of the clinical studies submitted.

| Study No.            | Study type           | Duration             | Treatment Group 1       | RSG/GLIM Dose         | N                    |
|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|
| Clinical Studies     | Clinical Studies     | Clinical Studies     | Clinical Studies        | Clinical Studies      | Clinical Studies     |
| RSG + any SU Studies | RSG + any SU Studies | RSG + any SU Studies | RSG + any SU Studies    | RSG + any SU Studies  | RSG + any SU Studies |
| 49653/231 2          | Open-label           | 18 months            | RSG+SU, SU+MET          | 4 to 8mg + SU 3       | 573 (301) 4          |
| 49653/231            | Open-label           | 12 months            | RSG+SU, SU+MET          | 4 to 8mg + SU 3       | 327(160) 5           |
| RSG + GLIM Studies   | RSG + GLIM Studies   | RSG + GLIM Studies   | RSG + GLIM Studies      | RSG + GLIM Studies    | RSG + GLIM Studies   |
| 797620/004           | Double- blind        | 28 weeks             | RSG/GLIM FDC, GLIM, RSG | 4mg/4mg 7 , 8mg/4mg 7 | 883 (435) 6          |
| 49653/325            | Double- blind        | 24 weeks             | RSG+GLIM, GLIM          | 4mg+2mg, 4mg+4mg      | 362 (181) 6          |
| 49653/234 2          | Double- blind        | 26 weeks             | RSG+GLIM, GLIM          | 4mg+3mg, 8mg+3mg      | 172 (115) 6          |
| HOE490/403 4         | Double- blind        | 26 weeks             | RSG, RSG+GLIM           | 4 to 8mg + 2 to 8mg   | 40 (25) 6            |

Objectives and treatment

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1. RSG = rosiglitazone, GLIM = glimepiride, SU = sulphonylurea (glimepiride [GLIM], glibenclamide [GLIB], gliclazide [GLIC]) 2. Previously submitted to the CHMP as part of Type II Variation for AVANDIA 3. SU dose (GLIM, 4mg/day; GLIB, 15mg/day; GLIC, 240mg/day) 4. 18 months RECORD glycaemic sub-study (SU stratum only) and those taking RSG + any SU in parentheses. 5. 12 months RECORD ABPM (ambulatory blood pressure monitoring) sub-study (SU stratum only) Efficacy Population and those taking RSG + any SU in parentheses 6. Indicates intent-to-treat (ITT) population and those taking RSG+GLIM in parentheses. 7. Indicates the maximum dose the subjects might receive. Starting doses were 4mg/1mg in both FDC groups and up-titration occurred to maintain the glycaemic target set for the study. METHODS Study Participants The number of subjects participating in each of the main studies is described in the Table EF 1. The mean age across studies 325, 234, 4034 and 231 was approximately 58 years (although it was 54 years in study 325) and the proportion of male subjects ranged from 42-59%. The majority of subjects were white (range 67-100%), particularly in the studies conducted in Europe. The mean baseline BMI was approximately 30 kg/m 2 in the European studies and 34 kg/m 2 in the predominantly US studies. The mean duration of diabetes ranged from 5-8 years across the studies, 92-100% of subjects had failed previous  oral  anti-diabetic  monotherapy  and  the  mean  baseline  HbA1c  and  FPG  ranged  from  7.98.4% and 155-191mg/dL, respectively (which were slightly lower than  the  ranges  in  the  integrated RSG+SU datasets; HbA1c ranged from 8.9-9.4% and FPG from 184-201 mg/dL). The drug-naïve subject population of study 004 were slightly younger (mean age 54 years) compared to the other studies (except study 325, where the mean age was also 54 years) with a mean duration of diabetes of 2.9 years. Other baseline characteristics were similar to the other studies: 77% of subjects were white, 59% were male, the mean baseline BMI was 32 kg/m 2 and mean baseline HbA1c and FPG were 9.1% and 11.7mmol/L (211mg/dL), respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The study 49653/231 (RECORD) comprised  two  sub-studies:  18  months  glycaemia  sub-study  and 12-month  Ambulatory  Blood  Pressure  Monitoring  (ABPM)  sub-study.  In  18  months  glycaemia  substudy subjects were randomised following a 4-week run-in period to receive either RSG in combination with background MET or SU or the standard combination of MET+SU. Subjects received open-label treatment, were treated to  a  target  HbA1c ≤ 7.0  %,  and  were  up-titrated  accordingly  to  a  total  daily dose of 8mg RSG or maximum permitted doses of MET/SU in the control arms. Results from this substudy  (6-months  data)  were  included  in  type  II  variation  for  AVANDIA  (EMEA/H/C/268/II/23).  A  12month Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring (ABPM) sub-study was conducted to compare the effect of RSG in combination with either MET or SU versus MET+SU on 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure at months 6 and 12. This application includes the 12-months data, however, this efficacy document summarises the data for the SU-stratum only (380 subjects enrolled).

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorise The following studies were all randomised, parallel-group studies in T2D subjects. Study 004 Study 004 was a 28 week randomised, double blind, parallel group study that compared RSG/GLIM FDC [4mg/1mg od titrated  to  a  maximum  of  4mg/4mg  od  (FDC  A)  or  8mg/4mg  od  (FDC  B),  as required to meet glycaemic targets] to GLIM (1mg od up to 4mg od, to meet glycaemic targets) or RSG (4mg od up to 8mg od, to meet glycaemic targets) in drug naïve subjects.  This study was carried out as part of the global development to support a first-line indication. · Study design Study 325 Study  325  was  a  24  week  randomised,  double  blind,  parallel  group,  placebo  controlled  study  that compared  RSG  (4mg)  added  to  GLIM  (2mg,  up-titrated  to  4mg  from  week  8  if  required  to  meet glycaemic targets) with up-titrated GLIM alone (4mg up to 8mg from week 8 if required) in subjects failing  monotherapy  (who  had  not  achieved  glycaemic  goals  on  half-maximal  GLIM  monotherapy prior to study entry).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Study design

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Study  4034  was  a  26  week  randomised,  double-blind,  parallel  group,  placebo-controlled  study  that compared the addition of GLIM (2mg/day, titrated to a maximum of 8mg/day to achieve target fasting blood  glucose  levels)  to  RSG  (4mg  or  8mg/day)  versus  RSG  alone  (4mg  or  8mg/day)  in  subjects inadequately controlled on RSG monotherapy.  This study was terminated early by the sponsor due to difficulty in recruiting eligible subjects and provides limited subject data (n=40).

Medicinal product no longer authorise Study 234 Study  234  was  a  26  week  randomised,  double  blind,  parallel  group,  placebo-controlled  study  that compared  RSG  (4mg  or  8mg)  plus  GLIM  (3mg)  to  GLIM  alone  (3mg)  in  subjects  inadequately controlled on GLIM monotherapy.  Data from this study were included in the recent Type II variation for Avandia tablets (EMEA/H/C/268/II/23). · Study design The run-in period of 4 weeks was short to identify 'real' non-responders. Stable treatment of 8 to 12 weeks preceding the study should be recommended to ensure that the maximal effect of the previous treatment has been observed. Study 4034

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Study Design

<!-- image -->

In  the  double-blind  studies,  the  proportion  of  subjects  withdrawing  due  to  an  AE  was  low  and comparable across the different treatments (range 0-4%). As expected, a higher proportion of subjects

Medicinal product no longer authorise Outcomes/endpoints The primary efficacy endpoint in the  four  double-blind  studies,  004,  325,  234  and  4034  was  mean change from baseline in HbA1c at the end of double-blind treatment. In addition, mean change from baseline  in  HbA1c  at  Month  18  was  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  for  the  open-label  18-month glycaemia sub-study 231. For the ABPM sub-study, the primary efficacy analysis was mean change from baseline in 24-hour ambulatory diastolic blood pressure at 6 months (submitted to the CHMP as part of the 8mg RSG + SU Type II variation. ABPM data after 12 months dual combination treatment were considered supportive and are included in this application. Mean change from baseline in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) to study endpoint was a main secondary efficacy variable collected for all studies. The proportion of subjects who achieved a target HbA1c ( ≤ 7% in studies 231, 325, 234 and 4034, &lt;7%  in  study  004)  and  the  proportion  of  subjects  who  achieved  a  target  FPG  (&lt;126mg/dL [&lt;7.0mmol/L] in study 004, ≤ 126mg/dL in study 325 and 231, ≤ 140mg/dL [7.8mmol/L] in study 325 and 234) were evaluated. These responder rate analyses were defined in accordance with CHMP and treatment  guidelines.  Additionally,  the  percentage  of  subjects  who  responded  to  treatment  with  a defined fall in HbA1c and FPG at the study endpoint was assessed. HbA1c responders were defined as subjects who had ≥ 0.7% decrease in HbA1c from baseline. FPG responders were defined as subjects who had ≥ 30mg/dL (1.7mmol/L) decrease in FPG from baseline. Both these criteria were based on regulatory precedents (0.7% acarbose; 30mg/dL troglitazone). Other variables included: change in lipid parameters, measures of HOMA insulin sensitivity and β -cell function, inflammatory and thrombotic markers, and albumin: creatinine ratio (ACR). Sample size In study 231, 77% and 91% of subjects in the 18-month sub-study and 12-month ABPM sub-study, respectively, were still receiving dual combination therapy; the proportion of withdrawals was similar for both treatment groups in each sub-study. In study 004, a similar proportion (approximately 87%) of drug-naïve subjects in each treatment group completed the study. In the concomitant RSG+GLIM studies (325, 234, 4034), 80-97% of subjects treated with RSG+GLIM completed the studies compared to 72-91% of subjects in the control arm of each  study.  This  is  similar  to  that  seen  in  the  RSG+SU  integrated  dataset  where  85%  of  subjects treated with RSG+SU and 73% treated with SU+PBO completed the studies, respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

withdrew  due  to  lack  of  efficacy  from  the  monotherapy  control  groups  (2-13%)  compared  to  the RSG+GLIM or RSG/GLIM FDC groups (0-4%).

Despite  the  different  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  for  studies  325,  234,  4034  and  231,  the demographic  and  baseline  characteristics  of  the  subjects  were  broadly  similar  and  were  considered representative of a T2D population failing monotherapy. In addition, the subjects were similar to the population included in the RSG+SU integrated dataset.

Study 4034 is the only study which recruited patients inadequately controlled by RSG monotherapy, but it has limited subject data. RSG+GLIM caused a statistically significant decrease in mean HbA1c at  week  26  compared  to  RSG+PBO.  Subjects  in  the  RSG+PBO  group  had  a  non-statistically significant higher mean baseline HbA1c than subjects in the RSG+GLIM group, however taking this

Medicinal product no longer authorise Statistical methods The primary population for statistical analyses within each study (with the exception of the 12 month ABPM  sub-study  231)  was  the  intent-to-treat  (ITT)  population.  This  population  consisted  of  all randomised subjects who had received at least one dose of study medication and had at least one valid on-therapy data value for an efficacy parameter. The primary analysis population for studies 004, 325, 234 and 4034 was ITT with the last observation carried forward (LOCF) for withdrawn subjects or those with missing values. A secondary statistical analysis  for  studies  004  and  325  included  the  ITT  population  without  LOCF.  For  study  234,  a secondary  statistical  analysis  was  carried  out  on  the  'Per-Protocol'  population  defined  as  those subjects who adhered to the protocol without any major deviation. For the 18 month glycaemia sub-study 231, the primary analysis population was ITT with a repeated measure analysis using all available data at each visit that compared RSG+SU with SU+MET at 18 months. A secondary supportive statistical analysis was carried out for a 'Per Protocol' population (all subjects  in  the  ITT  population  who  had  no  major  protocol  deviations  at  study  entry  or  at  any  time during the first 18 months of add-on treatment). A further supportive analysis assessed the differences between treatment arms with regard to changes from baseline in HbA1c at 18 months, using analysis of covariance on the ITT population with LOCF for missing visit outcomes. The  primary  analysis  population  for  the  12  month  ABPM  sub-study  231,  was  the  'Efficacy Population'. This was defined as all randomised subjects who received add-on treatment, who had a successful 24 h ABPM assessment at baseline and post-baseline (at either Month 6 or 12, or at early withdrawal, if this occurred sooner). The primary analysis employed LOCF for withdrawn subjects or those with missing values. A secondary analysis was performed on subjects in the Efficacy population who had ABPM data available at baseline and 12 months (i.e., without LOCF) Results HbA1c Endpoint A summary of mean change from baseline in HbA1c at treatment end for all studies is shown in Table 2. In 18-month glycaemia sub-study (321) SU+RSG was non-inferior to SU+MET after 18 months of dual combination treatment. In study 004, conducted in drug naive patients, there were significant (p&lt;0.0001) decreases in HbA1c in both the RSG/GLIM FDC groups compared to GLIM monotherapy (-0.63%, for FDC A and 0.66%, for FDC B) and compared to RSG monotherapy (-0.73%, for FDC A and -0.77%, for FDC B) after 28 weeks of treatment. There was no difference between the two RSG/GLIM FDC groups. This lack of dose  response  can  be  attributed  to  the  design  of  the  study  with  two  different  titration  strategies.  A demonstration of dose response relationship was not intended. Study 325 (patients inadequately controlled by non-TZD oral diabetic therapy) and study 234 (patients inadequately  controlled  by  glimepiride  3mg  od)  also  showed  RSG+GLIM  to  be  superior  to glimepiride monotherapy in reducing HbA1c with mean differences between groups of -0.55 for RSG 4mg to -1.10 for RSG 8mg. Although not formally statistically tested, there is evidence of a doserelated reduction in HbA1c with RSG+GLIM.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

into account, the reduction in HbA1c in the RSG+GLIM group was statistically significantly greater than the RSG+PBO group at all post-randomisation visits.

Table 2. Summary of mean change in HbA1c at treatment end: Study 004, 325, 234, 4034, 231.

| Study& Treatment              | Baseline                      | Change from baseline          | Change from baseline          | Comparison with Control group(s)                   | Comparison with Control group(s)   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                               | mean ± SD                     | mean ± SD                     | p-value                       | Adjusted mean                                      | p-value                            |
| Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride   | Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride   | Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride   | Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride   | Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride                        | Rosiglitazone + Glimepiride        |
| 004                           | 004                           | 004                           | 004                           | 004                                                | 004                                |
| GLIM 1                        | 8.96 ± 1.32                   | -1.72 ± 1.36                  | -                             | -                                                  | -                                  |
| RSG 2                         | 9.13 ± 1.27                   | -1.75 ± 1.49                  | -                             | -                                                  | -                                  |
| RSG/GLIM 3                    | 9.02 ± 1.30                   | -2.41 ± 1.39                  | -                             | Diff from GLIM, - 0.63 Diff from RSG, -0.73        | <0.0001 <0.0001                    |
| RSG/GLIM 4                    | 9.16 ± 1.36                   | -2.52 ± 1.40                  | -                             | longer Diff from GLIM, - 0.66 Diff from RSG, -0.77 | <0.0001 <0.0001                    |
| 325                           | 325                           | 325                           | 325                           | 325                                                | 325                                |
| GLIM 5 + PBO                  | 8.01 ± 1.01                   | -0.08 ± 0.84                  | 0.2143                        | -                                                  | -                                  |
| RSG(4mg) + GLIM 6             | 8.15 ± 1.08                   | -0.68 ± 0.95                  | <0.0001                       | -0.56                                              | <0.0001                            |
| 234                           | 234                           | 234                           | 234                           | 234                                                | 234                                |
| GLIM 7 + PBO                  | 7.9 ± 1.3                     | -0.08 ± 0.16                  | 0.625                         | -                                                  | -                                  |
| 4mg RSG+ GLIM 7               | 8.2 ± 1.4                     | -0.63 ± 0.16                  | 0.00015                       | -0.55                                              | 0.0305                             |
| 8mg RSG+ GLIM 7               | 8.1 ± 1.5                     | -1.17 ± 0.16                  | <0.0001                       | -1.10                                              | 0.0001                             |
| no 4034 12                    | no 4034 12                    | no 4034 12                    | no 4034 12                    | no 4034 12                                         | no 4034 12                         |
| RSG 8 + PBO                   | 8.4 ± 0.17                    | -0.3 ± 0.18                   | -                             | -                                                  | -                                  |
| RSG 8 + GLIM 9                | 7.9 ± 0.13                    | -1.2 ± 0.13                   | -                             | -0.9                                               | 0.0007                             |
| Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea | Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea | Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea | Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea | Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea                      | Rosiglitazone + Sulphonylurea      |
| 231                           | 231                           | 231                           | 231                           | 231                                                | 231                                |
| SU 10 + MET 11                | 7.97 ± 0.05                   | -0.61 ± 0.05                  | -                             | -                                                  | -                                  |
| SU 10 + RSG 8                 | 7.98 ± 0.04                   | -0.55 ± 0.06                  | -                             | 0.06                                               | 0.459                              |

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1. GLIM 4mg od to up to max possible dose of 4mg od 2. RSG 4mg od up to a maximum of 8mg od 3. 4mg/1mg od up to maximum possible dose 4mg/4mg od 4. 4mg/1mg od up to maximum possible dose 8mg/4mg od 5. GLIM dose 4mg od up to a maximum possible dose of 8mg od 6. GLIM dose 2mg od up to a maximum 4mg od 7. GLIM dose 3mg od 8. RSG dose 4 or 8mg/day 9. GLIM dose 2mg od up to maximum of 8mg od 10.  Glibenclamide 15mg/day or gliclazide 240mg/day or glimepiride 4mg/day 11.  MET up to 2.55g/day 12.  Data for study 4034 is presented as adjusted mean ± SE

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Baseline data

Despite  the  different  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  for  studies  325,  234,  4034  and  231,  the demographic  and  baseline  characteristics  of  the  subjects  were  broadly  similar  and  were  considered representative of a T2D population failing monotherapy. In addition, the subjects were similar to the population included in the RSG+SU integrated dataset.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The mean age across studies 325, 234, 4034 and 231 was approximately 58 years (although it was 54 years in study 325) and the proportion of male subjects ranged from 42-59%. The majority of subjects were white (range 67-100%), particularly in the studies conducted in Europe. The mean baseline BMI was approximately 30 kg/m 2 in the European studies and 34 kg/m 2 in the predominantly US studies. The  mean  duration  of  diabetes  ranged  from  5-8  years  across  the  studies,  92-100%  of  subjects  had failed  previous oral anti-diabetic monotherapy and the mean baseline HbA1c and FPG ranged from 7.9-8.4% and 155-191mg/dL, respectively (which were slightly lower than the ranges in the integrated RSG+SU datasets; HbA1c ranged from 8.9-9.4% and FPG from 184-201 mg/dL). The drug-naïve subject population of study 004 were slightly younger (mean age 54 years) compared to the other studies (except study 325, where the mean age was also 54 years) with a mean duration of diabetes of 2.9 years. Other baseline characteristics were similar to the other studies: 77% of subjects were white, 59% were male, the mean baseline BMI was 32 kg/m 2 and mean baseline HbA1c and FPG were 9.1% and 11.7mmol/L (211mg/dL), respectively. Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) Due to the differences in study populations and study treatments, it was not appropriate to integrate the efficacy data from any of these studies. Clinical safety · Introduction The  safety  profile  of  the  individual  components  of  the  FDC:  RSG  and  GLIM  has  been  well documented  in  their  respective  marketing  applications.    To  support  the  use  of  GLIM,  a  thorough review of scientific literature has provided a comprehensive assessment of GLIM safety and the key points  from  these  data  are  discussed  below.  A  discussion  of  the  key  data  from  the  previously submitted RSG data is provided to support this. The new clinical data supporting the RSG/GLIM FDC is presented. Safety data relevant to the RSG/GLIM FDC come from existing the RSG+SU data and RSG+GLIM data (both combination and concomitant dosing). For the study 231 sub-studies, safety evaluations were collected as per protocol but safety data have not been reported in order to maintain the integrity of the primary study outcome (cardiovascular death and/or hospitalisation). Body weight and  selected laboratory tests have  been  analysed  for exploratory purposes  only, i.e., to aid interpretation of ABPM data. · Patient exposure The review of the GLIM scientific literature done by Schneider in 1996 includes a review of clinical trials  conducted  in  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan  with  a  minimum  duration  of  2  weeks.    This  review concentrated mainly on the 21 US and European trials of which there were 4 placebo controlled, 12 active controlled, and 5 non-comparative trials.  Over 5500 subjects were included, with more than 3500 treated with GLIM; 1472 of these were treated for at least 1 year.  This safety overview is the largest identified in the literature and it concluded that the incidence and profile of AEs during GLIM treatment were similar to that of other SUs. A further key review of safety was that of Rosskamp who described the safety of GLIM from PBO controlled studies, and showed a similar safety profile to that of Schneider.  Evidence from the literature suggests that the incidence of hypoglycaemia with GLIM is at least not worse, and possibly slightly less, than with other SUs.  The incidence of deaths, non-fatal SAE and AEs leading to withdrawal were similar to GLIB and GLIP.  In addition, in common with other  SUs,  the  frequency  of  clinically  noteworthy  laboratory  abnormalities  was  very  low  for  all treatment groups.

The key data from previously submitted RSG studies are those from the integrated dataset of studies, investigating 4mg and 8mg RSG given concomitantly with SUs, which was submitted as part of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

recent Type II Variation to AVANDIA Tablets (EMEA/H/C/268/II/23, approved January 2005).  This dataset was made up of 9 double-blind studies and 3 open-label studies and included 3633 subjects. The double-blind dataset  included  885  subjects  treated  with  8mg  RSG+SU,  622  subjects  with  4mg RSG+SU and 1213 subjects were treated with PBO+SU. In the double-blind and open-label dataset, 1384 subjects were treated with 8mg RSG+SU and 1036 subjects were treated with 4mg RSG+SU.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The overall safety profile of 8mg RSG+SU was consistent with the product label and that described with 4mg RSG+SU.  In addition, the overall incidence of AEs was similar between the 4mg and 8mg RSG+SU groups (approximately 71% of subjects) and higher than the SU group (61%).  The two most commonly reported AEs were dose-related hypoglycaemia and weight increase, which were both more frequently reported in the RSG+SU groups than in the SU group.  The overall incidence of serious adverse events (SAEs) was low and was broadly comparable to the SU group. Deaths with RSG+SU were rare and comparable across treatment groups.  The specific RSG+GLIM safety data presented in this application, come from the clinical pharmacology and biopharmaceutical studies and four doubleblind, 6 month studies. In total 779 T2D subjects were treated in the double-blind clinical studies with the combination of RSG+GLIM; 442 received RSG/GLIM FDC tablets and 337 received concomitant RSG+GLIM. Due to the differences in subject populations and study treatments, it was not appropriate to integrate the safety data from these studies. Bearing in mind that the double-blind treatment period ranged from 24-28 weeks across the four studies, the mean duration of exposure for the RSG+GLIM (combination and concomitant) treated subjects ranged from 148-185 days and 141-182 days for the monotherapy control groups. · Adverse events The  clinical  pharmacology  and  biopharmaceutical  studies  showed  no  differences  in  safety  profile between  RSG/GLIM  FDC  and  concomitant  RSG+GLIM  administration.  Table  S  1  shows  the  ontreatment  AEs  reported  in  &gt;4%  of  subjects  in  the  double-blind  studies,  excluding  hypoglycaemia which wasn't reported as an AE in all studies. Hypoglycaemia and other AEs of interest are discussed in section 0. The type of AEs reported in subjects treated with RSG+GLIM (both RSG/GLIM FDC and concomitant administration) in the double-blind clinical studies in this submission is consistent with  that  described  previously  with  4mg  and  8mg  RSG+SU.  Within  studies  (except  4034),  the proportion of subjects with on-treatment AEs was similar across the treatment groups. Study 4034 did not  report  an  overall  frequency  of  AEs  for  each  group,  however  more  AEs  were  reported  in  the RSG+GLIM group than in the RSG+PBO group. The overall reported AE frequency was higher in both  treatment  groups  for  study  325  compared  to  the  other  studies  which  may  reflect  the  fact  that hypoglycaemia was included in the analysis of AEs in this study. However, the overall incidence of AEs in all four double-blind studies with RSG+GLIM, both RSG/GLIM FDC and concomitant RSG+ GLIM administration, was lower than that reported for the integrated double-blind RSG+SU dataset (4mg RSG+SU: 70.9%, 8mg RSG+SU: 71.5%, SU: 61.3%). The incidence of treatment-related AEs in study 325 was again higher than in the other studies, 36% and 21% of AEs in the RSG+GLIM and GLIM+PBO groups respectively. Hypoglycaemia was the most frequent treatment-related AE in both groups (16% and 9% for RSG+GLIM and GLIM+PBO, respectively).  Only  two  events  were  considered  treatment-related  in  study  234,  flatulence  in  the GLIM+PBO group and hypoglycaemia in the 4mg RSG+GLIM group and in study 4034, two reports of  weight  gain  were  considered  treatment-related  in  the  RSG+GLIM  group;  other  treatment-related AEs occurred with a frequency of one. In study 004, the overall incidence of treatment related AEs was similar between all the treatment groups and ranged from 8-11%. Weight increase was the most commonly reported treatment related AE and occurred with a frequency of 0-3% across the treatment groups. In the studies that reported severity of AEs, the majority were mild or moderate in severity and there were no differences in the frequency of severe AEs across the treatment groups. SUs are reported to  cause  some  gastrointestinal  side  effects,  however  the  incidence  of  GI  effects  in  the  current development programme was low and ranged from 7-13% across the treatment groups. There was a very  low  incidence  of  hepatobiliary-associated  AEs,  1  SAE  (cholelithiasis,  study  234)  and  no  AE withdrawals recorded which was similar for the RSG+GLIM (both RSG/GLIM FDC and concomitant RSG+GLIM administration) and monotherapy control groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3. Incidence of on-treatment AEs reported by more than 4% of subjects in any treatment group (safety population)

| Study 004                                     | GLIM N=222 n(%)                 | RSG N=230 n(%)                  | FDC A 1 N=224 n(%)              | FDC B 1 N=218 n(%)              |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Any AE                                        | 103 (46.4)                      | 116 (50.4)                      | 110 (49.1)                      | 114 (52.3)                      |
| Headache                                      | 5 (2.3)                         | 14 (6.1)                        | 7 (3.1)                         | 13 (6.0)                        |
| Nasopharyngitis                               | 8 (3.6)                         | 12 (5.2)                        | 9 (4.0)                         | 10 (4.6)                        |
| Hypertension                                  | 8 (3.6)                         | 12 (5.2)                        | 7 (3.1)                         | 5 (2.3)                         |
| Upper respiratory tract infection             | 4 (1.8)                         | 9 (3.9)                         | 9 (4.0)                         | 7 (3.2)                         |
| Arthralgia                                    | 1 (0.5)                         | 6 (2.6)                         | 7 (3.1)                         | 10 (4.6)                        |
| Weight increased                              | 0                               | 1 (0.4)                         | 9 (4.0)                         | 9 (4.1)                         |
| Study 325                                     | GLIM+PBO N=195 n(%)             | GLIM+PBO N=195 n(%)             | RSG+GLIM N=196 n(%)             | RSG+GLIM N=196 n(%)             |
| Any AE                                        | 117 (60.0)                      | 117 (60.0)                      | 132 (67.3)                      | 132 (67.3)                      |
| Nasopharyngitis                               | 19 (9.7)                        | 19 (9.7)                        | 10 (5.1)                        | 10 (5.1)                        |
| Upper respiratory tract infection             | 7 (3.6)                         | 7 (3.6)                         | 15 (7.7)                        | 15 (7.7)                        |
| Peripheral oedema                             | 11 (5.6)                        | 11 (5.6)                        | 8 (4.1)                         | 8 (4.1)                         |
| Tremor                                        | 6 (3.1)                         | 6 (3.1)                         | 10 (5.1)                        | 10 (5.1)                        |
| Back pain                                     | 5 (2.6)                         | 5 (2.6)                         | 8 (4.1)                         | 8 (4.1)                         |
| Influenza                                     | 10 (5.1)                        | 10 (5.1)                        | 3 (1.5)                         | 3 (1.5)                         |
| Study 234                                     | 3mg GLIM+PBO N=58 n(%) 4mg GLIM | 3mg GLIM+PBO N=58 n(%) 4mg GLIM | longer RSG+3mg 8mg RSG+3mg GLIM | longer RSG+3mg 8mg RSG+3mg GLIM |
| Any AE                                        | 27 (46.6) 24                    | 27 (46.6) 24                    | N=59 n(%) (42.1) 27 (45.8)      | N=59 n(%) (42.1) 27 (45.8)      |
| Bronchitis                                    | 9 (15.5) 7 (12.3)               | 9 (15.5) 7 (12.3)               | 5 (8.5)                         | 5 (8.5)                         |
| Arthritis                                     | no 3 (5.2) 3 (5.3)              | no 3 (5.2) 3 (5.3)              | 3 (5.1)                         | 3 (5.1)                         |
| Back pain                                     | 1 (1.7) 5 (8.8)                 | 1 (1.7) 5 (8.8)                 | 3 (5.1)                         | 3 (5.1)                         |
| Pharyngitis                                   | 4 (6.9) 3 (5.3)                 | 4 (6.9) 3 (5.3)                 | 1 (1.7)                         | 1 (1.7)                         |
| Gastritis                                     | 0 3 (5.3)                       | 0 3 (5.3)                       |                                 | 4 (6.8)                         |
| Other events                                  | 0 1 (1.8)                       | 0 1 (1.8)                       | 6 (10.2)                        | 6 (10.2)                        |
| Fever                                         | 1 (1.7) 4                       | (7.0)                           | 0                               | 0                               |
| Urinary tract infection Carpal tunnel         | 3 (5.2) 0 0                     | 3 (5.2) 0 0                     | 2 (3.4) 3 (5.1)                 | 2 (3.4) 3 (5.1)                 |
| syndrome                                      |                                 |                                 | 0                               | 0                               |
| Pain                                          | 3 (5.2)                         | 3 (5.2)                         |                                 |                                 |
| Study 4034                                    | product RSG+PBO N=15 n(%)       | product RSG+PBO N=15 n(%)       | RSG+GLIM                        | RSG+GLIM                        |
| Upper respiratory tract infection Weight gain | 3 (20.0)                        | 3 (20.0)                        | 2 (8.0)                         | 2 (8.0)                         |
| Headache                                      | 0                               | 0                               | 4 (16.0)                        | 4 (16.0)                        |
|                                               | 0                               | 0                               | 4 (16.0)                        | 4 (16.0)                        |
| Common Cold                                   | 0                               | 0                               | 3 (12.0)                        | 3 (12.0)                        |
| Foot pain                                     | 0                               | 0                               |                                 |                                 |
|                                               | 0                               | 0                               | 2 (8.0)                         | 2 (8.0)                         |
| Productive cough                              | 0                               | 0                               | 2 (8.0)                         | 2 (8.0)                         |

Special attention was paid to the well-known side effects of RSG of plasma volume expansion and fluid  retention.  Fluid  effects  can  result  in  oedema,  congestive  heart  failure,  anaemia  and  weight increase.

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1. Fixed Dose Combination of RSG/GLIM. FDC A starting dose 4mg/1mg up to a possible maximum of 4mg/4mg. FDC B starting dose 4mg/1mg up to a possible maximum of 8mg/4mg.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Oedema

In the RSG+SU dataset the incidence of oedema was greater in the 8mg RSG+SU group (12.4%) and the  4mg  RSG+SU group (7.4%) than in the SU alone group (1.6%). In study 004 the incidence of oedema AEs was low and similar between treatment groups (range 2.3-3.2%). All the oedema AEs were either mild or moderate in intensity. One subject each in the RSG, FDC A and FDC B treatment groups withdrew due to an oedema related AE. There were no oedema-related SAEs during the study. In  study  325  incidence  of  oedema  AEs  was  4.1%  for  the  RSG+GLIM  group  and  5.6%  for  the GLIM+PBO group. All of the AEs associated with oedema in both treatment groups were either mild or  moderate.  One  subject  (in  the  RSG+GLIM  group)  withdrew  due  to  a  peripheral  oedema.  There were  no  oedema  related  SAEs.  In  study  234,  two  subjects  (3.4%)  in  the  GLIM+PBO  group,  one subject (1.8%) in the GLIM+RSG (4 mg) and no subjects in the GLIM+RSG (8 mg) group had an oedema AE. For all three subjects the AEs were either mild or moderate and were considered by the investigator to be either unlikely or not related to study medication. In study 4034, 2 subjects in each group reported treatment-related oedema. Intensity was not reported.

Few SAEs were reported during the double-blind treatment period, with even fewer considered to be treatment-related,  and  there  was  little  difference  in  the  incidence  across  the  treatment  groups.  The overall  incidences  of  SAEs  in  these  studies  are  comparable  to  those  reported  in  the  RSG+SU

Medicinal product no longer authorise Congestive Heart Failure In the current studies there were 3 reports of CHF. One (0.5%) was in a GLIM monotherapy subject (study 325), it was moderate in intensity, considered serious and led to early withdrawal of the subject. After corrective treatment the event resolved. One (0.4%), in a RSG monotherapy subject (study 004), was severe in intensity, considered serious and led to early withdrawal of the subject. The third report (0.5%) of CHF was in a subject in FDC B group of study 004 but was not serious and did not lead to early withdrawal from the study. These results are consistent with the incidence of CHF seen in the integrated RSG+SU dataset - 6 subjects (0.7%) in the 8mg RSG+SU group, 2 subjects (0.3%) in the 4mg RSG+SU group and 2 subjects (0.2%) in the SU alone group. Anaemia The  incidence  of  anaemia  AEs  was  low  and  similar  for  RSG+GLIM  (both  RSG/GLIM  FDC  and concomitant  RSG+GLIM  administration)  and  the  monotherapy  groups  (range  0-2%).  None  were considered  serious,  all  were  mild/moderate  in  intensity  (intensity  was  not  reported  in  study  234  or study 4034) and only 1 subject withdrew due to anaemia (from the GLIM alone group in study 325). The  incidence  of  anaemia  in  the  current  studies  was  comparable  to  that  seen  with  the  integrated RSG+SU  dataset  in  the  previous  submission  (8mg  RSG+SU  (n=27,  3.1%),  4mg  RSG+SU  (n=8, 1.3%), and SU (n=8, 0.7%) groups). Body weight Weight gain is a well-described feature of treatment with TZD, particularly in combination with SU. It may be due in part to fluid retention, but also to fat deposition. In all four double-blind clinical studies and in the open label ABPM sub-study the subjects mean body weight increased between baseline and the study endpoint. Weight gain seen in the RSG+GLIM treated subjects (both RSG/GLIM FDC and RSG+GLIM  concomitant  administration)  in  this  development  programme  was  larger  than  in  the monotherapy groups but was comparable to that seen previously with RSG plus any SU. Hypoglycaemia Although  the  incidence  of  hypoglycaemia  in  the  RSG+GLIM  studies  was  higher  than  previously reported for RSG in combination with any SU, the increased reporting is suspected to be primarily as a result of the design of the studies and the way hypoglycaemia episodes were monitored in the studies i.e. daily self-monitoring of blood glucose and recording in diary cards rather than a real increase in incidence of hypoglycaemia with RSG+GLIM vs RSG plus any SU. This observation is supported by the lower incidence in study 234 which did not use self-monitoring of blood glucose/diary cards. The risk  of  developing  hypoglycaemia  with  RSG  in  combination  with  GLIM  is  reflected  in  the  Special Warnings and Special Precautions for Use section of the SPC and dosing advice is given accordingly. · Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

integrated double-blind dataset (4.6% for 8mg RSG+SU, 3.4% for 4mg RSG+SU and 3.9% for SU alone). In the previous RSG+SU submission, myocardial infarction was the most frequently reported SAE;  the  actual  numbers  were  low  (5  (0.6%)  in  the  8mg  RSG+SU  group,  1  (0.2%)  in  the  4mg RSG+SU group, and 2 (0.2%) in the placebo + SU group).

| Study 004                                 | GLIM N=222 n(%)         | RSG N=230 n(%)             | FDC A N=224 n(%)                  | FDC B N=218 n(%)                  |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Any SAE Facial palsy                      | 4 (1.8) 1 (0.5) 1       | 12 (5.2) 0                 | 8 (3.6) 0                         | 8 (3.7) 1 (0.5)                   |
| Study 325                                 | GLIM+PBO N=195 n(%)     | GLIM+PBO N=195 n(%)        | RSG+GLIM N=196 n(%)               | RSG+GLIM N=196 n(%)               |
| Any SAE Bacterial infection Hypoglycaemia | 8 (4.1) 1 (0.5) 1 (0.5) | 8 (4.1) 1 (0.5) 1 (0.5)    | 7 (3.6) 0 0                       | 7 (3.6) 0 0                       |
| Study 234                                 | 3mg GLIM+PBO N=58 n(%)  | 4mg RSG+3mg GLIM N=57 n(%) | longer 8mg RSG+3mg GLIM N=59 n(%) | longer 8mg RSG+3mg GLIM N=59 n(%) |
| Any SAE Cholelithiasis                    | 2 (3.4) 0               | 3 (5.3) 1 (1.8)            | 0 0                               | 0 0                               |
| Study 4034                                | RSG+PBO N=15            | RSG+PBO N=15               | RSG+GLIM N=25                     | RSG+GLIM N=25                     |
| Any SAE                                   | 0                       | 0                          | 0                                 | 0                                 |

Medicinal product no longer authorise Table  4  Summary  of  Overall  Incidence  of  Nonfatal  On  therapy  SAEs  Considered  to  be Treatment-related by the Investigator 1. Not considered to be treatment-related In the individual studies included in this submission, the only SAEs reported by more than one subject were unstable angina (2 subjects in the RSG+GLIM group of study 325), facial palsy (1 subject in the GLIM group and 1 subject in FDC B group of study 004) and non-cardiac chest pain (1 subject in the GLIM group and 1 subject in FDC B group of study 004). Further, in the individual studies, there were small numbers of reports of cardiac ischaemia, but no reports of myocardial infarction. All other SAEs occurred in only 1 subject. It is important to note that there were no SAEs reported for 8mg RSG + 3mg GLIM in study 234 (the only study that directly compared 4mg and 8mg RSG) suggesting that the  higher  dose  of  RSG  does  not  lead  to  a  worse  safety  profile,  a  fact  supported  by  the  overall frequency  of  AEs  across  the  3  treatment  groups  in  study  234.  Similarly  in  study  004,  the  overall incidence of AE and SAEs for the two RSG/GLIM FDC groups were similar. There were two deaths reported,  both  from  study  234.  One  non-randomised  subject  died  from  rectal  carcinoma  during  the run-in  phase  of  the  study.  The  other  subject  died  from  oesophageal  carcinoma.  He  received approximately 4 months of double-blind treatment in the 4mg RSG+GLIM group. The investigator considered the SAE to be unlikely to be related to the study medication.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Laboratory findings

Slight decreases in haemoglobin and haematocrit were seen. These are known side effects of RSG, due to plasma volume extension.  The percentage of subjects with ALT values of potential clinical concern while  on  RSG+GLIM  treatment  was  very  low  in  any  of  the  studies  and  comparable  to  those  on monotherapy treatment.  There were no other notable effects on laboratory parameters.

There have been no formal interaction studies with RSG/GLIM FDC, however the concomitant use of RSG+GLIM in studies and in widespread clinical use has not resulted in any unexpected interactions. Drugs that should be used with caution with the RSG/GLIM FDC are listed in SPC based on either

Medicinal product no longer authorise · Safety in special populations Renal  impairment  is  a  clinically  important  consideration  in  the  treatment  of  T2D  with  SU's  since reduced drug (and insulin) elimination may lead to an increased risk of hypoglycaemia. There is no data specifically evaluating the use of the FDC in renally impaired patients.  However, a recent posthoc analysis of studies using RSG and SU combination provides some useful safety data in renally impaired  patients.  The analysis  of  data  from  3  double  blind  studies  compared  the  tolerability  and efficacy of RSG+SU in 301 mild to moderate renally impaired patients (ClCr of 30 to 80 mL/min) with T2D  and  423  patients  without  renal  impairments  (ClCr  &gt;80mL/min)  [Agrawal,  2003].  Despite  the patients  with  renal  impairment  being  older  and  having  longer  disease  duration  than  patients  with normal renal function, examination of the AE profile in the population studied did not reveal obvious differences between the subgroups in terms of pattern or magnitude of AEs.  Reassuringly, symptoms suggestive of hypoglycaemia were reported in 4.8% (7 patients) with renal impairment and 5.4% (14 patients) with normal renal function.  With respect to GLIM, data is limited to two small studies. The first,  a  single-dose  study  in  15  patients  with  renal  impairment,  demonstrated  minor  changes  in pharmacokinetic profile. The second, a 3-month dose range study, demonstrated similar pharmacokinetic results. In the 3-month study, patients with a ClCr &gt;30 mL/min maintained glycaemic control with a range of doses between 1-8 mg daily (increased gradually).  A 1 mg dose was sufficient for  all  patients  whose  Cl Cr ≤ 22  mL/min [Rosenkrantz, 1996b; Profozic, 1999a], which is consistent with disease related impairment of insulin elimination. These findings must be interpreted with caution because of the small number of patient involved.  However, it is reassuring that analysis of combined data from three placebo controlled clinical trials suggests no difference in efficacy or adverse effects with  GLIM  between  patients  younger  or  older  then  65  [Campbell,  1998].  It  is  also  noted  that  the mutually recognised European label for GLIM makes no specific recommendations within the dosage section for renally impaired patients (other than contra-indication of those who are severely impaired) [Amaryl UK SPC, 2005]. To maintain consistency with the currently approved GLIM SPC [Amaryl UK SPC, 2005], GSK propose that the FDC should be contraindicated in patients with severe renal impairment (ClCr &lt;30mL/min).  The GLIM SPC provides no dosing advice for the mild to moderate patients (ClCr 30 - 80mL/min), however GSK consider that some advice is useful to aid the clinical management of the patient as they transition to the FDC.  The advice highlights the need to initiate and dose escalate glimepiride component of the FDC with care in RSG monotherapy failures.  In patients moving  from  an  SU  other  than  GLIM,  prescribers  are  advised  to  consider  risk  factors for hypoglycaemia  prior  to  initiating  use  of  the  FDC,  and  to  monitor  for  hypoglycaemia  once  FDC therapy is initiated. There  are  no  data  available  for  the  use  of  RSG/GLIM  FDC  or  concomitant  use  of  RSG+GLIM  in children.    Therefore,  the  use  of  RSG/GLIM  FDC  is  not  recommended  in  children.    In  the  pooled population pharmacokinetic analysis , age was not found to influence the pharmacokinetics of RSG or GLIM  to  any  significant  extent.    However,  it  is  recommended  in  the  SPC  that  the  initiation  and maintenance  of  therapy  with  RSG/GLIM  FDC  in  elderly  subjects  should  be  under  close  medical supervision due to an increased susceptibility to hypoglycaemia. A number of other precautions and contraindications are listed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the accepted SPC.  These  reflect  what  is  known  about  the  individual  components,  whether  used  alone  or  in combination. · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pharmacokinetic  interaction  studies  with  the  individual  components  (RSG  and  GLIM)  or  on theoretical class effects (GLIM), and reflect the currently approved SPCs for RSG and GLIM.

## · Discontinuation due to adverse events

Medicinal product no longer authorise The overall proportion of subjects withdrawn due to an AE during the clinical programme was low. Less than 4% of subjects were withdrawn from any treatment group with the exception of the RSG monotherapy group in study 004  where  6% of  subjects  were  withdrawn.  The  only  AE  resulting  in discontinuation of more than one subject was hyperglycaemia, which resulted in the withdrawal of 4 and 2 subjects in the RSG monotherapy and FDC B group of study 004, respectively. The frequency of withdrawal from the current studies is slightly lower than that reported for the RSG+SU integrated dataset of the RSG 8mg+SU submission where 7.8%, 3.7% and 6.7% of subjects withdrew due to an AE from the 8mg RSG+SU, 4mg RSG+SU and SU alone groups, respectively. No new or unexpected AEs were reported. There was no difference in the safety profile between concomitant and FDC use of RSG and GLIM. The profile reported is consistent with that described previously with RSG plus any SU. Few SAEs were reported with a similar incidence across treatment groups. The overall proportion of patients withdrawn due to an AE during the clinical studies was low as were the number of deaths. · Post marketing experience No access to GLIM post-marketing safety database was available for this MAA however, limited data has been provided for the reporting period 1995 to Q2 2003.  The estimated subject exposure to GLIM during this time period is 17,109,573 subject years, and the data provided supports a predictable well characterised safety profile with no additional concerns not signalled from the clinical trial database. With  more  than  6  million  subject  years  of  exposure  from  launch  to  September  2004,  the  postmarketing  safety  experience  with  RSG  supports  the  predictable  well-characterised  safety  profile established  from  an  extensive  clinical  trial  programme.    Further,  this  review  of  the  post-marketing events associated with RSG+SU demonstrates that the safety profile of RSG+SU is consistent with the previously described safety profile of RSG monotherapy.  Finally, although the data are limited, the safety profile of concomitant use of RSG+GLIM appears to be similar to that of RSG and RSG+SU. · Discussion on clinical safety The safety profile of the individual components of the FDC, RSG and GLIM has been documented in their respective marketing applications. To support the use of GLIM, a thorough review of scientific literature has provided a comprehensive assessment of GLIM safety. A discussion of the key safety data  from  the  previously  submitted  RSG  data  is  provided  to  support  this  application.  Safety  data relevant to the RSG/GLIM FDC come from existing the RSG+SU data and RSG+GLIM data (both combination and concomitant dosing). For the study 231 sub-studies, safety evaluations were collected as per protocol but safety data have not been reported in order to maintain the integrity of the primary study outcome (cardiovascular death and/or hospitalisation). Body weight and selected laboratory tests have been analysed for exploratory purposes only, i.e., to aid interpretation of ABPM data. No new or unexpected AEs were reported. There was no difference in the safety profile between concomitant and FDC use of RSG and GLIM. The profile reported is consistent with that described previously with RSG plus any SU. Few SAEs were reported with a similar incidence across treatment groups. The overall proportion of patients withdrawn due to an AE during the clinical studies was low as were the number of deaths. In the RSG+SU dataset the incidence of oedema was greater in the 8mg RSG+SU group  (12.4%)  and  the  4mg  RSG+GLIM  group  (7.4%)than  in  the  SU  alone  group.  In  the  four RSG+GLIM  trials,  incidence  of  oedema  was  similar  between  treatment  groups.  Incidences  of congestive heart failure, anaemia and body weight gain were also comparable to that seen previously with RSG plus any SU. The incidence of hypoglycaemia was higher than previously reported for RSG in  combination  with  any  SU.  This  might  be  due  to  the  design  of  the  studies  and  the  way hypoglycaemia  episodes  were  monitored.  The  risk  of  developing  hypoglycaemia  with  RSG  in combination  with  GLIM  is  reflected  in  the  SPC.  No  new  or  unexpected  laboratory  findings  were noted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Pharmacovigilance

## Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system

The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described by the applicant fulfils the legislative requirements.

<!-- image -->

| Safety concern                               | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Identified Risks that Require Further Action | Identified Risks that Require Further Action                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| PPAR γ fluid retention (oedema/CHF)          | product no longer Routine pharmacovigilance Ongoing Studies: A long term, open label, randomised study in patients with T2DM, comparing the combination of rosiglitazone and either metformin or sulphonylurea with metformin plus sulphonylurea on cardiovascular endpoints and glycaemia (RECORD - Study 231) A randomized, double-blind study to compare the durability of glucose lowering and preservation of pancreatic beta-cell function of rosiglitazone monotherapy compared to metformin or glyburide/glibenclamide in patients with drug-naive, recently diagnosed Type 2 Diabete Mellitus ( ≤ 2 years) (ADOPT - Study 048). A 16-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo- controlled, single-centre study to investigate fluid retention in insulin-treated subjects with T2DM and varying degrees of autonomic neuropathy when administered rosiglitazone 4 mg bd (Study 376) | Section 4.3 of SPC. Contraindication for history of cardiac failure (NYHA class I to IV) Warning in Section 4.4 of SPC for fluid retention and cardiac failure Oedema and heart failure listed as ADR in Section 4.8 of the SPC |
| Macular Oedema                               | Routine pharmacovigilance Examine incidence of macular oedema over longer RSG exposure in ADOPT and RECORD Implementation of targeted follow up questionnaires Continue to closely monitor spontaneous reports of macular oedema                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Type II variation to add macular oedema to SPC (information for prescribers and patients) It will be added to SPC as soon as Type II for Avandia finalised.                                                                     |
| Hypoglycaemia, especially in the elderly     | Routine pharmacovigilance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Advice in section 4.2 of SPC to consider and monitor for                                                                                                                                                                        |

Medicinal product no longer authorise Risk Management Plan The MAA submitted a risk management plan. Table Summary of the risk management plan

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorise

| Safety concern                                  | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Proposed risk minimisation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | activities hypoglycaemia when switching to Avaglim, particularly in the elderly Warning section in SPC section 4.4 regarding hypoglycaemia Hypoglycaemia listed as a ADR in Section 4.8 of the SPC                                                                                              |
| Potential Risks that Require Further Evaluation | Potential Risks that Require Further Evaluation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Potential Risks that Require Further Evaluation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Hepatic Events                                  | no longer Routine pharmacovigilance Close monitoring hepatic adverse in clinical trials and postmarketing experience Ongoing activities of the Avandia Hepatology Safety Board Annual Reports of hepatic adverse events received in association with RSG -provided as part of annual Avandia PSUR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Advice in section 4.2 of SPC regarding patients with history of hepatic impairment Contraindication for patients with hepatic impairment (Section 4.3 SPC) Warning in Section 4.4 of SPC regarding monitoring of liver function. Hepatic function abnormal listed as ADR in Section 4.8 of SPC. |
| Cardiovascular Outcomes                         | product Routine pharmacovigilance Statistical modeling of clinical trial data to investigate cardiovscular events - ongoing updates have been provided to the CHMP (most recent March 2006) Ongoing Studies: A long term, open label, randomised study in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus, comparing the combination of rosiglitazone and either metformin or sulphonylurea with metformin plus sulphonylurea on cardiovascular endpoints and glycaemia (RECORD - Study 231) A randomized, duble-blind study to compare the durability of glucose lowering and preservation of pancreatic beta-cell function of rosiglitazone monotherapy compared to metformin or | Contraindication for history of cardiac failure (NYHA class I to IV) Warning in Section 4.4 of SPC for fluid retention and cardiac failure                                                                                                                                                      |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety concern                                                                         | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                       |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                        | glyburide/glibenclamide in patients with drug- naive, recently dagnosed Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus ( ≤ 2 years) (ADOPT - Study 048) Worldwide Epidemiology: \"Coronary Heart Disease Outcomes in Patients Receiving Antidiabetic Agents\". This study has a retrospective cohort design with propensity score matching using administrative claims data to examine endpoints of myocardial infarction and coronary revascularization. |                                                                                                                             |
| Carcinogenicity                                                                        | longer Routine pharmacovigilance Follow-up of patients enrolled onto RECORD study extended to 10 years to monitor for neoplasma                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                             |
| Missing Information                                                                    | Missing Information                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                             |
| Lack of data regarding Avaglim use in children < 18 years of age and in pregnant women | Routine pharmacovigilance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Section 4.3 of SPC. Avaglim is not recommended in children < 18 years and in pregnant women, which is reflected in the SPC. |

Medicinal product no longer authorise The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the application, is of the opinion that no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 6. Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

Medicinal product no longer authorise The primary and secondary pharmacodynamics and the safety pharmacology of both RSG and GLIM have been investigated in a series of non-clinical studies, in vitro and in vivo .  In these investigations, RSG and GLIM were administered individually.    No  non-clinical  pharmacology  studies  have  been performed with these drugs administered as the fixed combination. The individual efficacies of RSG and  GLIM  in  the  treatment  of  T2D  patients  have  been  clearly  demonstrated.  There  were  no  new pharmacokinetic studies with the FDC or with RSG.  For GLIM pharmacokinetic data were extracted from published literature. Details of the methods used in all pharmacokinetic studies performed with RSG and its major  metabolites  were  submitted  and reviewed in  the  previous  European  MAA's  for RSG. No information was provided regarding possible pharmacokinetic interactions between RSG and GLIM.  However,  different  enzymes  metabolize  RSG  and  GLIM,  the  combination  has  been investigated  clinically  and  there  was  no  evidence  for  pharmacokinetic  interactions.  No  non-clinical toxicity  studies  have  been  performed  using  RSG/GLIM  FDC.  Therefore,  the  general  toxicological profile of RSG and GLIM has been investigated for both drugs when administered individually.  For GLIM data were extracted from  published  literature  and  the  expert  report  from  the  original  MAA. Combination  studies  of  RSG  and  GLIM  were  considered  to  be  not  necessary  because  of  extended clinical data with co-administration of both components of the combination. Acute toxicity was low for both RSG and GLIM. Repeated dose toxicity studies with RSG revealed increased food and water consumption, body weight gain, increased fat deposition with displacement of haemopoetic tissue in bone marrow, an increased plasma volume which caused increased heart weight and left ventricular hypertrophy at exposure levels comparable to the human therapeutic exposure, and at higher dosages, hydrothorax. These effects of RSG are well known and have already been discussed. After repeated administration of GLIM, the only noticeable effects were of a pharmacological nature and consisted of degranulation  in  the β cells  of  the  islets  of  Langerhans  in  the  pancreas  and  changes  in  the  serum glucose concentrations. Cataracts as were found in some high dose dogs, were shown to be not drug dependent in bovine lenses and in rats and were observed only at very high exposures. Both RSG and GLIM do not pose a genotoxic risk to humans. An increased number of lipomas were observed in carcinogenicity study of RSG and islet cell adenomas, bronchio-alveolar adenomas and adenocarcinomas were observed in carcinogenicity studies of GLIM but with a large safety margin. It is unlikely that GLIM will adversely influence the carcinogenic potential of the combination, because of the far lower affinity of GLIM for the PPAR γ receptor. In fertility studies, RSG caused decreased plasma  progesterone  and  estradiol  levels,  resulting  in  altered  oestrous  cyclicity.  In  embryotoxicity studies, RSG caused placental abnormalities, increased embryo-foetal death, and intrauterine growth retardation and decreased skeletal ossification. After administration of RSG pre- and postnatally, an increased  number  of  stillborn  pups,  a  lower  pup  survival  rate  and  a  delayed  physical  development were observed. No  effect from GLIM  on  fertility was observed in preclinical studies. In embryotoxicity  studies,  GLIM  caused  several  defects  in  small  numbers  of  foetuses.  In  pre-  and postnatal  studies,  GLIM  caused  an  increase  in  foetal  death  rate  and  skeletal  defects,  the  latter  also during the lactation period. An environmental risk assessment was provided. The company committed to provide additional information as a follow-up measures. Efficacy The efficacy of RSG and GLIM were documented in their respective marketing applications, and both drugs  are  approved  for  use  in  the  treatment  of  T2D,  although  RSG  has  still  a  limited  indication. The clinical data package of this submission consisted of (1) a review of the scientific literature on GLIM, (2)  data  from  previously  submitted  for  RSG  studies  and  (3)  main  studies  (specific  data  on RSG+GLIM, both in combination and concomitant administration). The results of the studies provided indicate that GLIM, RSG and RSG+GLIM are effective in patients with T2D. RSG is only indicated as add on therapy for patients inadequately controlled on monotherapy and as monotherapy to obese patients for whom MET is inappropriate. The reason to limit RSG monotherapy to obese patients for whom  MET  is  inappropriate  were  based  on  safety  concerns.  The  reason  for  this  still  holds.  The proposed indication for the RSG/GLIM FDC is treatment of T2D patients who are unable to achieve sufficient  control  on  optimal  dosage  of  sulphonylurea  monotherapy,  and  for  whom  metformin  is inappropriate because  contraindications or intolerance.  The  dosage  regimen  proposed  for  the RSG/GLIM  FDC  is  consistent  with  that  currently  approved  for  the  two  drugs  when  administered

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

concomitantly.  The  maximum  recommended  daily  dose  of  the  RSG/GLIM  FDC  is  8 mg/4 mg (RSG/GLIM). The accepted strengths for this product are 4mg/4mg and 8mg/4mg RSG/GLIM. As a follow up measure the Applicant committed to include in section 4.8 of the SPC 'macular oedema' to conform the ongoing variation for AVANDIA and to submit the up-dated risk management plan.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Safety The safety profile of the individual components of the FDC, RSG and GLIM has been documented in their respective marketing applications. To support the use of GLIM, a thorough review of scientific literature has provided a comprehensive assessment of GLIM safety. A discussion of the key safety data  from  the  previously  submitted  RSG  data  is  provided  to  support  this  application.  Safety  data relevant to the RSG/GLIM FDC come from existing the RSG+SU data and RSG+GLIM data (both combination and concomitant dosing). For the study 231 sub-studies, safety evaluations were collected as per protocol but safety data have not been reported in order to maintain the integrity of the primary study outcome (cardiovascular death and/or hospitalisation). Body weight and selected laboratory tests have been analysed for exploratory purposes only, i.e., to aid interpretation of ABPM data. No new or unexpected AEs were reported. There was no difference in the safety profile between concomitant and FDC use of RSG and GLIM. The profile reported is consistent with that described previously with RSG plus any SU. Few SAEs were reported with a similar incidence across treatment groups. The overall proportion of patients withdrawn due to an AE during the clinical studies was low as were the number of deaths. In the RSG+SU dataset the incidence of oedema was greater in the 8mg RSG+SU group  (12.4%)  and  the  4mg  RSG+GLIM  group  (7.4%)than  in  the  SU  alone  group.  In  the  four RSG+GLIM  trials,  incidence  of  oedema  was  similar  between  treatment  groups.  Incidences  of congestive heart failure, anaemia and body weight gain were also comparable to that seen previously with RSG plus any SU. The incidence of hypoglycaemia was higher than previously reported for RSG in  combination  with  any  SU.  This  might  be  due  to  the  design  of  the  studies  and  the  way hypoglycaemia  episodes  were  monitored.  The  risk  of  developing  hypoglycaemia  with  RSG  in combination  with  GLIM  is  reflected  in  the  SPC.  No  new  or  unexpected  laboratory  findings  were noted. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials and post-marketing have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. · User consultation During the approval process for Avandia (rosiglitazone), user consultation was undertaken for the patient information leaflet. The Avaglim patient information leaflet has been developed using the Avandia leaflet as key document. Therefore, the CHMP considered that the submission of a user consultation was not necessary. Risk-benefit assessment A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that:  pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns.  no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information.

The efficacy of adding RSG to SU, and GLIM in particular, is sufficiently demonstrated. The optimal dosage of GLIM is 4mg daily, and this dose is considered equally effective as the optimal dose of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

other SU's. The CHMP accepts that patients treated with other SU's (except chlorpropamide) could be switched to Avaglim.

Avaglim 4mg/4mg and 8mg/4mg can be used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients who are unable to achieve sufficient glycaemic control on optimal dose of sulphonylurea monotherapy, and for whom metformin is inappropriate because of contraindication or intolerance.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered  that the risk-benefit balance of Avaglim in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients who are unable to achieve sufficient control on optimal dosage of sulphonylurea monotherapy, and for whom metformin is inappropriate because contraindications or intolerance was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.