---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:54:53
document_pages: 17
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/avandamet-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: avandamet-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.3898902
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-25 04:58:41.780063
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Avandamet. For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Type  2  diabetes  (T2D)  is  a  chronic  progressive  disease  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia.  The mechanism  responsible  for  impaired  glucose  homeostasis  is  a  combination  of  decreased  insulin secretion  from  pancreatic β cells  and  insulin  resistance  resulting  in  increased  hepatic  glucose production  and  decreased  glucose  uptake  in  muscle,  adipose  tissue  and  liver.  Although  there  is increased insulin secretion in an attempt to compensate for insulin resistance early in the disease, with resultant  hyperinsulinaemia,  this  is  inadequate  to  maintain  normal  glucose  levels  and  diabetes develops. The aetiology of the disease is complex including both genetic and environmental factors. The commonest factors are obesity and physical inactivity. The  current  management  of  T2D  should  be  directed  at  both  the  treatment  and  prevention  of complications  including  tackling  the  underlying  pathophysiology  of  the  disease.  The  progressive nature  of  diabetes  is  characterised  by  rises  in  HbA1c  as  glycaemic  control  deteriorates  over  time (UKPDS 1995). This makes its management difficult with a need to intensify treatment and monitor frequently (UKPDS 33; UKPDS 34). Although the cornerstone of diabetic therapy is diet and exercise, the UKPDS highlighted that only 23% of patients on diet attained HbA1c of &lt;7% at 3 years and this was less than 10% at the end of the study (10 years). Thus to maintain glycaemic control as the disease progresses, there is a need for antihyperglycaemic agents and these are often required in combination. In addition to management of hyperglycaemia to prevent microvascular complications, prevention of macrovascular  complications  should  be  considered  by  aggressive  treatment  of  cardiovascular  risk factors associated with diabetes such as blood pressure, dyslipidaemia and central obesity. Metformin is  now  being  recognised  as  the  'gold'  standard  therapy  in  T2D  patients  who  are  overweight.  This follows the results of the UKPDS which showed that patients assigned to metformin had significantly lower  risk of death, myocardial  infarction and stroke compared  with  patients  who  received conventional therapy (diet and exercise). Sulphonylureas promote insulin secretion. The UKPDS demonstrated that SUs reduced HbA1c and microvascular complications but had no effect on macrovascular complications. Although the UKPDS highlighted the benefits of metformin and SU therapy it also demonstrated the lack of durability of effect associated with these older agents. By 3 years, less that 55% of patients allocated to any single pharmacological treatment could maintain fasting plasma glucose (FPG) levels &lt; 7.8 mmol/L or HbA1c levels &lt; 7.0%. By 9 years this figure had declined to approximately 25%. Other additional hypoglycaemic agents less commonly used include the meglitinides and Acarbose. The meglitinides reduce blood glucose by stimulating insulin secretion. Repaglanide (a meglitinide) was designed to normalise post prandial glucose fluctuations and gained approval in the EU in 1998. It is indicated as monotherapy and in combination with metformin (Repaglinide SmPC 1998). Acarbose is a competitive inhibitor of intestinal alpha glucosidases (Acarbose SmPC 1999-2002). It has limited usage and limited compliance due to GI side effects. Thiazolidinediones (TZD) act by reducing insulin resistance, and have been shown to provide added benefits in terms of reduction in HbA1c when added to either metformin or SU's. Insulin is clearly an option for the management of T2D but is generally used once control is no longer achieved with a combination of oral agents. Medicinal product no longer authorised

All  available  data  demonstrate  the  need  for  polypharmacy  in  the  majority  of  patients  with  T2D  in order  to  achieve  target  glycaemic  control.  Non-compliance  is  a  major  healthcare  problem  in  all therapeutic  areas  with  estimates  of  non-compliance  ranging  from  30-60%.  An  evaluation  of  the Medicaid patient population with T2D indicates that compliance with SU or metformin monotherapy is 36% higher than that associated with SU or metformin dual therapy (Daily 2001). Compliance can be promoted by the use of a single dosage unit combining two different classes of antihyperglycaemic agents  (i.e.  a  FDC).  That  is  the  reason  for  the  development  of  this  FDC  of  rosiglitazone  and metformin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Avandamet is a fixed dose combination of rosiglitazone and metformin. The proposed indication is 'in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients, particularly overweight patients, who are unable to achieve sufficient glycaemic control at their maximally tolerated dose of oral metformin alone'.

Rosiglitazone is a selective agonist at the PPAR γ nuclear receptor and reduces glucose by reducing insulin resistance at adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver. In animal models rosiglitazone preserved pancreatic islet mass and insulin content and prevented the development of overt hyperglycaemia. The glucose lowering effects in clinical trials was gradual in onset with near maximal reductions in FPG following approximately 8 weeks of treatment.

Two drug substances are used in this fixed combination product, rosiglitazone maleate and metformin hydrochloride.

Metformin is a biguanide that has antihyperglycaemic effects. The main mode of action of biguanides includes  a  reduction  in  hepatic  glucose  production  through  inhibition  of  gluconeogenesis  and glycogenolysis. Other effects delay intestinal glucose absorption and increase insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake into cells, particularly muscle. Metformin stimulates intracellular glycogen synthesis and increases the transport capacity of specific types of membrane glucose transporters (GLUT-1 and GLUT-4). Clinical studies have demonstrated a favourable effect on lipid metabolism independent of its glucose lowering effect. This is a stand alone application for a Marketing Authorisation (MA) according to Council Regulation EC No. 2309/93 (a centralised procedure). For the rosiglitazone component, reference is made to the original rosiglitazone application Avandia EU/1/00/137/001-012, approved in the EU in 2000. For metformin a bibliographic review is presented to  provide  justification  for  metformin's  'well  established  use'.  Two  oral  strengths  are  proposed containing 1 mg rosiglitazone and 500 mg metformin hydrochloride or 2 mg rosiglitazone and 500 mg metformin hydrochloride(1/500 mg or 2/500 mg tablets). Concerning the chemical-pharmaceutical information, in several sections also reference is made to the information already provided for Avandia. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Avandamet  is  a  fixed  dose  combination  of  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  hydrochloride.  Two  oral strengths are proposed containing 1 mg and 2 mg rosiglitazone (as free base) corresponding to 1.33 mg and 2.65 mg respectively to rosiglitazone maleate combined with metformin hydrochloride. They are presented as film coated tablets Apart from this difference in strength, the two formulations are identical, excipients include in the tablet core: sodium starch glycollate hypromellose, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose monohydrate,  povidone,  magnesium  stearate  ,and  in  the  film  coat:  hypromellose,  titanium  dioxide, macrogol 400, iron oxide yellow /red Film coated tablets are supplied in PVC/PVdC/aluminium blisters. Active substance Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Rosiglitazone maleate

The route of synthesis, site of manufacture, and control of rosiglitazone maleate drug substance are the same as accepted earlier in an authorisation for rosiglitazone tablets, (Avandia).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

As  before,  the  tests  and  limits  in  the  specifications  are  considered  appropriates  for  controlling  the quality of this active substance,

The stability studies concern the same studies and batches for which results already were provided for the commercial rosiglitazone tablets (Avandia). For this application however results are presented now covering 36 months at 25ºC/60% RH for 4 qualification batches and for 3 production scale batches (validation batches) and accelerated conditions (40ºC/75% RH) for 6 months for 4 validation batches and 12 months for 3 qualification batches.

As before, the stability results for rosiglitazone show no evidence of degradation when compared to the initial time point. There were no significant difference in assay content, related substances profile or water content results. The infrared spectrum showed no evidence for change in crystalline form or level of hydration. The results of the photostability study were conducted in line with the ICH guideline for photostability testing,  indicate  that  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  unusual  precautions  to  protect  the  substance  from light. The re-test period proposed is acceptable according to the stability data submitted. Metformin hydrochloride Information on metformin hydrochloride has been supplied in the form of an EDMF. Adequate In-Process Controls are applied during the synthesis. The specifications and control methods for intermediate products, starting materials and reagents, have been presented. Metformin hydrochloride specifications include tests for description, identification (IR, melting point, chlorides  test),  melting  point,  chlorides  test,  assay  (HPLC),  related  substances(HPLC)  residual solvents(GC),  particle  size,  heavy  metals(Ph  Eur),  sulphated  ash(Ph  Eur),  loss  on  drying(Ph  Eur), solubility(Ph Eur) Batch analysis data of the three lots of metformin hydrochloride drug substances are provided. The three lots are within the specifications and consistent from batch to batch. The  tests  and  limits  in  the  specifications  are  considered  appropriate  for  controlling  the  quality  of metformin hydrochloride. According  to  the  literature,  Metformin  hydrochloride  is  very  stable  in  the  solid  state.  It  thermally decomposes  only  at  temperature  exceeding  230°C.  However,  on  exposure  to  alkaline  solutions  it decomposes to form ammonia and dimethylamine. Forced degradations studies have been performed in order to confirm the literature data. The long term storage conditions were used according FDA guideline until February 2000 (i.e. 25 30°C  and  ambient  humidity)  and  ICH  guidelines  since  February  2000  (i.e.  25°C  /  60%RH)  in  10 batches during up to 60 months. The parameters tested were: description, solubility, melting point, loss on  drying,  assay and related substances. One batch of drug substance was also exposed to light in line with ICH guideline for photostability testing. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In view of these results and the information from literature, the proposed re-test is acceptable.

## Other ingredients

The excipients sodium starch glycollate hypromellose, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, Povidone are tested according to PhEur.

The iron oxide yellow and red meet the requirements of E172 in EC Directive 95/45/EC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Regarding the TSE compliance of the excipients, the lactose monohydrate is classified as a category IV  excipient  in  the  CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting  animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via medicinal products.

Tablets are  packed into  blister  strips.  The  blister  strip  comprises  an  opaque  white  PVC  film  with  a PVdC  layer,  sealed  with  an  aluminium  lidding  foil  with  a  vinyl  acrylic  heat  seal  coating.  The packaging  components  comply  with  directives  pertaining  to  suitability  for  direct  contact  with foodstuffs.

## Product development and finished product

.

As the product is a combination of two existing oral antidiabetics, the product was developed to be bioequivalent to  commercial  products  containing the individual active substances. The  tablet formulations were developed to provide fast release of both active substances, and to incorporate the same,  stable,  granular  concentrate  of  rosiglitazone  maleate  than  those  were  established  for  the manufacture of commercial rosiglitazone tablets. The  tablet  formulations  used  during  the  clinical  trials  were  identical  to  those  of  the  proposed commercial formulations. During formulation development, the particle size distribution of the two active substances, and the compatibility of the active substances with the excipients in the proposed formulation was examined. No major incompatibility was found. The  manufacturing  process  is  comprised  of  several  steps:  the  active  substances  are  mixed  together with the excipients, and the obtained mass is compressed into tablets. The  manufacturing  process  has  been  validated  by  a  number  of  studies  for  the  major  steps  of  the manufacturing process in three  production-scale  batches  of  each  and  is  satisfactory . The in process controls are adequate for this film coated tablet preparation. The batch analysis data show that the film coated tablets can be manufactured reproducibly according to the agreed finished product specification, which is suitable for control of this oral preparation. Product Specification The  product  specifications  include  tests  by  validated  methods  for  description,  identification  of metformin hydrochloride (HPLC), identification of rosiglitazone maleate (HPLC), assay of the active substances (HPLC), uniformity of dosage units (Ph Eur), dissolution profile,  microbiological  purity (Ph. Eur). Batch  analysis  data  on  three  production-scale  batches  (validation  batches)  for  each  of  three  tablets strengths confirm satisfactory uniformity in the product at release. Stability of the Product Stability data of three batches of both strengths stored for 18 months at 25ºC/60%RH and for up to 6 months  at  40ºC/75%RH  are  provided.  The  batches  of  tablets  are  identical  to  those  proposed  for marketing and were packed in the primary packaging proposed for marketing. Samples were tested for description, identification of metformin (HPLC), identification of rosiglitazone maleate (HPLC), assay of  the  active  substances  (HPLC),  related  degradation  products,  dissolution,  identification  of  the colorants, microbiological purity (Ph Eur), mean hardness, and moisture content. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In addition, samples previously stored at 25ºC/60%RH for 3 months were exposed to light as defined in the ICH Guideline on Photostability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products.

Based on available stability data, the proposed shelf-life and storage conditions as stated in the SPC are acceptable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bioequivalence

An  bioavailability  and  bioequivalence  study  was  performed  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  dose proportionality of  the  formulation  and  the  bioequivalence  of  the  combination  formulation  to commercial  rosiglitazone  and  commercial  metformin  hydrochloride  tablets.  See  clinical  part  of  the report for details.

## 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

The  pharmacology  of  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  has  been  investigated  for  both  drugs  when administered as individual drugs alone. Studies have been performed using a variety of animal species. Reports and summary information previously submitted and reviewed as part of the MAA submitted for each of these drugs individually have been also used. · In vitro studies In vitro data indicate that rosiglitazone activates the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma (PPAR γ ) nuclear receptor, which results in increased expression of a number of genes that play a key role in the regulation of glucose and lipid homeostasis. It  increases insulin binding, increases insulinstimulated  glucose  transport,  increases  the  total  adipocyte  content  of  GLUT-4  glucose  transporter. Rosiglitazone did not affect phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTPase), insulin receptor tyrosine kinase (IRTK) or amylin activity. · In vivo studies A number of in vivo studies in mouse and rat models of diabetes clearly show that rosiglitazone is a potent  and  orally  active  insulin  sensitiser  with  marked  antihyperglycaemic  activity  mediated  by improvements  in  insulin  resistance.  There  is  also  evidence  that  early  intervention  in  the  diabetic animals can reduce the progress of diabetes induced organ damage. Both in a mouse and in a rat model of type I diabetes rosiglitazone fails to affect glucose values which illustrates the need of an adequate pancreatic ß-cell reserve for the effectiveness of this drug. The glucose lowering effect of metformin has been studied in streptozotocin induced diabetic mice, obese  hyperglycaemic  rats  and  mice,  alloxan  induced  diabetic  rats,  genetically  diabetic  mice,  and normal mice, rats and guinea-pigs. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions In 1-month rat studies rosiglitazone was combined with the sulphonylurea glibenclamide or with the alpha-glucosidase inhibitor voglibose or with yeast-derived human insulin (Novolin-R). Rosiglitazone did  not  interact  with  voglibose.  As  expected  in  combination  with  glibenclamide  or  Novolin-R  as compared to rosiglitazone alone an enhanced therapeutic effect was observed. There was no evidence for new or increased toxicities as result of the combinations. · General and safety pharmacology programme No new non-clinical safety pharmacology studies were conducted using rosiglitazone/metformin fixed dose  combination.  The  safety  pharmacology  profile  has  been  investigated  for  both  drugs  when administered individually. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  the  previous  assessment  of  rosiglitazone  it  was  stated  that  the  preclinical  concerns  in  particular regarding  cardiotoxicity  should  be  addressed  in  clinical  postmarketing  studies.  Observed  effects  of cardiotoxicity  but  also  hepatotoxicity  have  been  recognised  and  dealt  with  in  the  SPC  Conclusions regarding the safety of metformin hydrochloride in metformin tablets have been substantiated by the established clinical safety of this compound, which has been used extensively in patients for over 40 years.

## · Summary of salient findings

Based on results of preclinical studies it can be concluded that rosiglitazone has high affinity to the PPAR γ and  that  rosiglitazone  has  shown  to  be  a  potent  and  orally  active  insulin  sensitiser  with  a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

marked antihyperglycaemic activity mediated by improvements in insulin resistance. The slow onset of action of the PPAR γ agonist rosiglitazone is in line with the theory that the synthesis of the active products  such  as  lipoprotein  lipase  and  GLUT-4  induced  by  activation  of  PPAR γ -responsive  genes needs time. Accordingly, the duration of action and offset time will be determined by the half-life of these products rather than by the binding of rosiglitazone to PPAR γ per se.

The  results  of  the  newly  submitted  pharmacodynamic  studies  do  not  include  clear  advantages  or disadvantages for the efficacy and safety of rosiglitazone. The contribution of M10 into the efficacy of rosiglitazone remains unresolved.

Metformin is a biguanide with antihyperglycaemic effects and a multifactorial mode of action. The first studies were performed with metformin in the 1950s. The precise mode of action of biguanides remains unclear but possible mechanisms of action include a reduction in hepatic glucose production through inhibition of gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, delaying intestinal glucose absorption and modestly increasing insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake into cells, particularly muscle.  Metformin stimulates  intracellular  glycogen  synthesis  and  increases  thetransport  capacity  of  certain  types  of membrane glucose transporters (GLUT-1 and GLUT-4). Unlike  the  sulphonylureas,  metformin  does  not  act  by  stimulating  additional  release  of  pancreatic insulin.    It  has  no  significant  effects  on  the  secretion  of  glucagon,  cortisol,  growth  hormone  or somatostatin.  Since  the  first  studies  were  performed  with  metformin  in  the  1950s,  there  has  been increasing recognition of the effectiveness of metformin as an antihyperglycaemic agent. Preclinical  studies  on  the  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  rosiglitazone  with  metformin  were  not conducted. Pharmacokinetics The applicant focussed on biotransformation and excretion studies of rosigitazone in mice and on the extent  of  plasma  protein  binding  of  metabolite  M10.  In  addition,  the  applicant  carried  out  a pharmacokinetic study of rosiglitazone in juvenile rat. The applicant submitted a new method for determination of rosiglitazone in plasma of juvenile rats because  smaller  aliqouts  of  plasma  needed  to  be  examined  compared  to  the  previous  method, submitted before for registration of rosiglitazone only. Absortion Following oral administration of rosiglitazone maleate, the bioavailability of rosiglitazone was high. Mean absolute bioavailability was found to be approximately 100%, 60% and at least 95% in rat, dog and man, respectively.  Rosiglitazone has thus been shown to be well absorbed and does not undergo substantial  presystemic  elimination  in  rat,  dog  and  human.    Absorption  was  rapid,  Tmax  values generally being 0.5 to 2 hours. After  single  oral  dosing  in  the  juvenile  rats,  systemic  exposure  to  rosiglitazone  generally  increased proportionally with dose, with no apparent sex differences. Similarly in adult rats, systemic exposure was proportional to dose increment up to 2 mg/kg, but subproportional thereafter and generally 50100% higher in  females  than  in  males.  Exposure  to  rosiglitazone  was  generally  lower  in  male  and female juvenile rats, at 20-50% and 12-40% of adult values, respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Oral  absorption  of  metformin  in  animals  is  rapid,  with  peak  plasma  levels  being  obtained  within 30 minutes in mice, 1 to 2 hours in rats, 1.75 hours in dogs and 0.75 to 2 hours in monkeys. In  man,  the  absolute  bioavailability  of  metformin  varies  between  50  and  60%  and  gastrointestinal absorption is apparently complete within 6 hours of ingestion. This low bioavailability is most likely a result of being protonated at intestinal pH as well as its poor solubility.

## Distribution

Rosiglitazone-related  material  distributes  rapidly  into  the  tissues  of  the  albino  rat  following  oral administration  of 14 C-rosiglitazone  maleate.    Tissue  concentrations  were  generally  lower  than  the corresponding  plasma  concentrations,  which  is  consistent  with  the  low  volume  of  distribution observed for the parent drug.  In pigmented rats, quantifiable drug-related material was still present in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

melanin-containing tissues (uveal tract and pigmented skin) 35 days after dosing.  This infers some affinity of rosiglitazone and/or its metabolites for melanin.

The plasma protein binding of rosiglitazone was comparably high (&gt;98%) in the mouse, rat and man, but  slightly  lower  in  the  dog.  Due  to  the  high  protein  binding  of  SB-332650,  the  major  human metabolite of rosiglitazone in man (M10), to plasma in man and dog (in excess of 99.9%), it was not technically possible to obtain data even at the highest plasma levels, however it was estimated that the plasma free fraction of SB-332650 was 28-fold lower than that of rosiglitazone in man. Binding of SB-332650 to plasma proteins was comparable in mouse and rat. The assumed higher protein binding of  M10  compared  to  rosiglitazone  reduces  the  contribution  of  M10  in  the  blood  glucose  lowering potential of rosiglitazone.

According  to  the  NfG  on  fixed-combination  products  (CPMP/EWP/240/95)  non-clinical  animal studies  with  the  active  substances  are  needed  unless  the  substances  have  been  extensively  (600 patients) and safely used in humans in identical/similar combinations for a long period of time ( ≥ 6 months). In the strict sense this is not possible for AVANDAMET as rosiglitazone has been granted a marketing  authorisation  since  July  2000.  Nevertheless  additional  non-clinical  studies  with  the combination  are  considered  not  necessary  since  the  submitted  PSURs  for  rosiglitazone  (PSUR  6, August 2002) did not  indicate  the  need  for  additional  non-clinical  studies.  In  addition,  non-clinical data on metformin revealed no special hazard for humans based on conventional toxicity studies. In the  previous  assessment  of  rosiglitazone  it  was  stated  that  the  preclinical  concerns  in  particular

Drug-related material crosses the placenta of the rat following oral administration of 14 C-rosiglitazone maleate and is secreted in the milk of lactating rats. For Metformine, after a single oral dose in mice, radioactivity first appeared in the stomach, urinary tract  and  bladder  and  later  in  the  salivary  gland  and  intestinal  walls.    The  highest  radioactivity  was found in the kidneys, adrenals, pancreas, liver, lungs and intestinal wall with little localised in brain or fat.  Multiple doses showed no apparent accumulation in the tissues.  Rats were similar to mice. At  2  hours  following  oral  administration  to  pregnant  rats  on  Day  16  of  gestation,  levels  of radioactivity were generally lower in the foetus than in maternal tissues. Metformin was also demonstrated to cross the placenta in rabbits following oral administration on Day 18 of gestation. When  given  to  lactating  rats,  the  ratio  of  total  radioactivity  in  the  milk  to  plasma  was  generally increased at later time points and had increased significantly by 24 hours post-dose. Metabolism Rosiglitazone  was  extensively  metabolised  following  oral  administration  in  the  mouse.  The  main routes of biotransformation were similar to those previously observed in rat and man. No metabolites  of  metformin  were  found  following  chromatography  of  urine,  faecal  and/or  plasma samples  from  mice,  rats,  dogs,  monkeys  or  humans.    However,  one  metabolite,  N-desmethyl metformin (N-monomethylbiguanide), occurs in the rabbit. Excretion Similar  to  other  animal  species,  rosiglitazone  was  mainly  excreted  via  the  faecal  route.  In  man  the urinary route predominates. After oral administration of 50-mg/kg metformin, excretion in the dog is mainly in the urine, with the monkey excreting almost equal amounts in the urine and faeces by 48 hours. Elimination of metformin into the urine is via tubular secretion. In  short,  the  submitted  additional  pharmacokinetic studies  generally do not change the current nonclinical view on rosiglitazone except for the fact that the contribution of M10 to the pharmacological effect of rosiglitazone is likely to be reduced substantially. Toxicology Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

regarding cardiotoxicity should be addressed in clinical postmarketing studies. Therefore, additional non-clinical studies are not needed with the fixed combination product.

Administration of single intravenous doses of SB-332650 (human metabolite, M10 of rosiglitazone) to male  and  female  mice  at  up  to  60  mg/kg  did  not  result  in  any  adverse  effects.  Higher  doses  were precluded by solubility limitations. The study is partly inconclusive, as effects due to activation of the PPAR  receptors  are  not  accounted  for.  A  repeated  dose  study  with  M10  might  have  been  more appropriate.  Nevertheless,  a  repeated  dose  toxicity  study  with  M10  will  not  be  required,  as  the outcome will not change our current preclinical view on rosiglitazone.

For metformin, rabbits and dogs were more sensitive to the acute effects of the product than mice or rats.  Signs of toxicity included decreased activity, ataxia and diarrhoea in all species.  Single dose oral studies demonstrated that metformin has a low order of toxicity. Repeat  dose  studies  of  at  least  12  months  in  duration  in  mice,  rats,  dogs  and  monkeys  have  been performed  with  metformin.    Non-clinical  data  reveal  no  special  hazard  for  humans  based  on conventional studies of repeated dose toxicity. Observations  from  the  juvenile  rat  toxicity  study  with  rosiglitazone  were  consistent  with  those reported in adult rats, and there were no unique target organs or effects on physical development of juvenile rats. Other studies performed on rosiglitazone or its metabolites presented did not identify any new safety issues and generally confirmed or investigated known toxicities. A full package of genetic toxicology and carcinogenicity studies has been performed for each product individually. There were no results in any of these studies that would cause concern over the safety of concomitant  administration  of  rosiglitazone  and  metformin.    Thus  no  further  investigations  were needed to support the use of the rsg/met FDC product. A  full  range  of  reproductive  toxicity  studies  was  submitted  along  with  the  previous  rosiglitazone application.  The  main  effects  observed,  the  impaired  female  fertility  and  the  impaired  post  natal development were only observed at multiples of clinical exposure and therefore not clinically relevant. Fertility and reproductive performance of male and female rats was unaffected by metformin at doses up to 600 mg/kg/day, which is approximately twice the maximum recommended human daily dose based  on  body  surface  area  comparisons  (Dollery,  1999).    No  effects  of  metformin  on  embryonic development were observed in rats or rabbits at oral doses of up to 600 or 140 mg/kg/day respectively. An  environmental  risk  assessment  (ERA)  for  rosiglitazone  maleate  and  metformin  hydrochloride (derived  from  use  of  Avandamet  tablets)  has  been  undertaken.  This  ERA  concludes  that  the compounds  derived  from  Avandamet  released  into  the  environment  are  not  expected  to  have  any adverse  effects.  No  adverse  environmental  effects  are  expected  to  occur  as  a  result  of  emissions associated with the disposal of unused product. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects Taking  into  account  the  precautionary  measures  in  the  SPC  with  respect  to  cardiotoxicity  and hepatoxicity, the preclinical information provides good assurance of safety for rosiglitazone for use in rosiglitazone/metformin  Fixed  Dose  Combination  tablets  at  the  proposed  therapeutic  dose  for  the treatment of diabetes in humans. In addition, the non-clinical data on metformin revealed no special hazard for humans based on conventional toxicity studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 4. Clinical aspects

This application  concerns a fixed dose combination (FDC) of rosiglitazone and metformin (rsg/met FDC). Rosiglitazone (Avandia) is a thiazolidinedione that was approved via the central procedure in the  EU  in  2000  for  combination  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes  (T2D)  in  patients  with  insufficient glycaemic control despite maximal tolerated dose of monotherapy. At the time of submission of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Avandamet  Marketing  Authorisation  Application,  Avandia  was  licence  for  combination  use  with metformin  in  obese  patients  and  consequently  the  clinical  section  of  the  MAA  refers  to  the  obese patient group.  The Avandia licence has subsequently been amended to allow combination use with metformin particularly in overweight patients and to ensure consistency, the Avandamet indication has been amended accordingly

## Clinical pharmacology

In support of the application two new pharmacology studies were submitted. These studies serve to bridge the FDC tablet to the original approval of rosiglitazone and metformin combination therapy in obese  patients.  These  new  studies  establish  the  bioequivalence  and  dose  proportionality  of  the rosiglitazone/metformin fixed dose combination to the concomitantly administered rosiglitazone and metformin.

The pharmacokinetic parameters of rosiglitazone are proportional to dose in the dose range 1 to 8 mg. The absolute bioavailability was 99%. Based on absorption data rosiglitazone can be taken without regard to food as the rate, but not the extent of absorption was influenced by food. Rosiglitazone is mainly distributed to the extracellular water (VD 16 L), is highly bound to plasma proteins (99.76%), and has a low clearance (3.4 L) and an elimination half-life of 3 to 4 hours. Rosiglitazone is almost completely metabolised with no unchanged parent compound excreted in the urine or faeces.

Pharmacodynamics  Mechanism of action Rosiglitazone is a selective agonist at the PPAR γ nuclear receptor and reduces glucose by reducing insulin resistance at adipose tissue, skeletal muscle and liver. In animal models rosiglitazone preserved pancreatic islet mass and insulin content and prevented the development of overt hyperglycaemia. The glucose lowering effects in clinical trials was gradual in onset with near maximal reductions in FPG following approximately 8 weeks of treatment. Metformin is a biguanide that has antihyperglycaemic effects. The main mode of action of biguanides includes  a  reduction  in  hepatic  glucose  production  through  inhibition  of  gluconeogenesis  and glycogenolysis. Other effects delay intestinal glucose absorption and increase insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake into cells, particularly muscle. Metformin stimulates intracellular glycogen synthesis and increases the transport capacity of specific types of membrane glucose transporters (GLUT-1 and GLUT-4). Clinical studies have demonstrated a favourable effect on lipid metabolism independent of its glucose lowering effect. Dynamic studies: No studies were submitted in which pharmacodynamics of the FDC were investigated. Pharmacodynamics of both components administered together were sufficiently studied and described in the previous marketing authorisation application. Pharmacokinetics · General: This application was supported by two pharmacokinetic studies, i.e. a bioequivalence/dose proportionality study and a food-interaction study. Furthermore, reference was made to a steady-state pharmacokinetic interaction study between rosiglitazone (Avandia) and metformin, which was already assessed for the application of Avandia. The pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone have been extensively studied and well documented after single dose administration up to 20 mg and repeat doses up to 8 mg/day in a total number of 494 subjects. Following  administration  in  the  fasted  state,  rosiglitazone  was  rapidly  and  completely  absorbed. Maximum plasma concentrations were reached about 1 hour after dosing at all dose levels. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The major routes of metabolism are N-demethylation and hydroxylation followed by conjugation with sulphate and glucuronic acid. RSG is predominantly metabolised by the cytochrome P450 iso enzyme CYP2C8, with CYP2C9 representing only a minor pathway. 65-69% of the dose is excreted via the urine and 25% in faeces. The elimination of total radioactivity from plasma was very slow, with a half-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

life of about 150 h. The major metabolite in plasma is sulphated para-hydroxylated RSG (M10). The predicted exposure (AUC) to M10 is approximately 22-fold higher than RSG at steady-state, while the unbound exposure is expected to be less or similar to that of rosiglitazone as the protein binding of M10  is  very  high  (&gt;99.99%).  Although  the  bulk  of  the  data  indicates  that  rosiglitazone  clearly contributes  to  the  pharmacological  activity,  the  possibility  that  the  main  metabolite  M10  may contribute to the effect cannot be ruled out. However this is not considered to raise safety concerns, as stated in the SPC.

Absorption of metformin takes place mainly from the small intestine, with an estimated half-life of 0.9 - 2.6 h. Studies have established that metformin is incompletely absorbed, with faecal recovery being about  30%  of  an  oral  dose.  The  absorption  is  slower  than  the  elimination,  with  peak  plasma concentrations reached after 2 h or later.

Oral bioavailability of doses between 500-1000 mg is 50-60%. Concomitant food intake may slightly impair metformin absorption; absorption is completed within 6 h. Once  absorbed,  the  distribution  of  metformin  is  rapid,  and  has  linear  pharmacokinetic  properties. Salivary glands, kidney and liver persistently accumulate metformin more then two-fold above plasma concentrations, while heart and skeletal muscle accrue concentrations above those of plasma at some time intervals. Metformin is not bound to plasma proteins. Metformin  is  excreted  unmetabolised  in  the  urine  in  laboratory  animals.  The  same  finding  was observed in man following early pharmacokinetic studies. But although some metabolic transformation  may  occur,  neither  conjugates  nor  any  other  metabolites  of  metformin  have  been identified. Estimates for the mean plasma elimination half-life ranges from 1.5-6.5 h. It is prolonged in patients with  renal  impairment  and  is  correlated  to  creatinine  clearance.  Therefore,  there  may  be  some prolongation of the half-life in the elderly because of deteriorating renal function. Appropriate advice on the use of metformin in the elderly population is presented in the metformin EU harmonised SPC. There are no human data on excretion in breast milk, but studies in lactating rats show excretion of metformin into milk. There is no placental transfer of metformin. · Interaction studies: There is surprisingly little literature available on the potential interactions of metformin and alcohol. However, the potential for interaction is recognised as clinically important. The interaction of alcohol and metformin potentates the antihyperglycemic and hyperlactatemic effect of metformin by inhibiting gluconeogenesis.  Hence,  patients  treated  with  metformin  should  avoid  alcohol.  Acute  alcohol intoxication and alcoholism are contraindicated in the SPC, which advises to \"avoid alcohol or alcohol containing medications\". Metformin, and therefore Avandament should be stopped prior to or at the time of X-ray examinations with iodinated contrast materials such as intravenous urography and aortography, where a risk exists for temporary renal insufficiency. This is stated in the SPC (Section 4.3 and 4.4) Glucocorticoids (systemic and local routes), beta 2 agonists, and diuretics have intrinsic hyperglycaemic  activity  and  therefore  should  be  used  with  caution  when  taking  metformin,  and therefore Avandament. Certain  drugs  tend  to  produce  hyperglycaemia.  These  drugs  include  thiazides  and  other  diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid,  sympathomimetics,  calcium  channel  blocking  drugs,  and  isoniazid.    When  such  drugs  are administered with metformin, the patient should be closely observed to maintain adequate glycaemic control. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The extent of absorption of rosiglitazone is not significantly affected by food. For the rsg/met FDC 4 mg/500  mg  tablet,  administered  under  fasted  and  fed  conditions,  the  90%  confidence  intervals  for rosiglitazone  AUCinf  were  within  the  bioequivalence  acceptance  range  of  0.80-1.25.  However,  the rosiglitazone  Cmax levels are statistically significant  reduced  under fed conditions, by approximately 22%, compared to fasting conditions. Rosiglitazone t1/2 values were similar (approximately 3.50 hours) under fed or fasting conditions.

The effect of food on the rosiglitazone Cmax and tmax in the rsg/met FDC tablet is comparable to the food effect that has been reported for Avandia.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Also  for  metformin,  the  extent  of  absorption  is  not  significantly  affected  by  food,  but  the  rate  of metformin absorption is statistically significant reduced under fed conditions, by approximately 15%. This is somewhat less than reported for metformin, where a decrease of approximately 40% under fed conditions is mentioned in the SmPC. The reported differences, however, are not considered clinically significant.

Moreover,  also  under  fed  conditions,  the  rsg/met  FDC  tablet  or  the  concomitantly  administered rosiglitazone (Avandia) and metformin tablets are bioequivalent with respect to the rate and extent of absorption of both rosiglitazone and metformin.

The food-interaction study has been performed with the 4 mg/500 mg strength only. This is considered acceptable, since the rsg/met FDC 1 mg/500 mg, 2 mg/500 mg, and 4 mg/500 mg tablets are doseproportional with respect to rosiglitazone.

## Dose response studies

Co-administration of rosiglitazone and metformin does not influence the steady-state pharmacokinetics of either drug, compared to either drug administered alone. · Bioequivalence studies: The 4 mg/500 mg rosiglitazone/metformin fixed dose combination (rsg/met FDC) test tablet and the 4 mg rosiglitazone (Avandia) reference tablet were shown to be bioequivalent with respect to the rate and extent of absorption of rosiglitazone, and the 4 mg/500 mg FDC test tablet and 500 mg metformin reference tablet are also bioequivalent with respect to the rate and extent of absorption of metformin. The pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone from the rsg/met FDC tablet appears to be dose linear in the 1 mg to 4 mg dose range. This is in line with information on rosiglitazone from the Avandia tablets, for which  dose-linearity  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  range  0.2-20  mg.  After  dose-correction,  the  1 mg/500 mg FCD tablet is bioequivalent with respect to the rate and extent of rosiglitazone absorption with both the 4 mg/500 mg FDC tablet and the 4 mg rosiglitazone Avandia reference tablet. The 1 mg/500 mg, 2 mg/500 mg and 4 mg/500 mg FDC tablets are dose proportional, i.e. the only difference is the amount of rosiglitazone granular concentrate. Therefore, also the 2 mg/500 mg FDC tablet, for which no studies were submitted, can be considered bioequivalent with respect to the extent and rate of absorption of rosiglitazone. Clinical efficacy Dose-response studies and main clinical studies Efficacy  and  safety  data  relevant  to  the  rsg/met  FDC  come  from  three  double-blind  studies  of rosiglitazone in combination with metformin, two of which were included in the original rosiglitazone MAA (093, 094). One study (044) has completed since the MAA. All 3 studies are submitted in this application.  Pooled  data  from  these  3  studies  (093,  094,  044)  has  been  evaluated  in  the  overall population, and a sub-set analysis is available in the target population of obese patients. All studies were undertaken in accordance with standard operating procedures of the GlaxoSmithKline Group of Companies, which comply with the principles of Good Clinical Practice. All studies were conducted with the approval of Ethics Committees or Institutional Review Boards. Informed consent was obtained for all subjects, and the studies were performed in accordance with the version  of  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  that  applied  at  the  time  the  studies  were  conducted.  Where regulatory approval was required, this was obtained from the relevant health authority. Medicinal product no longer authorised

For the FDC maximum dose of metformin is 2g daily, given in two times. This differs from the dose administered in the clinical studies (2.5g). It is suggested that there will be little clinical benefit from increasing the dose above 2g daily. The Applicant refers to a paper by Garber et al., who observed a maximum efficacy at 2000mg and not 2500mg metformin. However, the explanation for this finding was elusive: it is conceivable that the slightly higher discontinuation rate at the highest dosage may have diluted the effect on glucose variables at the  highest dose. There are no formal dose-response studies conducted with metformin. The best studies are that by Garber (1997) and the UKPDS 34, but

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

also from these studies there is no hard proof that metformin 2g daily is the optimal dose. However, the overall impression is that increasing the metformin dose above 2000 mg adds little to the efficacy whereas  there  is  a  clear  increase  in  gastro-intestinal  side  effects.  The  UKPDS  used  a  twice-daily regimen, and from that study it can be concluded that this regimen is effective.

## Main studies (phase III = therapeutic confirmatory trials)

The efficacy data for Rosiglitazone and metformin are public available and will not be repeated in this report. The evaluation will focus on the new submitted data: Study 044 and the pooling of this new study with the existing ones 093 and 094 to evaluate the target population of obese T2D.

1. Description of the study Both  studies  093  and  094  were  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trials  in  patients  who were not adequately controlled on maximal metformin monotherapy (i.e. 2.5 g daily). In study 094 the effects  of  two  different  doses  of  RSG  (4  mg  and  8  mg  od)  added  to  metformin  were  compared  to metformin monotherapy. Metformin was given as open treatment (2.5 g daily) in 500mg tablets to be taken in 2-3 times daily. In study 093 the effects of RSG 4 mg bd + metformin were compared to those of each agent alone. Metformin (2.5 g daily, 250 mg tablets) had to be taken 3 times a day: 4 x 250 mg in the morning, 2 x 250 mg in the afternoon, and 4 x 250 mg in the evening. Study 044, conducted more recently, was a randomised, double-blind, multicenter, placebo-controlled study with duration of 26 weeks. This study evaluated the effects of metformin alone or metformin and rosiglitazone  2  mg  or  4  mg  bid  on  HbA1c  and  FPG  levels  in  Mexican  Americans  who  were inadequately controlled on 2.5 g a day metformin. Study  participants  were  type  2  diabetic  patients  inadequately  controlled  on  a  daily  dose  of  2.5  g metformin.  Numbers  of  patients  included  in  study  093,  094  and  044  were  306,  339  and  152, respectively. Study 044 was conducted in 5 centres in Mexico and 5 centres  in Canada. Inclusion criteria were: males and females, 40 to 80 years of age, with a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus; patients with fasting C-peptide ≥ 0.8ng/mL at screening and with FPG ≥ 140mg/dL and ≤ 300mg/dL at the visits 2 and  3  of  the  four  week  metformin  maintenance  period  (2.5g/day).  Exclusions  included  clinically significant  renal  or  hepatic  disease,  anaemia,  severe  cardiac  disease,  evidence  of  left  ventricular hypertrophy,  and  hypertension  (if  systolic  blood  pressure  &gt;180  mmHg  or  diastolic  blood  pressure &gt;110 mmHg). Patients were randomised either to rosiglitazone administered 2mg or 4mg twice daily or to placebo in a ratio of 1:1:1. The randomisation list was computer generated with a fixed block size. A total  of  237  patients  who  completed  study  093  and  290  patients  who  completed  study  094  were eligible to participate in the open-label extension study 113. Of these patients, a total of 460 (201 or 85% of patients who completed study 093 and 259 or 89% of patients who completed study 094) were enrolled into this study. 2. Primary endpoints In  study  044,  the  primary  objective  was  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  rosiglitazone  in  reducing hyperglycaemia when added to the therapy of NIDDM patients who were inadequately controlled on a maintenance dose (2.5g/day) of metformin. The primary endpoint was the reduction from baseline in HbA1c after 26 weeks of treatment in the rosiglitazone/metformin combination groups (rosiglitazone 2mg bid or 4mg bid plus metformin 2.5g/day) in comparison with the metformin monotherapy group (rosiglitazone placebo plus metformin 2.5g/day). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The secondary objectives  were  1)  To  compare  the  change  from  baseline  (visit  4)  in  the  metformin monotherapy group with the rosiglitazone/metformin combination groups in fasting plasma  glucose (FPG), fructosamine, C-peptide, immunoreactive insulin, and lipids, including total cholesterol, HDLcholesterol, LDL-cholesterol (calculated), VLDL-cholesterol, triglycerides and free fatty acids at week 26 (visit 9); 2) To compare two types of responder rates in each treatment group: one with respect to HbA1c (i.e., proportion of patients demonstrating a reduction from baseline of ≥ 0.7% at week 26), and the other with respect to FPG (i.e., proportion of patients demonstrating a reduction from baseline of ≥ 30mg/dL at week 26). In addition, the proportion of patients in each group who achieved target FPG

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(&lt;140mg/dL) is described;  3)  To  define  the  clinical  safety  and  tolerability  of  the  monotherapy  and combination groups by the assessment of changes in physical examinations, vital signs, body weight, clinical laboratory tests, adverse experiences and electrocardiograms (ECGs).

## 3. Statistical analysis

For  the  assessment  of  differences  between  the  treatment  groups  with  regard  to  continuous  efficacy variables,  an  analysis  of  covariance  (ANCOVA)  procedure  that  accounts  for  the  variability  due  to centres,  treatments  and  baseline  was  employed.  For  primary  and  secondary  efficacy  variable evaluation, pairwise comparisons for the difference in treatment means (RSG 2 mg or 4 mg bd groups vs.  placebo  group)  were  performed  using  Dunnett's  adjustment  for  two  comparisons.  Intent-to-treat (ITT)  population,  which  consisted  of  all  randomised  patients  who  had  at  least  one  on-therapy  data value  for  an  efficacy  parameter,  was  used  for  efficacy  analyses.  Each  analysis  was  carried  out separately with and without last observation carried forward (LOCF).

RESULTS 4 Study populations/accountability of patients The  demographic  characteristics  for  the  intent-to-treat  (ITT)  population  were  similar  in  the  three treatment groups except that in the RSG 4mg bd group, more patients were ≥ 65 years of age and more were female than in the other two treatment groups. The history of type 2 diabetes mellitus was similar across all treatment groups in the ITT population. Mean baseline HbA1c and FPG were lower in the RSG 4mg bd group than in the other two treatment groups.  Few  patients  in  each  treatment  group  ( ≤ 6.4%)  had  been  previously  treated  with  diet  only. Slightly more patients in each treatment group had been previously treated with a single antidiabetic agent than with combination therapy. Of the 224 patients who entered the placebo maintenance period, 72 patients withdrew from the study prior to randomisation. Of these, 83.3% did not meet inclusion/exclusion criteria. Overall withdrawal from the study was higher in the placebo group than in either rosiglitazone treatment group 5 Efficacy results RSG 2mg bd or 4mg bd in combination with a maintenance dose of metformin was effective and well tolerated in patients with NIDDM previously inadequately controlled on metformin alone. Significant decreases  in  HbA1c  were  showed  in  both  RSG  groups.  Fructosamine  and  C-peptide  showed significant  decreases  compared  to  placebo.  Significant  differences  in  the  proportion  of  HbA1c responders and FPG responders were reported in both RSG groups.  The responders analysis showed a statistically  significant  difference in the number of HbA1c responders in the rosiglitazone treatment groups compared to the placebo group.  Target FPG was achieved in 27% of patients in the RSG 2mg bid and 51% of patients in the RSG 4mg bid group compared to 9% in the placebo group. Mean HbA1c decreased from week 0 to week 18 in both RSG treatment groups and then appeared to plateau to week 26. Mean HbA1c increased slightly in the placebo group between baseline and week 26. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

7.5 8.0 8.5 (ROSIGLITAZONE/044 - ITT Population) Clinical studies in special populations No adittional clinical studies were performed for this application Exploratory analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis). The results of study 044 are similar to study 093 and 094 with statistically significant decreases in HbA1c  and  FPG  compared  to  baseline  and  to  metformin  after  26  weeks.    In  view  of  the  similar designs and results of the double blind studies (093, 094 and 044) data has been pooled and evaluated together.  All  three  double-blind  studies  (044,  093,  094)  individually  demonstrated  clinically  and statistically  significant  decreases  in  HbA1c  and  FPG  compared  to  baseline  and  to  metformin  at  26 weeks.   The proportion of responders, defined as those achieving a reduction in HbA1c of ≥ 0.7%, was also statistically greater in patients treated with concomitant metformin and rosiglitazone compared to metformin alone. Discussion on clinical efficacy The newly submitted study 044 confirms the results of the formerly submitted studies 093 and 094. There are no formal dose-response studies conducted with metformin.  In all the studies the dose of RSG was 4mg or 8mg daily, and metformin was administered in a dose of 2.5g daily mostly in three times.  No  clinical  efficacy  studies  were  performed  with  the  FDC  tablet.  As  the  FDC  tablet  is bioequivalent  to  both  monocomponents,  no  new  clinical  studies  are  necessary.  However,  there  is  a difference in dosing. For the FDC maximum dose of metformin is 2g daily, given in two times. This differs from the dose administered in the clinical studies (2.5g). From the number of studies from the literature  submitted,  it  is  suggested  that  there  will  be  little  clinical  benefit  from  increasing  the  dose above 2g daily. Therefore,  in  spite  of  these  remarks,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  efficacy  of  the  proposed  dosage regime of this combination product has been demonstrated sufficiently. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical safety

There have been no specific safety studies conducted with rsg/met FDC. Limited data are available with  the  FDC  in  healthy  volunteers  from  clinical  pharmacology  studies.  The  safety  profile  of rosiglitazone  given  together  with  metformin  has  been  presented  in  the  rosiglitazone  MAA  and  the safety  profile  of  metformin  has  been  well  established.  Seven  Periodic  Safety  Update  Reports  have been prepared and submitted since the rosiglitazone MAA was granted. No new safety issues have been arisen during this time.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  short  term  safety  of  rosiglitazone  in  combination  with  metformin  has  been  established  in  3 double-blind studies (093, 094, 044). Study 113, an OLE of 093, 094, provides the long-term safety database for rosiglitazone and utilised 8 mg/day rosiglitazone and 2.5 g/day metformin. The result of this study is therefore highly relevant to this application.

## Patient exposure

There were 651 patients exposed to concomitant rosiglitazone and metformin during the double-blind and long term OLE study, giving a total exposure of 982 patient years of which 308 were obese (BMI &gt; 30kg/m 2 ).  The results of the obese subset of patients are directly applicable to the proposed target patient population and discussion will concentrate on this subgroup. The safety profile of these obese patients  treated  with  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  is  however  consistent  with  that  observed  in  the overall patient population.

## Discontinuation due to adverse events

Adverse events and serious adverse event/deaths Adverse  events  were  considered  in  those  studies  where  rosiglitazone  was  added  to  metformin  in patients failing maximum doses of metformin (093, 094, 044, 113). In double-blind studies (093, 094, 044), the overall incidence of AEs was higher in the rosiglitazone plus metformin group compared to metformin alone (80.9% vs 72.9%).  This higher incidence would be expected given the addition of a new  agent.  The  most  frequently  reported  AEs  in  obese  patients  during  this  period  were  upper respiratory tract infection (16.5%), diarrhoea (11.7%), anaemia (8.5%), and injury (8.0%). For  obese  patients  during  double-blind  and  OLE  studies,  adverse  events  of  particular  interest  were considered  to  be  hypoglycaemia  and  those  covered  under  Section  4.4  of  the  SPC  for  either rosiglitazone or metformin. In double-blind studies, there was a higher incidence of anaemia (8.5% vs. 2.3%), oedema (4.8% vs. 3.8%), hypoglycaemia (2.1% vs. 1.5%) and weight gain (1.6% vs. 0%) in the rosiglitazone  plus  metformin  group  than  the  metformin  alone  group.  There  were  no  cases  of congestive heart failure (CHF) reported in either treatment group during the double-blind phase. In  the  long  term  OLE  study  there  was  no  comparator  arm  and  the  exposure  to  rosiglitazone  and metformin was obviously much greater (30 months) than the exposure in the double blind studies (6 months). A higher number of adverse events were observed in this study. This finding is thought to be attributable to two factors: Firstly, patients previously treated with placebo or 4 mg rosiglitazone were treated with the higher 8 mg/day in the OLE. Secondly, as expected the increased exposure confers a higher probability of experiencing normal life events  and  events  attributable  to  the  underlying  disease.  Because  of  this,  presentation  of  AEs  by incidence  will  be  biased  against  the  open  label  treatment.  To  correct  for  this  bias,  the  AE  are  also presented by rates per 100 patient years of exposure. Thus although there are more events in the open label studies there is no increase in event rate. There  were  no  serious  adverse  events  or  deaths  reported  in  the  clinical  pharmacology  studies.  The overall  patient  population  (n=651)  is  reviewed  here  as  opposed  to  the  obese  subset  covered  in  the previous section. Five deaths were reported during the clinical trial programme, of which one (fatal MI) occurred during the double-blind phase (094). None of the deaths were considered to be treatment related. A  total  of  14  (3.2%)  patients  had  reported  SAEs  whilst  receiving  rosiglitazone  and  metformin compared to 8 (2.9%) metformin alone. Not unexpectedly this figure rises to 86 patients 13.2% when the open-label extension study is included. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A  total  of  19  patients  receiving  combination  therapy  withdrew  during  the  double-blind  phase compared to 15 on metformin alone. Withdrawals in the rosiglitazone plus metformin group due to AEs of interest have been reviewed. Two patients (0.5%) withdrew due to anaemia, 1 patient (0.2%) withdrew due to congestive heart failure and one patient withdrew due to hepatic events (0.2%). The overall withdrawal rate was very low (&lt;1%). When withdrawals from the open label extension study (113) are considered there were slightly more patient withdrawals due to these AEs compared to the double-blind period, particularly anaemia (1.1%) and oedema (1.1%).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Laboratory findings

Treatment with rosiglitazone has been  associated with anaemia and a  3.1% reduction in hematocrit was observed during  the  double-blind  phase  of  the  studies  when  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  were administered together.

There were no significant elevations of ALT during the double-blind phase and the incidence was very low 0.2% (0.1 per 100 patient years) during the extension phase. In line with the rosiglitazone SPC, monitoring of liver function is recommended. Both anaemia and hepatic impairment are discussed in Section 4.4 of the proposed SPC.

In line with the metformin SPC, monitoring of renal function is recommended. Renal impairment is discussed in Sections 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 of the proposed SPC.

The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way At the time of the CPMP opinion, there were a number of unresolved quality issues without impact on the clinical efficacy or safety of the product, therefore the applicant made a commitment to resolve these as postopinion follow-up measures.

There were no other notable effects on laboratory parameters. Safety in special populations There is limited data for the use of metformin in patients under 18 years. There is no data available for the  use  of  rosiglitazone  in  children.  Therefore,  rsg/met  FDC  should  not  be  used  in  children.  This advice is reflected in the proposed SPC. A number of precautions and contraindications are listed in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the proposed SPC. These  reflect  what  is  known  about  the  individual  monocomponents,  whether  used  alone  or  in combination. Discussion on clinical safety There  are  no  new  or  unexpected  safety  findings  reported  in  this  new  application.  The  known  side effects of rosiglitazone; anaemia, weight gain and oedema are known adverse events of rosiglitazone mostly due to fluid retention as previously indicated. Additionally GI symptoms are reported due to Metformin. In  three  patients  Cardiac  heart  failure  was  reported  (1%)  in  the  long-term  study,  which  didn't  raise concern in this patient population. With the marketing authorisation application, the applicant has made a commitment for cardiac safety studies for Avandia (rosiglitazone). These studies are planned or on-going at this moment. Seven Periodic Safety Update Reports have been prepared and submitted since the rosiglitazone MAA was  granted.  No  new  safety  issues  have  been  arisen  during  this  time  (PSUR  7,  March  2003).  The conclusions of this seventh PSUR were as follows: reporting rates on hepatic events remain very rare; the  reports  on  CHF  and  oedema  are  in  line  with  the  identified  risk  for  fluid  retention  by  RSG determined  during  the  European  review  of  the  MAA  and  are  adequately  reflected  in  the  approved SPC;  regarding  anaemia,  there  is  no  new  information  of  interest;  reports  of  pancytopaenia  and thrombocytopaenia are not considered to create any real signal, but these issues  will be kept under observations  in  upcoming  PSURs;  continuing  monitoring  is  warranted  for  pancreatitis  and  for interactions with warfarin. 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Quality Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology

The  pharmacology  of  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  has  been  investigated  for  both  drugs  when administered as individual drugs alone. No preclinical studies of the combination were conducted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For rosiglitazone, the results of the newly submitted pharmacodynamic studies do not include clear advantages  or  disadvantages  for  the  efficacy  and  safety,  and  corroborate  the  previous  available information.

In  the  case  of  metformin,  its  effectiveness  as  an  antihyperglycaemic  agent  has  been  increasingly recognized since the first studies performed in the 1950s.

From the pharmacokinetic point of view, mice and juvenile rats were the most relevant species for preclinical efficacy and safety studies.

Overall,  the  toxicology  programme  provided  good  assurance  of  safety  for  rosiglitazone  for  use  in rsg/met  FDC  tablets  at  the  proposed  therapeutic  dose  for  the  treatment  of  diabetes  in  humans.  In addition,  the  non-clinical  data  on  metformin  revealed  no  special  hazard  for  humans  based  on conventional toxicity studies. This information has been included in the SPC.

Clinical pharmacology Bioequivalence  between  the  rosiglitazone/metformin  fixed  dose  combination  (rsg/met  FDC)  tablets and the rosiglitazone and metformin reference tablets has been sufficiently demonstrated. Furthermore, the pharmacokinetics of rosiglitazone from the rsg/met FDC tablet appears to be dose linear in the 1 mg  to  4  mg  dose  range.  Therefore,  the  pharmacokinetic  data  provided  allow  bridging  of  the  FDC tablet  to  the  clinical  efficacy  and  safety  data  for  the  rosiglitazone  and  metformin  combination  that were obtained for the original application for rosiglitazone. Efficacy A newly submitted study confirms the results of the previous submitted studies for the rosiglitazone MAA.  Although  there  are  no  formal  dose-response  studies  conducted  with  metformin,  it  can  be concluded  that  the  efficacy  of  the  proposed  dosage  regime  of  this  combination  product  has  been demonstrated sufficiently. Safety The safety profile of rosiglitazone given together with metformin was presented in the rosiglitazone Marketing authorization and the safety profile of metformin has been well established. There are no new or unexpected safety findings reported in this new application. Benefit/risk assessment Taking into account that  clinical  efficacy  of  adding  rosiglitazone  (4-8  mg)  to  metformin  (2.5g)  has sufficiently been demonstrated, and no new or unexpected safety findings have been reported, it can be concluded that the benefit/risk for this product is positive taking into account the restriction of use as included in the SPC (see also EPAR Avandia). Recommendation Based  on  the  CPMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CPMP  considered  that  the benefit/risk  profile  of  Avandamet  in  the  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  patients,  particularly overweight  patients,  who  are  unable  to  achieve  sufficient  glycaemic  control  at  their  maximally tolerated dose of oral metformin alone was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised