---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:14:50
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/avandia-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: avandia-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.2887266
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 22:36:06.018602
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Avandia. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2003. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1 Introduction

Rosiglitazone  (RSG)  is  the  active  substance  of  the  medicinal  product  Avandia.  RSG  is  a  novel thiazolidinedione  antidiabetic  agent  thought  to  improve  glycaemic  control  by  improving  insulin sensitivity. RSG acts as a selective and potent agonist at the nuclear receptor, peroxisomal proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPAR γ ).

The  impurity  limits  in  the  specification  are  considered  qualified  in  view  of  the  impurity  levels observed in the batches used in safety and clinical studies. Batch analysis data are provided for 22 batches, reported against the proposed commercial specification and are satisfactory.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Avandia is formulated as a film-coated immediate release tablet for oral administration. It contains the active ingredient rosiglitazone as the maleate salt in four dosage strengths 1 mg, 2 mg, 4 mg and 8 mg per tablet.  The recommended initial oral dosage was 4 mg/day that could be increased if necessary to 8 mg/day after 8 weeks of treatment. The  clinical  development  program  included  studies  in  monotherapy  and  in  combination,  data  from which were included in the Marketing Authorisation Application. During  the  procedure  of  the  original  application,  the  efficacy  of  rosiglitazone  in  monotherapy  was considered insufficiently  documented. In a subsequent application in February 2003 additional data were submitted by the MAH on the use of rosiglitazone in monotherapy. 2. Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects Composition Avandia is formulated as film-coated immediate release tablets for oral administration. The tablet core contains  rosiglitazone  maleate  (active  substance),  sodium  starch  glycollate  (Type  A),  hypromellose 3cP, microcrystalline cellulose, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate. The film coating contains either Opadry yellow OY-L-22809, or Opadry pink OY-L-24802, or Opadry orange OY-L-23028, or Opadry  pink  OY-L-24803,  which  consists  of  hypromellose  6cP,  titanium  dioxide  E171,  macrogol 3000, lactose monohydrate, glycerol triacetate, iron oxide yellow E172, and/or iron oxide red  E172 and purified talc (4mg tablet only). Packaging material: The tablets are packaged in blisters containing 14 tablets in two rows of 7. The blister strips consist of a 250 µ m laminate of opaque, white, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and a 20 µ m aluminium lidding foil. Active substance RSG is chiral and contains one asymmetric centre making 2 stereoisomers (enantiomers) theoretically possible.  The  active  ingredient  is  presented  as  the  racemate  in  Avandia,  supported  on  the  basis  of preclinical studies and clinical efficacy and safety. The synthesis and the in-process controls are satisfactorily described. A number of amorphous and crystalline physical forms  have been identified . The validation  of  the specifications  and  the  analytical  methods  are  acceptable  and  the  specification  for  impurities  is  in conformity to the batch analysis as well as the requirements of ICH.

The proposed re-test  period  of  12  months  for  rosiglitazone  maleate  when  stored  in  the  commercial packaging material is acceptable and is supported by the provided stability data.

## Other ingredients

All  excipients  are  of  pharmacopoeial  quality,  well  established  and  suitable  for  pharmaceutical  use. Magnesium stearate will be used in compliance with the amended Directive 75/318/EEC concerning

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TSE. The MAH applied for a type I variation to replace magnesium stearate of animal origin with magnesium stearate of vegetable origin.

## Product development and finished product

Development  Pharmaceutics: Issues addressed in the development pharmaceutics section are composition,  changes  made  during  development,  choice  of  excipients  and  compatibility,  process optimisation, and tablet dissolution. The development pharmaceutics studies have been satisfactorily described.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Manufacturing  process:  The  manufacturing  process  is  in  general  satisfactorily  described,  and  is standard for a product of this type. The process validation was performed on 3 pilot scale batches and the validation results are satisfactory. In addition, results from testing of one full-scale batch of each strength  manufactured  at  the  commercial  manufacturing  site  are  also  provided.  These  batches  were tested  against  the  finished  product  specification,  but  no  in-process  parameters  were  addressed.  The batches  complied  with  the  release  specification;  the  content  uniformity  and  dissolution  data  were acceptable. The manufacturing process has been satisfactorily validated. Specifications of the medicinal product: The release and end of shelf-life specification for the finished products  include  tests  for  description,  RSG  identity  and  content,  individual  and  total  degradation products, dissolution, content uniformity, identity of colouring agents, and microbial quality. The test methods are suitable and satisfactorily described. Batch analysis data: Batch analysis results are presented for 3 consecutive pilot scale batches of each strength  manufactured  at  the  commercial  production  site.  The  batches  have  been  tested  for  all  test parameters  in  the  specification  for  the  finished  product  except  identification  of  colourants  and microbial quality. Stability of the medicinal product: The stability studies on the finished product were performed on 3 pilot scale batches of each strength manufactured by the commercial process at the commercial site. In view of the stability data provided, the requested shelf-life of 2 years for Avandia 1 mg, 2 mg, 4 mg and 8 mg tablets, when packaged in the commercial packaging material is considered acceptable. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics The  overall  animal  efficacy  data  supports  both  the  potential  antidiabetic  effect  of  RSG  in  diseased individuals and the proposed clinical therapeutic regimen. RSG had an antidiabetic effect in several animal models of type 2 diabetes after repeated administration. The antidiabetic effect of RSG was maintained over a 30-week period in genetically diabetic mice and at least over 22 weeks in diabetic rats. In the Zucker rat, RSG had only a marginal effect on fasted glucose concentrations and showed no effect on HbA1C-level when measured 9 months after treatment initiation. RSG was shown to be 10-fold more potent than pioglitazone or troglitazone as a glucose lowering agent in a mouse model for  Type  2  diabetes.  RSG  showed  an  intermediate  effect  in  the  dietary  normal  obese  rat,  while  no activity  was  observed  in  normoglycaemic  animals  or  in  models  for  insulin-dependent  diabetes mellitus.

The antidiabetic activity of racemic RSG is predominantly due to the (S)-(-) enantiomer. One of the two identified human metabolites with significant in vitro binding affinity to PPAR γ , sulphated parahydroxylated RSG (M10), has an expected plasma AUC value considerably greater than parent RSG in  man and a relatively longer plasma half-life. The enantiomers of RSG (ratio of 1:1) interconvert rapidly in  vitro and in  vivo where,  in  the  used  laboratory  animal  species,  the  S(-)  form  is  favoured while in human, the R(+) form is the dominating enantiomer at equilibrium.

## Interactions

Interaction  between  RSG  and  the  antidiabetic  agents  glibenclamide  (sulphonylurea),  voglibose  ( α -glucosidase inhibitor) and human insulin was assayed in a 1-month toxicity study in rat. There was no evidence  of  other  unexpected  or  synergistic  effects  arising  from  the  combinations  apart  from  the synergistic increase in brown fat weight observed upon co-administration with insulin or glibenclamide. In animals, RSG causes some induction of CYP4A and in the male rat only, CYP3A.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Although the preclinical results indicated that concomitant RSG-treatment may have an impact on the metabolism  of  carbamazepine,  paclitaxel,  or  cerivastatin  via  inhibition  of  CYP2C8,  and  on  oral contraceptives via potential induction of CYP3A, no clinically relevant interactions were observed in man (see clinical aspects). In addition, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may activate PPAR γ .  The overall likelihood of significant metabolic interactions between RSG and other medicinal products metabolised by P450 enzymes is considered to be low.

## Pharmacokinetics

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetic studies revealed overall similar qualitative kinetics in the pivotal species rat and dog compared with man, except that the relative total excretion rate in man was much slower than that of the rat and the dog, and the major route of excretion was via faeces (previously absorbed material) in the animals while urinary excretion dominated in man [3.9]. No metabolism data were reported for the mouse,  although  this species was  used  in several pivotal toxicity  studies.[3.10]  Whole-body autoradiography  in  pigmented  rats  revealed  binding  of  RSG-related  material  to  melanin-containing tissues (uveal tract and pigmented skin) with long terminal half-lives (40 and 60 days in uvea and skin, respectively). The potential for RSG-induced phototoxicity in patients is low based on an examination of available data relating to photostability, UV absorption and clinical observations. Toxicology Overall, qualitatively similar toxicity profiles were observed in mice, rat and dog, although the dog generally appeared to be more sensitive than the rodents. Single dose toxicity: Single dose toxicity was performed in mouse (p.o. and i.v.), rat (p.o. and i.v.), and dog (p.o.). The animal species tolerated well a high single oral dose of RSG, the rodents being less sensitive  than  the  dog.  CNS  related  effects  were  the  main  observation  in  the  rodents.  In  dogs,  a decrease in erythrocyte parameters was observed at 20 mg/kg and emesis and weight loss at higher dosing (160mg/kg). Repeated dose toxicity:  Repeated  oral  dose  toxicity  of  up  to  12  months  duration  was  performed  in mouse rat and dog. In accordance with the animal efficacy studies RSG treatment had no effect on plasma glucose in healthy animals Few unscheduled deaths occurred (due to hydrothorax), and only at very high multiples of clinical exposure (40mg/kg/day) in the 6-month rat studies. Toxicity profile in adipose tissue, heart, liver and pituitary gland/ovary: Increased fat mass comprising hyperplasia  and  transition  of  brown  fat  adipocyte  tissue  to  white  adipocyte  tissue  was  observed  at exposure levels below the maximum clinical exposure. At higher exposures, increased fat content was also  observed  in  bone  marrow  of  rat  and  dog.  These  effects  are  considered  to  be  a  result  of  the pharmacological  action  of  RSG.  Cardiovascular  safety  pharmacology  studies  revealed  significant increase in heart rate, cardiac output and stroke volume, with slight reductions in blood pressure and a significant reduction in total peripheral resistance, concomitant with increased heart weight. Increased heart weight not associated with ECG changes was observed in all species, at clinical exposure in dog. The  sensitivity  to  cardiac  hypertrophy  increased  with  treatment  duration.  Further  cardiovascular effects observed were plasma volume expansion and decrease in erythrocyte parameters; red cell mass was normal or slightly increased. In the rat and the dog a progressive increase over time was observed in  blood  flow  in  adipose  tissue,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  skin  and  (in  dog)  in  the  small  intestine. Furthermore,  RSG-treatment  was  found  to  cause  an  early  and  sustained  antinatriuretic  effect.  The cardiovascular  effects  were  believed  by  the  applicant  to  be  mediated  by  the  following  cascade: increased  regional  blood  flow  and  reduced  total  peripheral  resistance  induce  sodium  and  water retention in the kidney and result in increased plasma volume, increased preload and adaptive cardiac hypertrophy.

Increased liver weight was observed in rats and in dogs but not in mice. In the dog, liver weights were increased at clinical exposure levels. Additional effects observed only in the dog were a significant increase in plasma ALT and ALP, brown pigmentation containing iron (haemosiderin), increases in liver non-haeme iron content and lipofuscin, increases in cell proliferation (PCNA labelling index) and in  cell  density.  The  species  sensitivity  to  hepatotoxicity  correlated  with  the  degree  of  oxidative cleavage metabolic pathway of RSG, which was 23-32% in dog and 7-17% in rat (human 4%). In vitro studies  with  potentially  suspected  metabolite  moieties  associated  with  oxidative  stress  cleavage

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pathway did not reveal conclusive results.   RSG did not induce liver tumors in mice or rats treated for 2 years.

Additional toxic events associated with prolonged RSG treatment were: (i) increase in mean pituitary weight along with hyperplasia of prolactin-containing cells of the pars distalis in female rats  (not in dogs); (ii) reduction of ovary weight in female rats at high doses associated with a reduction/absence of corpora lutea; (iii) reduction in platelet count in mouse and rat but not in dog.

Reproduction  toxicity:  RSG  was  not  teratogenic  in  rat  and  rabbit.  Significant  toxicity  on  fertility observed in high-dosed rat females consisted of disruption of oestrous cycles and placental pathology findings  including  increased  weight,  delayed  maturation,  basal  zone  degeneration  and  labyrinth congestion/necrosis.  Increased  pre-  and  post-implantation  loss,  reduced  embryo/foetal  viability  and growth were also noted in the high-dose group of animals. No similar toxicity was noted in the rabbit except increased pre and implantation loss and decrease in foetal weight at high doses. RSG was found in vivo to reduce plasma levels of oestradiol and progesterone in the rat as well as in the Cynomolgus female monkey. The LOAEL for effects on the menstrual cycle in monkeys was only at 2-fold the high (average) therapeutic AUC and 3-fold clinical Cmax. For effects on the placenta, embryo-foetus and offspring the no-effect level was 4-fold clinical systemic exposure.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Mutagenicity: RSG was not mutagenic or clastogenic in the in vitro bacterial assays for gene mutation, the in vitro chromosome aberration test in human lymphocytes, the in vivo mouse micronucleus test, and  the in  vivo/in  vitro rat  UDS  assay.  There  was  weak  mutagenic  activity in  vitro in  the  mouse lymphoma test in the presence of metabolising system at moderately cytotoxic concentrations above 50-100 µM. Carcinogenicity:  In  the  submitted  documentation,  RSG  showed  no  carcinogenic  potential  in  mice while  in  rats  an  increased  incidence  of  benign  subcutaneous  lipomas  (3-4  fold  above  control)  was observed in mid-dose male and high-dose female animals. In the males, the lowest observed adverse effect  level  was  estimated  to  be  1.8x  for  both  clinical  Cmax  and  AUC.  The  increase  in  adipocyte hyperplasia is probably due to persistent pharmacological overstimulation of adipocytes. Due to the absence of a sufficient margin of exposure to the human dose, the appearance of benign lipomas upon prolonged treatment with RSG in patients cannot be excluded. Moreover, the animals may not have been adequately exposed to the main human metabolite, recently found to be active in vivo . There has been a report in the literature that in an animal model for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP),  treatment  with  RSG  at  200  times  the  pharmacologically  active  dose  and  with  troglitazone, increased tumour multiplicity in the colon. The relevance of this finding is unknown. However, RSG and troglitazone promoted differentiation and reversal of mutagenic changes in human colon cancer cells in vitro . As outlined above, RSG was not mutagenic in the standard battery of genotoxicity tests and there was no evidence of colon tumours in the two lifetime rodent carcinogenicity studies with RSG. This information has been included in the SPC. Special toxicity studies: Passive cutaneous (PCA) and active systemic anaphylaxis tests (ASA) were carried  out  in  guinea-pigs,  the  former  test  including  determination  of  mast  cell  binding  antibodies (IgE/IgG1b and IgG1a) after sensitisation. There were no reactions or antibody productions associated with administration of RSG, nor did RSG induce antigenic responses in the rat PCA model. Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk assessment: According to a phase I environmental risk assessment, the  use  of  projected  production  levels  (8750  kg/year  for  the  EU  market)  will  not  have  a  negative impact on the environment. GLP Status: All toxicity studies were conducted in compliance with the GLP principles.

## 4. Clinical aspects

## Clinical pharmacology

The clinical pharmacology program referred to:

- -The safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics following either single doses of up to 20 mg, or repeat doses up to 8 mg/day, or single intravenous doses up to 4 mg in healthy volunteers and special populations (elderly, obese, hepatic impairment, renal insufficiency).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -The absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and absolute bioavailability of a single dose of RSG in healthy volunteers.
- -The  potential  drug  interactions  including  other  oral  antidiabetic  agents,  digoxin,  warfarin, cytochrome P450 3A4 substrates and H2 receptor antagonists.

## Pharmacodynamics

Medicinal product no longer authorised As expected from the proposed mechanism of action, single oral or intravenous doses of RSG up to 20 mg did not induce significant changes in blood glucose in healthy volunteers. For glucose lowering effects  in  diabetic  patients,  more  importance  should  be  given  to  the  clinical  trials  since  the pharmacology  trials  were  not  powered  to  detect  statistically  significant  differences  in  glucose concentrations. Pharmacokinetics A total of 533 healthy volunteers, patient volunteers and patients with type 2 diabetes participated in a clinical  pharmacology  program  consisting  of  24  studies.  The  pharmacokinetics  of  RSG  have  been extensively  studied  and  well  documented  after  single  dose  administration  up  to  20  mg  and  repeat doses up to 8 mg/day in a total number of 494 subjects. Following administration in the fasted state,  RSG was rapidly and completely absorbed. Maximum plasma concentrations were reached about 1 hour after dosing at all dose levels. The pharmacokinetic parameters of RSG are proportional to dose in the dose range 1 to 8 mg. The absolute bioavailability was 99%. Based on absorption data RSG can be taken without regard to food as the rate, but not the extent  of  absorption  was  influenced  by  food.  RSG  is  mainly  distributed  to  the  extracellular  water (VD  16  L),  is  highly  bound  to  plasma  proteins  (99.76%),  and  has  a  low  clearance  (3.4  L)  and  an elimination half-life of 3 to 4 hours. RSG is almost completely metabolised with no unchanged parent compound  excreted  in  the  urine. The  major  routes  of  metabolism  are  N-demethylation  and hydroxylation  followed  by  conjugation  with  sulphate  and  glucuronic  acid.  RSG  is  predominantly metabolised by the cytochrome P450 iso enzyme CYP2C8, with CYP2C9 representing only a minor pathway. 65-69% of the dose is excreted via the urine and 25% in faeces. The elimination of total radioactivity  from  plasma  was  very  slow,  with  a  half-life  of  about  150  h.  The  major  metabolite  in plasma  is  sulphated  para-hydroxylated  RSG  (M10).  The  predicted  exposure  (AUC)  to  M10  is approximately 22-fold higher than RSG at steady-state, while the unbound exposure is expected to be less or similar to that of RSG as the protein binding of M10 is very high (&gt;99.99%). Although the bulk of the data indicates that RSG clearly contributes to the pharmacological activity, the possibility that the  main  metabolite  M10  may  contribute  to  the  effect  cannot  be  ruled  out.  However  this  is  not considered to raise safety concerns, as stated in the SPC. Interaction studies RSG  is  expected  to  cause  mild  inhibition  of  CYP2C8,  but  no  significant  inhibition  of  the  other isoenzymes. No clinically relevant interactions were observed in the in vivo drug interaction studies which  included  other  oral  antidiabetic  agents  (glibenclamide,  metformin,  acarbose),  cardiovascular medicines  with  narrow  therapeutic  indices  (digoxin  and  warfarin),  CYP3A4  substrate  (nifedipine), oral contraceptives and ranitidine. Any possible influence of other drugs metabolised by CYP2C8 on the pharmacokinetics of RSG has not been studied. Cerivastatin is expected to have a low potential for interaction  with  the  metabolism  of  RSG,  while  paclitaxel  may  inhibit  the  metabolism  of  RSG.  The interaction potential of the major metabolite M10 is low.

## Clinical efficacy

Efficacy was studied with RSG as monotherapy and in combination with SU and metformin. Once daily and twice daily regimens were evaluated. An overview of the performed double blind trials is given in Table 1. The clinical studies conform to the essential principles of Good Clinical Practice. Further  information  regarding  long-term  efficacy  and  safety  was  provided  from  six  open  label extension  (OLE)  studies  and  from  one  open  label,  active  comparator,  cardiac  safety  study  of  12 months duration. The appeal documentation submitted in December 1999 included results from OLE

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

studies  with  patients  exposed  to  rosiglitazone  for  greater  than  24  months.  In  the  course  of  the evaluation, data referring to safety only were submitted from clinical trials using RSG in combination with insulin.

The  subsequent  submission  in  February  2003  presented  additional  data  on  the  use  of  RSG  as monotherapy, including results from OLE studies with patients exposed to rosiglitazone monotherapy up to 3 years.

## Dose-response studies and main clinical studies

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Dose response studies Three double-blind, placebo-controlled trials were conducted in patients with type 2 diabetes (Table 1); one for a duration of 12 weeks (006) and two for 8 weeks (090, 098). The aim of the studies was to investigate the lower and upper portion of the dose-response curve for Fasting Plasma Glucose (FPG). · Main studies Description of the studies The performed studies to support efficacy are indicated in table 1. Table 1: Overview of double-blind studies presented in the MAA

| Study No.                    | Duration                     | RSG total daily dose (regimen)   | Treatment Groups                                  | Site                         | N (ITT)                      |
|------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
| longer Dose-response studies | longer Dose-response studies | longer Dose-response studies     | longer Dose-response studies                      | longer Dose-response studies | longer Dose-response studies |
| 006                          | 12 weeks                     | 0.1-4 mg (bd)                    | RSG, placebo                                      | US                           | 380                          |
| 090                          | 8 weeks                      | 4-12 mg (bd)                     | RSG, placebo                                      | US                           | 284                          |
| 098                          | 8 weeks                      | 4-12 mg (od)                     | RSG, placebo                                      | Europe                       | 369                          |
| no                           | no                           | no                               | no                                                | no                           | no                           |
| product Monotherapy Studies  | product Monotherapy Studies  | product Monotherapy Studies      | product Monotherapy Studies                       | product Monotherapy Studies  | product Monotherapy Studies  |
| 011                          | 26 weeks                     | 4,8 mg (bd)                      | RSG, placebo                                      | US                           | 493                          |
| 024                          | 26 weeks                     | 4,8 mg (od) 4,8 mg (bd)          | RSG, placebo                                      | US                           | 908                          |
| 020                          | 52 weeks                     | 4,8 mg (bd)                      | RSG, GLB titration (2.5 to 15 mg)                 | Europe                       | 587                          |
| Combination with SU          | Combination with SU          | Combination with SU              | Combination with SU                               | Combination with SU          | Combination with SU          |
| 015                          | 26 weeks                     | 2,4 mg (bd)                      | (GLB, glipizide or gliclazide) + (RSG or placebo) | Europe                       | 574                          |
| Medicinal 079                | 26 weeks                     | 4 mg (bd)                        | GLB+placebo, RSG+placebo, RSG+GLB                 | US                           | 296                          |
| 096                          | 26 weeks                     | 2,4 mg (od)                      | GLB + RSG GLB + placebo                           | US                           | 346                          |
| Combination with MET         | Combination with MET         | Combination with MET             | Combination with MET                              | Combination with MET         | Combination with MET         |
| 093                          | 26 weeks                     | 8 mg (bd)                        | MET+placebo, RSG+placebo, RSG+MET                 | US                           | 306                          |
| 094                          | 26 weeks                     | 4, 8 mg (od)                     | MET + RSG MET + placebo                           | US                           | 339                          |

Abbreviations: bd: twice daily; od: once daily; GLB: glibenclamide; MET: metformin

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Patient population

All  patients  had  a  diagnosis  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  according  to  the  National  Diabetes  Group definition.  In  US  studies,  FPG  prior  to  randomisation  had  to  be  7.8-16.7  mmol/L.  In  the  European studies FPG had to be 7-15 mmol/L as per the new WHO diagnostic definition of diabetes. Men and women, aged 40-80 could be included if they did not have diabetic complications requiring treatment, or serious renal, hepatic or haematological impairment, or severe (NYHA class III or IV) heart failure. Prior  to  study  entry,  patients  were  either  managed  by  diet  and  exercise  but  had  developed  a requirement for oral hypoglycaemic therapy, or were already taking oral antihyperglycaemic agents. In  the  main  monotherapy  studies  any  previous  antihyperglycaemic  medication  was  withdrawn  6-8 weeks before randomisation.

## Efficacy results

Medicinal product no longer authorised Efficacy parameters For all Phase III trials, the primary endpoint was change of the HbA1c concentration at the end of the treatment period compared to baseline. The primary comparisons were between the RSG and control groups. Secondary assessments of efficacy were also presented as change from baseline of the plasma levels of: FPG,  fructosamine, lipids (total  cholesterol  [TC],  HDL-cholesterol  [HDLc],  LDLcholesterol  [LDLc],  VLDLc,  triglycerides,  free  fatty  acids  [FFAs]),  insulin  and  C-peptide.  Insulin precursors,  postprandial  glycaemia  and  apolipoproteins  A I   (Apo  AI)  and  B 100   (Apo  B)  were  also measured  in  selected  studies.  HbA1c  responders  were  prospectively  defined  as  patients  who  had ≥ 0.7%  decrease  in  HbA1c  compared  to  baseline.  FPG  responders  were  prospectively  defined  as patients who had ≥ 30 mg/dl (1.7 mmol/L) decrease compared to baseline. The proportion of patients who achieved a target FPG of &lt; 140 mg/dl (7.8 mmol/L) was also assessed (target based on National Diabetes Group diagnostic criterion). Statistical analysis The  primary  efficacy  analyses  were  performed  based  on  the  Intention  To  Treat  (ITT)  population, which was defined as all randomised patients who had at least one valid observation for an efficacy variable while on treatment. For withdrawn patients or missing values during the double-blind period, LOCF  (Last  Observation  Carried  Forward)  was  used,  which  is  considered  acceptable  in  this therapeutic area. RESULTS Study populations The  mean  age  of  patients,  proportion  of  men  and  women,  mean  BMI  (Body  Mass  Index)  and distribution of races were similar across all treatment groups. Patients &lt; 65 years old represented two thirds of the population and few patients were &gt;75 years old. As would be expected, patients receiving RSG or placebo as monotherapy had a shorter mean duration of type 2 diabetes than patients receiving RSG  in  combination  with  SU  or  metformin  (5.7  and  5.6  years  compared  with  8.7  and  7.5  years respectively). Baseline levels of HbA1c and FPG, were similar for all treatment groups in all individual trials.  The Phase III placebo-controlled trials evaluated a population with mixed experience of prior antidiabetic  therapy,  approximately  30%  had  not  received  oral  anti-hyperglycaemic  medication previously. Patient disposition: A total of 3,120 patients out of 4,327 (72%) who received RSG either completed the study or completed the study and were reported as being on study in OLE studies, compared with 65%  of  those  who  received  placebo  and  75%  of  those  who  received  an  active  comparator. Withdrawals due to adverse events (AEs) were comparable in the three groups.

Phase  II  trials  established  a  dose-response  relationship  on  FPG  for  RSG  within  the  recommended dosage range. Eight mg/d appeared to be the maximally effective dose. Subgroup analyses indicated similar dose-response curves for male and female patients.

## Effects on HbA1c and FPG:[4.10]

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Monotherapy

The mean effect of RSG compared with placebo on HbA1c in two 26-week monotherapy studies was 1.2% (CI: -1.5, -0.9) and -0.93% (CI: -1.2, -0.6) with the 2 mg dose twice daily and -1.5% (-1.9, -1.2) and -1.45% (CI: -1.8, -1.1) with the 4 mg twice daily. Generally, 8 mg/d appeared more effective than 4  mg/d  and  twice  daily  dosing  more  effective  than  once  daily  dosing,  but  statistically  significant differences between dose levels and regimens were not demonstrated. RSG monotherapy given once or twice daily was significantly superior to placebo regarding change from baseline in HbA1c and FPG. The response rate, based on reduction of HbA1c of &gt; 0.7% was 28-54% in the treatment groups and 69% in the placebo groups. Similar responses were obtained on the FPG criteria (Fig 1).

Medicinal product no longer authorised In the 52-week monotherapy study vs glibenclamide (median dose 7.5 mg/d after an initial 12-week period of dose-titration), the effect was -0.27% (CI:-0.42, -0.12) and -0.53% (CI: -0.72, -0.34) with the 2 and 4 mg twice daily dose respectively. The effect of glibenclamide in this study was -0.72% (CI: -0.86, -0.58). These results fulfilled the protocol-defined criteria for non-inferiority of RSG 4 mg twice  daily  compared  with  glibenclamide  for  change  from  baseline  in  mean  HbA1c  after  52  weeks. Compared with glibenclamide, the onset of action of RSG was slow, with a near maximum effect on HbA1c  reached  after  16  weeks,  compared  with  8  weeks  for  glibenclamide.  In  subgroup  analyses, efficacy  of  RSG  was  better  in  anti-diabetic  medication  naive  patients  compared  with  patients  with previous experience of anti-diabetic medication. In  a  subsequent  application  the  MAH  submitted  additional  data  on  the  use  of  rosiglitazone  as monotherapy.  This  included  data  to  assess  the  non-inferiority  of  rosiglitazone  to  metformin  on glycaemic control at 18 months. The data were considered satisfactory to support approval. These data formed an interim analysis of an  ongoing study, and will be  discussed in detail only when the full study has completed, to ensure the integrity of the ongoing blinded study Figure 1:  FPG: Change from Baseline Study 079 Study 096 (2mg bd + Glb) vs Glb (Glb + 2mg od) vs Glb (Glb + 4mg od) vs Glb Study 015 (1mg bd + SU) vs SU (2mg bd + SU) vs SU Study 093 (4mg bd + Met) vs Met (Met + 4mg od) vs Met Study 094 (Met + 8mg od) vs Met Study 011 2mg bd vs Placebo 4mg bd vs Placebo Study 024 4mg od vs Placebo 8mg od vs Placebo 2mg bd vs Placebo 4mg bd vs Placebo Comb'n + Met Comb'n + SU Monotherapy

<!-- image -->

Although not designed for this purpose, combination trials 093 and 079, which included monotherapy arms  with  RSG,  provided  some  insight  regarding  efficacy  of  RSG  monotherapy  in  patients insufficiently  controlled  on  monotherapy  with  glibenclamide  or  metformin.  In  both  trials,  RSG monotherapy was inferior to continued monotherapy with the comparator regarding metabolic control at study end.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Combination therapy

In combination trials, RSG, 2-4 mg/d together with adequately dosed SU and 4-8 mg/d in combination with submaximal doses of metformin, produced significant add-on efficacy on HbA1c and FPG, of a magnitude  similar  to  that  found  in  placebo-controlled  monotherapy  trials.  This  is  in  line  with  the different  mode  of  action  of  RSG.  Compared  with  SU  +  placebo  (background  SU  therapy  either glibenclamide,  glizipide  or  gliclazide)  the  effect  of  combination  with  2  mg  RSG  bd  on  HbA1c  was -1.0% (CI: -1.3, -0.8), and -1.4 (CI: -1.73, -1.07), in a further study the effect of 4 mg od was -0.8 (CI: -1.1, -0.6). In the metformin combination studies (metformin 2.5 g/d) the effect of 4 mg RSG od over metformin alone was -0.97 (CI: -1.32, 0.63), of 8 mg od -1.18 (CI: -1.53, -0.83) and of 4 mg bd 0.8 (CI: -1.2, -0.5). Similar responses were obtained in the FPG criteria (Fig.1).

|               | Total Cholesterol   | HDLc   | LDLc   | TC:HDLc ratio   |
|---------------|---------------------|--------|--------|-----------------|
| 4mg/day       | product             |        |        |                 |
| N*            | 1240                | 1237   | 1168   | 1237            |
| Baseline mean | 214.6               | 44.9   | 129.0  | 5.08            |
| Mean change   | + 22.9              | + 3.6  | + 12.8 | - 0.19          |
| 8mg/day       |                     |        |        |                 |
| N*            | 941                 | 940    | 880    | 940             |
| Baseline mean | 212.0               | 44.7   | 124.5  | 5.04            |
| Mean change   | + 29.6              | + 5.6  | + 19.4 | - 0.24          |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Effects on post-prandial glycaemia: RSG monotherapy was assessed in a subset of 89 patients in a placebo-controlled trial. At all doses of RSG  postprandial  AUCglucose  decreased  significantly  compared  to  placebo.  Consistent  results  were seen at 12 weeks in 60 patients receiving 8mg RSG. Effects on insulin and insulin-precursors: RSG in monotherapy decreased serum levels of insulin and insulin-precursors significantly and in a dose-dependent manner. Effects on lipids: RSG 4 mg and 8 mg daily reduced FFAs in a dose-dependent fashion both in monotherapy and in combination.  Effects  on  TG  levels  appear  neutral  during  long-term  therapy  in  the  presented population.  RSG  increased  TC,  HDLc  and  LDLc  in  a  statistically  significant  and  dose-dependent fashion. This was observed both in the monotherapy studies and in the combination therapy groups in the combination studies (Table 2). Table 2: Changes in Total Cholesterol, HDLc and LDLc at 26 weeks in double-blind Studies (ITT with LOCF) * N = number of patients for whom change in parameter could be calculated on LOCF basis. Most of the increase in LDLc appears to have occurred during the first four weeks. During long-term therapy (&gt; 12 months) the early increase in LDLc levels off, whereas HDLc rises progressively and continuously  over  the  study  period.    The  HDLc  increase  was,  however,  not  accompanied  by  an increase in ApoA1. Additional detailed data on the effects of RSG combination therapy on the lipid profile were submitted for a duration of 18 months. The TC:HDLc and LDLc:HDLc ratios remained unchanged  or  showed  a  slight  trend  for  improvement  beyond  one  year  of  therapy.  The  clinical relevance of these changes is unknown.

## Clinical studies in specific populations

Target population: A wide range of type 2 diabetes patients was represented in the clinical trials. The population  pharmacokinetic  analysis  showed  that  no  dose  alterations  are  required  on  the  basis  of gender, weight, age, race, smoking or alcohol consumption.

Patients  with  impaired  renal  function:  Patients  with  mild,  moderate  and  severe  renal  impairment showed  only  slightly  higher  unbound  Cmax  and  AUC  (up  to  19%)  than  subjects  with  normal  renal function.  Therefore  no  dosage  adjustment  is  needed  in  renal  impairment.  There  is  no  information regarding  the  excretion  or  additional  accumulation  of  metabolites  in  renal  impairment.  However,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

safety data indicate that patients with mild and moderate renal impairment did not have an increased incidence of adverse events compared with patients with normal renal function. The experience with RSG is limited in severe renal impairment.  Therefore, RSG is recommended for use with caution in these patients.

Patients with impaired liver function: In liver impairment (Child-Pugh B), the unbound Cmax and AUC were 2- and 3-fold higher than in healthy volunteers. The variability in unbound AUC within patients with  moderate liver impairment was very high and only two patients with mild hepatic impairment were included in the study. Thus, the pharmacokinetic information in patients with mild, moderate and severe  hepatic  impairment  is  too  limited  to  make  a  dose  recommendation.  Therefore,  RSG  is  not appropriate for use in any patients with hepatic impairment.

In combination with SU in patients in whom metformin is contraindicated.  Due to the risk of lactic acidosis metformin is contraindicated or not recommended in patients with renal failure or the very  elderly.  In  the  file,  data  were  presented  on  396  patients  (274)  patients  with mild/moderate renal insufficiency and 122 patients &gt;70 years.  There were no differences in the efficacy  and  safety  compared  with  the  overall  population  in  the  principal  studies  for  oral combination of RSG + SU.

- Medicinal product no longer authorised Children: The efficacy and safety of RSG has not been studied in children and adolescents. Therefore, its use is not recommended in these age groups. Post-hoc analysis in specific subgroups of patients In  specific  diabetic  populations  who  cannot  tolerate  the  combination  of  SU+metformin,  an  unmet medical need is present. The only alternative option in this situation is insulin, whereas this therapy requires more frequent blood measurements with a risk of hypoglycaemia which makes this therapy less appropriate in certain patient groups. Also insulin is less appropriate in cases with severe insulin resistance. The applicant provided supplementary information to support the possible use of RSG in such populations, specifically (i) in combination with metformin in obese patients (ii) in  combination with SU in patients who show gastrointestinal intolerance to metformin or in whom metformin is contraindicated. (i) In combination with metformin in obese patients.  The administration of an insulin secretagogue such  as  SU  cannot  be  recommended  in  obese  patients  insufficiently  controlled  on  metformin because most of these patients are markedly insulin-resistant and have high insulin levels. These patients  may  benefit  from  an  insulin  sensitiser.  In  the  file  data  were  provided  on  162  obese patients (defined as BMI &gt; 30 kg/m 2 ) treated with RSG + metformin. Analyses of this subgroup indicated no differences in efficacy and safety up to 18-months between the obese patients and the overall population included in the principal studies for combination of RSG and metformin. In fact, patients with BMI &gt; 30 kg/m 2 showed a greater efficacy regarding reduction of insulin resistance from baseline compared to patients with a BMI &lt; 30 kg/m 2 . Weight in obese patients on combination therapy was increased (on average 2.6% weight gain) compared to the known and observed weight loss in the metformin alone group. (ii) In combination with SU in patients who show gastrointestinal intolerance to metformin.  Up to 15%  of  diabetic  patients  show  gastrointestinal  intolerance  to  metformin.  However,  it  is  not expected that patients intolerant to metformin will have a different response regarding glucose control  by  RSG.  Data  for  patients  intolerant  to  metformin  were  not  available.  However,  data were submitted showing that there were no differences in efficacy and safety of RSG added to metformin  in  114  patients  who  had  metformin  related  gastrointestinal  adverse  events  (but continued on metformin) compared to patients without gastrointestinal disturbances. Since RSG does not induce gastrointestinal adverse events, it can be assumed that it can be safely used in metformin intolerant patients.

## Discussion on efficacy

- (i) In the initial MAA clinical trials results provided insufficient evidence of efficacy for RSG in monotherapy,  because  no  adequate  comparison  to  metformin  was  provided  and  the  trial  vs glibenclamide may not have allowed for optimal use of glibenclamide for the whole duration of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  study.  Subsequently,  data  were  submitted  to  support  the  use  of  RSG  as  a  second  line monotherapy. The data were considered satisfactory and use as second-line monotherapy was granted once the first-line status of metformin was acknowledged and the indication was clear that rosiglitazone is an alternative for patients for whom metformin would otherwise be the first alternative.

The  data  presented  for  rosiglitazone  in  monotherapy  did  not  suggest  that  hypoglycaemic efficacy or short- to medium-term safety are dependent on obese or non-obese status. However, it should be noted that the overall database for rosiglitazone assessed during the MAA warranted the  following  statement  in  the  approved  SPC  (section  5.1):  'A  more  pronounced  glucoselowering effect was observed in obese patients.' Considering the currently approved indication for combination therapy, as well as the pharmacological activity of insulin sensitisers, the CPMP was of the opinion that the use of rosiglitazone in second line monotherapy should be further clarified by using a weight qualification.

The  appeal  documentation  provided  additional  patient  years  of  exposure  in  all  groups  (Table  3), reflecting the increased duration of exposure rather than entry of new patients into the studies or of new studies. The updated safety database includes over 1,000 patients treated with RSG for at least 2 years and 2,000 patients treated for at least 1 year, of whom 897 patients were treated in combination with  SU  or  metformin.  Furthermore,  data  from  the  post-marketing  experience  in  the  U.S.A.  were submitted.

Medicinal product no longer authorised (ii) As  a  combination  therapy  with  metformin  or  SU,  RSG  was  compared  to  placebo.  RSG  was effective  in  reducing  HbA1C.  However,  RSG  has  not  been  compared  to  the  widely  used SU+metformin  combination.  Hence,  it  is  not  known  whether  the  combination  of  RSG  with metformin or SU  offers any advantages regarding efficacy compared  to the standard combination.  Therefore, a marketing authorisation for the combination in the indication 'RSG is  indicated for use in combination with sulphonylureas or metformin in patients who are not satisfactorily  controlled  by  either  agent  alone'  cannot  be  granted  until  the  data  from  a comparative study are submitted and assessed. (iii) Among the patients insufficiently controlled on monotherapy with one of the currently approved oral antidiabetics, there is a subgroup of patients for whom the SU+metformin combination is not an option. Currently the available therapy for these patients would be insulin, and insulin therapy is associated with practical problems in particular in elderly patients as well as with the risk of hypoglycaemia. Specifically, satisfactory data were submitted to support the use of RSG a) in combination with SU  in patients who  are not satisfactorily controlled upon monotherapy and show gastrointestinal intolerance to metformin or where metformin is contraindicated. b) in  combination  with  metformin  in  obese  patients  who  are  not  satisfactorily  controlled upon  metformin  monotherapy.  In  order  to  harmonise  the  indication  for  combination therapy  with  the  monotherapy  indication,  the  weight  qualification  was  subsequently amended from obese to overweight patients. These patients may generally be expected to exhibit  marked  insulin  resistance  and  would  benefit  from  therapy  with  an  insulin sensitiser. Therefore, the use of RSG can be recommended for these subgroups of patients for whom an unmet medical need is present. Clinical safety In the Phase II/III clinical trial program of the initial application, safety of RSG was assessed in 5,479 patients with Type 2 diabetes in 19 studies conducted in Europe and USA (5,042 patients in integrated database, 437 patients in  ongoing echocardiographic studies). The clinical cut-off for the integrated database was 18 June 1998. Additionally, all Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) and deaths occurring in clinical studies after the clinical cut-off were included up to 05 November 1998.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3: Patient Years of Exposure for the MAA* and Safety Update Databases

|                 | Patient Years of Exposure   | Patient Years of Exposure   | Patient Years of Exposure   |
|-----------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                 | MAA                         | First Safety Update         | Second Safety Update        |
|                 | CCO* 18/06/98               | CCO 05/11/98                | Data available on 05/11/99  |
| RSG + SU        | 552                         | 774                         | 1042                        |
| RSG + MET       | 272                         | 403                         | 646                         |
| RSG monotherapy | 1668                        | 2496                        | 3334                        |

| Medicinal     | MAA   | First Safety Update   | Second Safety Update   |
|---------------|-------|-----------------------|------------------------|
| RSG+SU        |       |                       |                        |
| Ptyrs*        | 552   | 774                   | 1042                   |
| rate/100ptyrs | 11.0  | 10.0                  | 8.83                   |
| SU            |       |                       |                        |
| Ptyrs*        | 363   | 542                   | 588                    |
| rate/100ptyrs | 13.23 | 11.25                 | 10.71                  |
| RSG +MET      |       |                       |                        |
| Ptyrs         | 272   | 403                   | 646                    |
| rate/100ptyrs | 14.0  | 11.09                 | 9.59                   |
| MET           |       |                       |                        |
| Ptyrs         | 98    |                       |                        |
| rate/100ptyrs | 13.25 |                       |                        |

Medicinal product no longer authorised *MAA: marketing authorisation application; CO = clinical cut-off other abbreviations see Table 1 In a subsequent application to extend the indication to the use of rosiglitazone as monotherapy an integrated dataset consisting of 3293 patients treated with RSG monotherapy, including over 1000 patients treated for 2 years was provided. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths: In  the  clinical  trials  there  were  no  deaths  with  likely  relationship  to  RSG  therapy.  The  rates  of withdrawals  due  to  adverse  events  AEs  in  Phase  III  trials  were  similar  for  RSG,  placebo  and comparators and of the usual magnitude for this type of studies. Relative to placebo, the only types of AEs in the RSG population that caused an increased frequency of premature withdrawal from study were  anaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia,  reported  in  0.3%  each  (including  all  patients  treated  with RSG). The only AEs reported for &gt; 5% of patients on RSG monotherapy were upper respiratory tract infection and injury. As expected from the pharmacological mode of action, hypoglycaemia is not an AE of RSG monotherapy and was reported accordingly only in 0.6%. The available experience did not suggest qualitative  changes  of  the  AEs  profile  with  prolonged  treatment  duration  up  to  18  months. However, the available study results at the end of the initial application were not considered sufficient to assess potential long-term toxicity. In combination studies, there were no indications of potentiation by RSG of adverse effects associated with SU or metformin or vice versa .  In  addition,  according  to  updated  data presented in the  appeal documentation the  majority of AEs across the combination program were considered to be mild or moderate. Withdrawal due to AEs expressed in rates per 100 patient years decreased compared with the marketing authorisation application (MAA) and the Safety Updates (Table 4). Table 4:  Rate of withdrawals due to AEs per 100 patient years in the MAA and safety update databases RSG+SU SU RSG +MET

* ptyrs = patient-years

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## For other abbreviations see Table 1

The profile of adverse events for RSG monotherapy or in combination with SU or metformin has not changed since the First Safety Update.

A comparison of the data in the appeal documentation with the data in First Safety Update showed small increases in the relative frequency of AEs which may be expected during long-term treatment. Concerning the common AEs and those related to the pharmacology of thiazolidinediones, oedema, anaemia and elevated lipid parameters, a comparison of rates per 100 patient-years with MAA, First Safety Update and Second Safety Update showed that with time the rates decreased. There was no evidence that AEs commonly associated with either SU or metformin were exacerbated when RSG was added. The overall rates of SAEs have not changed since the MAA; the most frequently reported SAEs were cardiovascular. Overall the additional data did not indicate a change in the safety profile and provided reassurance because of the increased treatment duration.

Hence, it is concluded that the cardiovascular risk is not increased in the short-term as assessed using this  very  large  database.  However,  the  patients  treated  in  the  clinical  trials  conducted  so  far  were devoid of manifest pre-existing severe CHF (NYHA class III or IV) and insufficient data are presently available  to  exclude  progression  in  subclinical  left  ventricular  dysfunction  in  patients  with  mild  or moderate pre-existing cardiac dysfunction.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Cardiovascular safety Cardiovascular safety in relation to RSG in combination with insulin: Safety  data  from  the  ongoing  clinical  program  of  RSG  in  combination  with  insulin  have  been submitted in the course of the initial evaluation. The data referred to safety only. In these trials, the combination  of  RSG  plus  insulin  was  associated  with  a  clear  trend  to  increased  incidence  of congestive heart failure, CHF (RSG+insulin 2.5%, insulin alone 1% RSG+SU:0,6%, RSG+Metformin:0,3%).  One  possible  explanation  is  that  in  the  insulin  add-on  trial  there  were differences  in  the  baseline  parameters  of  the  patients  as  shown  in  additional  post-hoc  analysis. Secondly, in order to achieve  maximal glycaemic control, patients were given a fixed dose of 8mg RSG without titration and the high dose of insulin was fixed at study entry. Thirdly, patients in the insulin combination studies had a longer disease duration (in the trial a mean of 12.8 years) compared to  8.7  and  7.5  years  for  the  oral  combination  treatment  trials  of  SU+RSG  and  metformin+RSG respectively. Cardiovascular safety in relation to RSG monotherapy and combination with SU or metformin: In  contrast  to  the  increased  incidence  of  CHF  observed  with  the  insulin  combination,  no  increased incidence of new-onset CHF compared with placebo was observed with RSG. In the presented target population, there were only isolated cases of worsening of pre-existing CHF during RSG treatment.  In addition,  RSG  was  not  associated  with  aggravated  hypertension  or  specific  ECG  changes.  In  three echocardiographic  studies  (12  to  36  months)  no  clinically  relevant  effects  on  left  ventricular  mass index (LVMI) were observed. In the appeal documentation the rates of all cardiovascular events (expressed per 100 patient years) with  RSG  in  monotherapy  or  in  combination  with  SU  or  metformin  were  equal  to  either  SU  or metformin alone and did not increase between the MAA and the Second Safety Update. The possibility to assess a large database was considered reassuring: · with more than 1,000 patients treated with RSG for at least 24 months · with more than 2,000 patients treated with RSG for at least 12 months · with more than 3,000 patients treated with RSG for at least 6 months.

## Fluid retention:

In the preclinical program for RSG cardiac hypertrophy findings in animal models were considered to be due to plasma volume expansion. An increase in plasma volume of approximately 4% relative to placebo was found with 8 mg/d RSG in a Phase I trial in healthy volunteers. In double-blind trials, oedema  of  mild  to  moderate  intensity  was  reported  with  higher  frequency  in  RSG  group  (4.9%),

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

compared with placebo and comparator medications. Higher incidences of oedema were seen in the small number of patients with pre-existing CHF studied (20%), and in patients &gt; 75 years old (13%).

No new data were provided in the appeal documentation regarding the pathophysiological mechanism of fluid retention. With longer treatment duration the cumulative incidence of oedema increased in all RSG groups between the First and Second Safety Update although when expressed per 100 patient years the rate of oedema did not increase over time  (RSG+SU: MAA 7.42; First Safety Update: 8.0; Second  Safety  Update:  6.14.    RSG+Met:  MAA  15.05;  First  Safety  Update;14.40;  Second  Safety Update: 12.38).  In approximately 50% of oedema cases corrective therapy with diuretics was used. There  was  no  change  in  incidence  of  CHF  with  RSG  monotherapy  or  with  RSG  oral  combination therapy between the First and Second Safety Update. Furthermore, the rate of CHF had not increased in the updated monotherapy dataset (February 2003) despite the increased exposure and duration of treatment. These data are reassuring.

Subgroup analyses performed in the different weight gain quartiles of changes in blood pressure, heart structure and function (LVMI, LVEF, LVEDV), lipid pattern and HbA1c concentrations did not reveal any differences across all weight quartiles or in comparison to the other treatments over a period of 12 months.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  addition,  new  data  were  presented  showing  statistically  significantly  decrease  in  diastolic  blood pressure with RSG treatment in the total population. The outcome has not been analysed for patients with hypertension. Considering the signal in the insulin combination, the risk of fluid retention and pending further safety data, it is  concluded that RSG treatment is not appropriate in patients with cardiac failure or with a history of cardiac failure. Furthermore, concomitant use of medications, such as NSAIDs, which can cause fluid retention may increase the risk of oedema with RSG. Effects on red blood cell parameters Dose-related reductions of Hb and Hct were seen in clinical trials with RSG and were at least partly explained by the induced haemodilution. Anaemia was reported as an AE in 1.9% of patients on RSG monotherapy, increasing to 7.1% among those treated with a combination of RSG and metformin: this is likely to reflect low baseline levels of Hb prior to the addition of RSG. No cases of severe anaemia were reported, but anaemia was a cause for premature withdrawal in 0.1-0.6% of the RSG treatment groups. The average Hb reduction of 1 g/100 ml seen during RSG should not have clinically relevant consequences in patients with a normal blood value when starting RSG treatment, but anaemia was a frequent finding in patients with low Hb at baseline. According to the data of the MAA and the First and Second Safety Updates, the incidence of anaemia increased in all treatment groups, markedly in the group of RSG added to metformin, but the rate of anaemia per 100 patient years decreased slightly with time in all treatment groups (RSG+SU: MAA 4.53:  First  Safety  Update  3.75;  Second  Safety  Update  3.55.  RSG+Met:  MAA  19.09:  First  Safety Update 15.64; Second Safety Update 12.84). Effects on body weight RSG was associated with a gain in mean body weight over time due to increased body fat and there may  also  have  been  a  contribution from  fluid  retention.  Among  patients  treated  with  RSG monotherapy for at least 12 months, approximately 35% gained ≥ 5% in body weight and 11% gained ≥ 10%, compared with baseline.  In the appeal documentation a comparison of weight increases during 24 months was presented.  Weight gain occurred primarily over the first 6-12 months of therapy with small  increases  in  all  groups  up  to  24  months.  Weight  gain  with  RSG  does  not  seem  to  be  more frequent when RSG is added to SU or metformin compared with RSG alone.  In mechanistic studies, the  weight  gain  was  predominantly  shown  to  be  due  to  increased  subcutaneous  fat  with  decreased visceral and hepatic fat.

## Effects on lipids

Lipid parameters were secondary efficacy endpoints. The mechanisms of the induced multiple changes in the lipid profile are not known. The magnitude of the increase of the TC and LDLc was 10-15% compared  to  baseline  values  after  six  months  of  treatment  and  showed  a  decreasing  trend  towards baseline thereafter. The early increase in LDLc is accompanied by a more sustained increase of HDLc

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

of the same order of magnitude. However the increase in HDLc is not accompanied by the expected increase  of  Apo  A1  concentrations,  which  cannot  be  explained  with  the  existing  data.  Overall, although  the  ratio  TC/HDLc  does  not  change  or  even  decreases  slightly,  the  potential  long-  term effects  of  these  lipid  profile  changes  are  not  possible  to  predict  and  remain  a  concern  without additional long-term clinical data to provide reassurance. Concerns were also expressed regarding the necessity to introduce statins to manage the changes in the lipid profiles.

## Hepatic effects

Medicinal product no longer authorised In preclinical studies gross hepatotoxicity was not observed but increases in liver enzymes were seen in the dog, and hepatic hypertrophy in several species. Adequate monitoring of liver function in the RSG trials submitted in the initial application did not reveal any abnormalities of liver function with likely relationship to RSG treatment. Overall, one patient was prematurely withdrawn due to abnormal liver  function  tests  and  in  the  safety  update  population  treatment  was  discontinued  in  one  patient, subsequent to the diagnosis of a primary liver cell carcinoma. In monotherapy trials, the incidence of AEs related to the liver and biliary system was identical to that found for placebo (0.7%). Specific AEs  associated  with  abnormal  liver  functional  tests  (LFTs)  were  reported  in  0.6%  with  RSG monotherapy,  compared  with  0.2%,  2.9%  and  1.3%  for  placebo,  SU  and  metformin,  respectively. Laboratory analyses did not show an increased incidence of transition of LFTs from normal to levels of clinical concern with RSG, compared with placebo. Additional data submitted demonstrated that AEs associated with liver abnormalities remained rare in RSG monotherapy or when RSG was added to SU or metformin in the clinical trials as well as in postmarketing experience with RSG. Although in very rare cases fatal outcome due to hepatocellular dysfunction has been reported, a causal relationship has not been demonstrated. Effects on the reproductive system Thiazolidinediones including RSG have effects on ovarian production of sex steroids and effects on estrogen  and  progesterone  levels  were  seen  in  two  animal  species,  including  primates.  The  clinical experience with RSG in premenopausal females is limited, but did not reveal menstrual disturbances or symptoms/signs of hypoestrogenism. Safety in special populations Pregnancy and lactation: In reproductive toxicity studies, there were no effects on the embryo during early gestation but treatment during mid-gestation was associated with foetal death and retarded foetal development.  It  is  not  known  whether  breast-feeding  will  lead  to  exposure  of  the  infant  to  the medicinal  product.  It  is  established  medical  practice  to  use  insulin  for  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes during  pregnancy  and  lactation.    As  a  consequence  RSG  should  not  be  used  during  pregnancy  or breast-feeding. These observations have been recorded in the SPC. Age: RSG did not result in any increase in frequency of reports in elderly patients (65-75 year group) compared to the &lt; 65 year group, either when given as monotherapy, or in combination. In the RSG monotherapy studies, AEs for which there did appear to be age-related increases in frequency included anaemia  and  combined  oedema.  Other  events  reported  more  frequently  only  in  patients  &gt;75  years included  upper  respiratory  tract  infections,  diarrhoea,  respiratory  disorder,  chest  pain,  insomnia, cardiac failure and arrhythmia. No age-related difference in reports of ALT increases or myocardial infarctions were noted.

Gender: In the overall population, the incidence of AEs reported by males and females was similar, although  some  AEs  such  as  headache,  sinusitis  and  urinary  tract  infections  as  well  as  oedema  and anaemia were reported more commonly in females than in males. There was a trend to more reports of weight gain in females. This may reflect the fact that females tend to have greater fat mass than males. One  explanation  may  be  that  given  that  the  molecular  target  for  PPAR γ agonists  is  expressed  in adipose tissue. There was no difference in the frequency of reports relating to increased lipids, and LFT  abnormalities.  The  cardiovascular  tolerability  profile  appeared  similar  in  male  and  female patients.

## Post-Authorisation safety Data

Following the CPMP review of the second PSUR section 4.8 'Undesirable Effects' of the SPC has been amended to include 'Rare cases (frequency &gt;1/10000, &lt;1/1000) of congestive heart failure and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pulmonary  oedema  have  been  reported in post-marketing experience.'In addition a  wording amendment has been introduced to the existing statement in section 4.8 of the SPC, for hepatic events and elevated liver enzymes.

Following the CPMP review of the fourth PSUR section 4.8 of the SPC has been amended to include the wording ' Very rarely cases (frequency &lt; 1/10000) of angioedema and urticaria have been reported in post-marketing experience.'

Through a type II variation a warning regarding rapid and excessive weight gain has been added in section  4.4  'Special  warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use'.  In  addition  section  4.8  has  been amended to reflect rapid and excessive weight gain.

The overall data indicates that no particular risks in the short-term are expected for patients without chronic heart failure treated with metformin or SU in combination with RSG, but additional studies are required looking at more sensitive functional parameters (e.g. dynamic parameters during rest and exercise) to detect early onset of cardiac injury. Taking into account also the lipid changes induced by RSG,  long-term  studies  are  required  to  evaluate  the  potential  of  RSG  to  affect  cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in patients with long-standing diabetes. It is therefore recommended that the applicant undertake adequate clinical trials with cardiovascular safety as primary endpoint to address these issues. In addition, use of RSG in patients with cardiac failure or history of cardiac failure has been contraindicated in the SPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The safety data submitted with the monotherapy variation did not reveal new or unexpected adverse events. Nevertheless, section 4.8 of the SPC has been updated to reflect the adverse events related to the use of rosiglitzone as monotherapy. In addition the presentation of the ADRs in section 4.8 of the SPC has been modified due to the use of a different cut-off (0.2%) for the definition of 'excess' in the comparison with placebo or comparator drug. Discussion on safety Anaemia, seen with the highest incidences in patients treated with metformin and RSG in combination (7%) and in elderly patients (4%) is thought to result from the observed volume expansion and not from direct effects on blood formation. A warning has been added in the SPC. The clinical trial and postmarketing data submitted demonstrated that adverse events associated with liver abnormalities remained rare. However, due to potential class effects, the proposed monitoring of liver function and the special warning in the SPC were considered to be a reasonable approach. The body weight is a safety concern especially due to the fact that a large proportion of type 2 diabetic patients are overweight. The cardiovascular consequences of both obesity and type 2 diabetes are an issue of concern, taking into consideration also the LDLc increase induced by RSG. The long-term magnitude  of  weight  gain  or  its  metabolic  implications  cannot  be  assessed  based  on  the  submitted data, which were limited to 2 years. However, the weight increase induced by RSG over a two year period did not impair RSG efficacy on blood glucose control. A recommendation to monitor weight has been added in the SPC. Although an increase in plasma volume has been demonstrated and mild to moderate oedema were reported  with  higher  frequency  upon  administration  of  RSG,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  an increased  cardiovascular  morbidity  and  mortality  upon  oral  administration  of  RSG  alone  or  in combination with metformin or SU for a duration of up to 2 years. However, in approximately 50% of oedema cases, corrective therapy with diuretics was used and thus it cannot be excluded that diuretic therapy prevented or masked the development of CHF or hypertension. The  potential  long-term  effects  of  the  observed  changes  in  the  lipid  profile  on  the  cardiovascular system cannot be predicted and therefore raise concerns.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Overall Conclusion on quality, efficacy, safety and benefit risk assessment

## Quality

The pharmaceutical documentation showed  that the quality of the product was acceptable. Physicochemical aspects relevant to the clinical performance of  the  product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way.

## Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology

In the repeated dose toxicity studies, the main findings were in metabolism and the cardiovascular system. Increased fat deposits, anaemia, cardiac hypertrophy and increased plasma volume were observed on all species tested (rat, mouse, dog), while increased body weight was observed in mouse and rat and increase in plasma ALT and ALP only in dog. In the carcinogenicity study rats developed lipomas due to persistent pharmacological overstimulation of adipose tissue.

- Medicinal product no longer authorised Efficacy -In type 2 diabetics failing on monotherapy significant improvements in glycaemic control were observed  with  the  use  of  RSG  in  combination  with  metformin  or  SU.  Effect  on  glycaemic control is considered a well-validated surrogate for outcome  benefits. However,  as a combination  therapy  with  metformin  or  SU,  RSG  has  not  been  compared  to  SU+metformin. Such  comparison  is  needed  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  RSG  with  SU  or metformin against the standard combination treatment in these patients. Hence, taking also into consideration the safety concerns, a marketing authorisation could not be granted for the applied indication;  'RSG  is  indicated  for  use  in  combination  with  sulphonylureas  or  metformin  in patients who are not satisfactorily controlled by either agent alone'. -However, among the patients insufficiently controlled on monotherapy with one of the currently approved  oral  antidiabetics,  there  is  a  subgroup  of  patients  for  whom  the  metformin+SU combination is not an option. Currently the available therapy for these patients would be insulin, and insulin therapy is associated with practical problems in elderly patients as well as the risk of hypoglycaemia. During the course of the appeal process specific data were submitted to support the use of RSG in combination with SU in patients who are not satisfactorily controlled upon monotherapy  and  show  gastrointestinal  intolerance  to  metformin.  Furthermore,  data  were submitted to support the use of RSG in combination with metformin in obese patients who are not  satisfactorily  controlled  upon  metformin  monotherapy.  These  patients  may  generally  be expected to exhibit marked insulin resistance and would benefit from therapy with an insulin sensitizer. Therefore, the use of RSG can be recommended for these subgroups of patients for whom an unmet medical need is described. -Based on a subsequent submission (February 2003) of additional monotherapy data, RSG was also recommended for use as second-line monotherapy, particularly in overweight patients, for whom metformin would otherwise be the first alternative. Safety The  safety  database  for  RSG  contains  more  than  1,000  patients  treated  for  at  least  two  years  with RSG. The safety profile of RSG observed in the updated monotherapy dataset was consistent with that previously observed. Due to potential class effects, and although the available clinical data do not provide a signal for liver toxicity,  the  proposed  monitoring  of  the  liver  function  in  patients  receiving  RSG  and  the  special warning was considered to be a reasonable approach.

RSG-induced weight gain over 24 months was comparable to weight gain seen in combination with SU or metformin. However, the magnitude of the body weight increase on the long term and possible associated  cardiovascular  effects  cannot  be  assessed  based  on  the  submitted  data  and  must  be investigated in long-term studies.

In  spite  of  the  observed  plasma  volume  expansion,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality upon oral administration of RSG alone or in combination with metformin or SU for a duration of up to 2 years. However, the patients treated in the clinical trials conducted so far were devoid of manifest pre-existing severe chronic heart failure (NYHA class III or

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

IV) and insufficient data are presently available to definitely exclude a detrimental cardiac effect in the long term in patients with mild to  moderate pre-existing cardiac dysfunction (NYHA class I or II). Although no particular risks in the  short  term  are  expected  for  patients  with  mild  to  moderate  preexisting cardiac failure treated with metformin or SU in combination with RSG, the CPMP agreed that additional studies are required looking at more sensitive functional parameters to detect early onset of cardiac injury. Moreover, in view of the lipid changes induced by RSG, long-term studies are required to evaluate the potential of RSG to affect cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in diabetes patients during long-term therapy.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  discussing  the  timing  of  studies  to  address  the  cardiovascular  risk,  some  CPMP  members maintained that these studies should be performed prior to the marketing authorisation. However, the majority of the CPMP considered that, as the indication for RSG has been restricted to patients with an unmet  medical  need,  these  studies  could  be  undertaken  as  a  post-marketing  commitment.  The applicant has committed to perform the following post-marketing studies to address all open safety issues. · A double blind study of the effect of RSG on cardiovascular structure and function in type 2 diabetic patients with chronic heart failure NYHA stages I-II. · A long-term cardiovascular morbidity/mortality study in patients on RSG in combination with SU or metformin. Benefit/risk assessment Based on the CPMP review of data on efficacy and safety, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile for rosiglitazone was favourable in the following therapeutic indications: 'as  oral  monotherapy  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus  particularly  in  overweight  patients inadequately  controlled  by  diet  and  exercise  and  for  whom  metformin  is  inappropriate  because  of contraindications or intolerance. Rosiglitazone is also indicated for oral combination treatment in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with insufficient  glycaemic  control  despite  maximal  tolerated  dose  of  oral  monotherapy  with  either metformin or a sulphonylurea: -in combination with metformin particularly in overweight patients. -in combination with a sulphonylurea only in patients  who  show  intolerance  to  metformin  or for whom metformin is contraindicated.'