---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 21:10:37
document_pages: 16
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/crixivan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: crixivan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.5974899
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 18:11:17.310071
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Crixivan.  This  scientific discussion has been updated until 1 October 2004. For information on changes after this date, please refer to module 8B.

The manufacturing process is adequately described. It is carried out under GMP at controlled humidity of the air in the manufacturing areas associated with roller compaction/milling and encapsulating (less than 33 %). Studies showed that the quality of the finished product is not compromised by the scale-up in production. In order to protect the product against moisture and subsequent degradation, the market

1. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The  active  substance  of  Crixivan,  indinavir,  is  used  as  the  sulphate  salt  ethanolate.  One  gram  of anhydrous  freebase  corresponds  to  1.25  grams  of  the  sulphate  salt  ethanolate.  This  form  is  freely soluble in aqueous solutions, but the solubility decreases at higher pH. Indinavir is highly hygroscopic at  relative  humidities  above  60  %.  It  has  two  pKa  values,  6.2  and  3.8,  and  the  partition  coefficient octanol/water (log P) is 2.7 at pH 7. The  primary  degradation  pathway  for  indinavir  sulphate  for  both  solid  state  and  solution  is  amide bond  hydrolysis  to  form  lactone  and  aminoindanol.  The  degradation  is  humidity  and  temperature dependent. Indinavir  is  a  chiral  molecule  with  5  stereogenic  centres  and  is  used  as  a  single  isomer.  It  is stereoselectively prepared from chiral starting materials. The enantiomeric purity is ascertained by a combination of controls during the synthesis. The only stereoisomer observed in the drug substance is the 4-(R)-epimer, which is controlled by the impurity method for drug substance. The drug substance is very pure. The limit for any single impurity is not more than 0.1 % and the limit for the sum of all impurities is not more than 0.5 %. However, due to the high doses to be given in clinical use (&gt; 2 g/day), the qualification threshold as defined in the ICH guideline on impurities, is 0.05 %. One of the impurities is thus not qualified since the levels were low in the batches used in the toxicological studies. The limit for this impurity is therefore tightened to not more than 0.05 %. Composition Crixivan  is  formulated  as  capsules  containing  200  mg  and  400  mg  of  the  active  substance.  They contain a high percentage of the drug substance and two excipients, anhydrous lactose and magnesium stearate. The ingredients are granulated to improve flowability. A dry granulation method is used to avoid  exposure  to  moisture,  which  has  been  shown  to  promote  degradation  to  a  lactone  and aminoindanol. All clinical trial formulations were manufactured with the same composition as the market product. The formulation intended for market has remained unchanged throughout the development programme. Development pharmaceutics The development work is adequately described. Early clinical studies revealed a more reproducible absorption  when  indinavir  was  administered  as  the  sulphate  salt  compared  with  the  free  base.  The sulphate salt was chosen for the development of the product. In order to accelerate the dosage form development and to facilitate manufacture of the drug product, a weight multiple capsule formulation was chosen for the development. Anhydrous lactose was selected as a filler and binding aid because of its low moisture content, non hygroscopicity  and  good  compactibility.  Magnesium  stearate  provides  the  lubrication  required  for machinability. In  view of indinavir sulphate's moisture and temperature sensitivity, poor flowability and relatively loose bulk density, a dry granulation formulation with acceptable compressibility and consistent fill volume during encapsulation was developed. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

container  will  be  a  HDPE  (high  density  polyethylene)  bottle  fitted  with  polypropylene  plastic  cap. Silica gel canisters are included as desiccant.

The result of the process development is a stable product with low batch-to-batch variation with the finished product specification.

Stereoisomerism The  stereochemistry  is  well  under  control  during  the  synthesis.  Racemisation  after  the  synthesis  is extremely unlikely since it would require inversion of the configuration of all stereogenic centres. The formation of epimers cannot be excluded but should be detectable by the purity tests applied. Control of starting materials Indinavir sulphate is stereoselectively prepared from chiral starting material in six steps. The  enantiomeric  purity  of  the  active  substance  and  other  ingredients  is  ensured  by  the  route  of manufacture  and  quality  control  on  intermediate  products  (starting  materials  and  intermediate indinavir free base) rather than a test for specific rotation. The  impurity  profile  of  indinavir  sulphate  has  been  extensively  evaluated  and  remains  consistent throughout  the  development  and  the  scale-up.  Potential  impurities  from  synthesis,  stereoisomeric impurities and degradants have been identified. The impurities are minimised or removed by control on  the  reaction  parameters  and  in-process  controls.  High  humidity  which  leads  to  formation  of degradants is avoided. The synthetic procedure is comprehensively described, including procedures used in the early stage of the development. The minor changes in the route of synthesis during development have not resulted in changes in the impurity profile or the consistently low impurity levels. Control of other ingredients Anhydrous lactose, magnesium stearate as well as the components of the capsule shells comply with the  requirements  of  the  European  Pharmacopoeia.    To  demonstrate  compliance  with  Commission Directive  1999/82/EC  and  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  Minimising  the  Risk  of  Transmitting  Animal Spongiform Encephalopathy Agents via Medicinal Products (CPMP/BWP/1230/98 rev.1), satisfactory European Pharmacopeia Certificates of Suitability have been provided for the magnesium stearate and the gelatin. Control of packaging materials Studies showed that the product has good stability and is adequately protected from moisture in the proposed packaging configuration. Capsules are packaged in a container composed of HDPE (high density polyethylene) fitted with a polypropylene plastic cap and containing desiccant. The blister is made of polyamide/aluminium/PVC with push through lidding of aluminium with a heat seal coating. The capacity of the package materials to protect from moisture has been demonstrated along with sufficient data on stability. Control of the finished product The specifications of the finished product cover the appearance of the capsules identity, assay of drug substance,  dose  uniformity,  dissolution  test,  test  on  degradation  product  and  moisture  content.  At release,  an  assay  limit  of  95-105  %  and  a  limit  for  the  lactone  is  set  to  not  more  than  0.3%.  Batch analyses data for several pilot scale lots used in clinical, safety and stability studies are submitted and demonstrate a consistent quality of the product and compliance with the stated specifications. Since the aminoindanol is produced in equimolar amount to the lactone, only the data of the lactone levels are provided. No degradation other than the lactone and the aminoindanol were observed in any of the stressed capsules. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Stability

The stability of indinavir sulphate was assessed under a variety of storage conditions and containers. The  submitted  data  show  that  in  the  presence  of  moisture  and/or  elevated  temperatures,  the  drug substance  undergoes  conversion  to  an  amorphous  material  or  to  a  hydrate  crystal  form  and  to  the formation of degradation products i.e. lactone and several unidentified impurities occur.

The stability results presently available demonstrate that the drug substance is stable under the stated storage conditions. No degradation or crystal form changes occurred. The finished product shelf life limits for assay and lactone content are 93-105 % and not more 1.5 %, respectively. The stability studies of the finished product show that the drug product is stable when stored in the original container tightly closed and protected from humidity. The  initial  shelf  life  at  the  time  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation  was  12  months.    Based  on  the availability of additional stability data the shelf life for all strengths was extended to 36 months when capsules are presented in bottles. The stability data provided demonstrated that the specifications are all met and that the shelf life of 36 months is acceptable. The shelf life for the 400 mg capsules stored in blisters is 24 months. Submission  of  full  time  stability  data  on  production  batches  of  the  finished  product  is  part  of  the follow-up measures. The applicant should also develop a specific analysis method for one of the degradation products in Crixivan capsules and reassess the shelf life specifications for degradants when the complete results of the stability studies will be available. Additional strengths for Crixivan hard capsules have been later approved following its first approval. A new strength containing 333 mg indinavir has been formulated with the same ingredients as for the two already approved strengths, except the pink ink, and is the exact weight multiple of the existing ones.  Since  this  new  strength  is  bracketed  within  the  existing  ones,  no  bioequivalence  study  is required. The other strength, containing 100 mg indinavir, has been developed to be used in children. The active substance, the other ingredients and the method of preparation of the finished product were similar to the ones already approved. 2. Toxico-pharmacological aspects The nature and the rationale of the testing programme is in accordance with the guidelines for testing conventional products for single agent use. The protein products of the gag and pol HIV genes are produced initially as precursor polyproteins, which  must  subsequently  undergo  post-translational  cleavage  to  generate  the  respective  structural proteins  and  enzymes.  Indinavir  is  an  orally  active  peptidomimetic  HIV-1  protease  inhibitor. Inactivation of the HIV protease by competitive inhibition results in the production of immature, noninfectious HIV particles, thus blocking completion of the viral replication cycle. Pharmacodynamics Effects related to the proposed indication Eight in vitro studies regarding the antiviral activity, mechanism of action and resistance development were submitted. No in vivo studies have been conducted. Indinavir is a selective inhibitor of HIV-1 protease with little inhibitory activity against mammalian proteases. The IC50 values were 0.41 nM for HIV-1 protease and &gt; 40000 nM against several human proteases.  Indinavir  is  considerably  less  active  against  HIV-2  than  against  HIV-1.  Antiretroviral efficacy of indinavir in vitro was demonstrated in human T-lymphoid cell cultures, PBM (peripheral blood  mononuclear)  cells  and  primary  monocytes/macrophages  using  the  p24  assay.  IC95  values  of 50 nM to 100 nM were reported for both laboratory strains of HIV-1 and clinical isolates. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Indinavir is a reversible inhibitor. In vitro activity was reversible upon removal of the drug from cells and  proteolytic  activity  appeared  to  resume  more  rapidly  for  indinavir  than  for  other  protease inhibitors.

Potential  antiretroviral  activity  of  metabolites  was  not  directly  investigated,  but  one  study  indicates that human plasma and urine metabolites contributed little to enzyme inhibition.

In  general  pharmacology  studies,  some  cardiovascular  and  respiratory  effects  were  reported  in anaesthetised dogs given intravenous doses of 10 mg/kg/day of indinavir. Other studies in dogs and mice  given  intravenous  or  oral  doses  of  10  mg/kg/day  did  not  indicate  any  biologically  significant effects on major organs. Systemic exposure was however well below the expected clinical exposure in

Resistance Studies  on  the  emergence  of  indinavir  resistant  HIV-1  variants  in  patients,  some  initially  on suboptimal doses, showed a decreased antiviral effect by 24 weeks of therapy (see III.4). Correlation  of  phenotypic  and  genotypic  changes  in  clinical  isolates  from  selected  patients  after 24 weeks of therapy was determined and amino acid changes were further analysed by site directed mutagenesis. By  and  large, resistance emergence  was  associated with multiple and variable coexpression of amino acid substitutions at 11 protease sites, at least. On the basis of the available data, amendments to the SPC on resistance mutations have been introduced to correspond to the need for this kind of information among practising physicians. Decreasing susceptibility seemed to be related to increasing numbers of amino acid substitutions. A minimal  loss  of  susceptibility  seemed  to  require  the  coexpression  of  specific  combinations  of 3 substitutions  and  a  greater  degree  of  resistance  (IC 95 &gt;  400  nM)  at  least  4  to  5  substitutions.  A minimum of 4 substitutions  was  required  for  broad  cross-resistance.  All  indinavir-resistant  primary viral variants were cross-resistant to ritonavir whilst resistance to saquinavir was variable. In vitro studies showed that zidovudine resistant clinical isolates were sensitive to indinavir as would be expected from the different mechanisms of action. One brief report indicating synergistic activity in vitro of indinavir with zidovudine, didanosine and an investigational  non-nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitor  has  been  submitted.  The  potential  for synergistic toxic interactions was not studied. Pharmacokinetics The  disposition  of  indinavir  exhibited  both  species  and  gender  differences.  In  rats,  absorption  was rapid and pH dependent and a bioavailability of about 24 % in female rats and about 12 % in male rats was calculated. Absorption was prolonged following repeated administration of indinavir. Greater  than  proportional  increases  in  Cmax  and  AUC  were  often  observed  in  rats  and  dogs  given repeated oral doses at 10 mg/kg/day and 40 mg/kg/day. No consistent dose proportionality trend could be  seen  at  higher  doses.  In  dogs,  bioavailability  approached  100  %  while  in  monkeys  a  low bioavailability  of  12  %  was  reported.  No  clear  gender  differences  have  been  detected  in  dogs  and monkeys. Indinavir had a low protein binding ranging from 60 to 70 % in all species. Distribution, studied only in albino rats, was wide. Most tissues except the brain had high levels of radioactivity. Indinavir was taken up into brain tissue only to a limited extent with a mean plasma/brain ratio of 0.18. Uptake into lymphatic tissue, considered to be the main site for HIV replication was apparent and levels about half those of plasma were detected at 0.5 to 1 hour post dose. Indinavir  was  extensively  metabolised  in  all  species  by  cytochromes  P450  dependent  systems,  the primary site of  metabolism being the liver, with the intestine contributing little to metabolism. The predominant pathways of indinavir metabolism were N-dealkylation and hydroxylation. Qualitatively similar metabolic profiles were seen across species. The major route of excretion was biliary with 76 to 86 % of a dose excreted into faeces and less than 14% in urine. Toxicology Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

several  of  these  studies.  The  studies  regarding  general  pharmacology  were  not  conducted  in compliance with Good Laboratory Practice principles.

All pivotal toxicity studies were in compliance with Good Laboratory Practice principles.

The acute toxicity in mice and rats of per os and intraperitoneal administered indinavir is low. The incidental oral intake of a large quantity of indinavir by humans is not anticipated to produce serious adverse effects.

During the evaluation of the low strength of Crixivan intended to be used in children, the available toxicological data in young animals were reviewed. Results from a 14-week study in juvenile dogs (aged  1  day  at  start  of  the  study)  and  a  study  in  infant  monkeys  to  specifically  investigate

The repeated dose toxicity and toxicokinetics of orally administered indinavir were studied in rats and dogs  for  up  to  53  weeks.  Shorter  duration  oral  studies  were  conducted  in  mice  (14  weeks)  and monkeys (5 weeks). In oral studies, the animals were administered indinavir at doses causing doselimiting toxicity except for monkeys. Toxicity studies including a recovery period were not submitted. Toxicity after intravenous administration (16 days) was studied in rats and dogs. No treatment related toxicity was noted after intravenous administration. Treatment related mortality due to gastrointestinal toxicity occurred in rats and mice. The toxicity was likely related to local irritant effects (gastrointestinal irritation due to the high dose). The clinical dose of  800  mg  (16  mg/kg  in  a  50  kg  person)  administered  t.i.d.  is  at  least  40  times  lower  than  doses causing gastrointestinal toxicity in rats and mice. Therefore it is not considered to be associated with a significant risk of gastrointestinal toxicity in patients. In dogs very little treatment related toxicity other than emesis was seen. The absence of toxicity may reflect  the  low  systemic  exposure  (AUC),  1-1.5  higher  than  clinical  exposure,  in  this  species.  The toxicokinetic  data  indicate  that  sufficiently  high  systemic  exposure  could  not  be  attained  in  dog studies. A low toxicity in monkeys was observed in the 5 week toxicity programme. The systemic exposure in female  monkeys  was  approximately  2-3  times  higher  than  clinical  exposure  and  in  male  monkeys, lower or comparable with clinical exposure. Indinavir was associated with increased hepatic weight in rats, mice and monkeys. A modest induction of  CYP3A1  was  also  demonstrated  in  both  mice  and  rats.  There  might  be  a  possibility  of  similar hepatic changes in humans although the metabolic load is lower in patients at clinical doses. The  indinavir  induced  hyperbilirubenemia,  observed  in  some  toxicity  studies  and  in  a  few  AIDS patients, was studied in rats and in in vitro systems. It may be explained by the inhibition of hepatic uptake of bilirubine as well as inhibition of acylglucuronidation. Indinavir is a competitive inhibitor of uridine diphosphate glucuronyl transferases (UDPGT) in in vitro systems. However, indinavir did not inhibit the enzymes involved in glucuronidation of p-nitrophenol. An increase in thyroid weight and thyroid hyperplasia was observed in all rat toxicity studies at doses over 160 mg/kg/day. This is likely due to an increase of thyroxin clearance. This probably represents a species-specific phenomenon and is not predictive of similar responses in humans. Crystalluria  (crystals  contain  the  parent  drug  free-base  form)  was  observed  in  numerous  rats administered indinavir at relatively low doses. Crystalluria was not observed in monkeys treated with indinavir at doses of 10 - 40 mg/kg b.i.d. It was observed in one monkey at 160-mg/kg/day b.i.d. and in  one  female dog given a high dose of indinavir (80 mg/kg/day). The crystals were not associated with  drug-induced  renal  injury.  In  rats  administered  very  high  doses  of  indinavir,  renal  tubular necrosis and vacuolation were observed. Serum biochemical, haematological and urinanalytical changes were noted in rats and mice exposed to indinavir  concentrations  in  the  clinical  range.  These  changes  seem  to  be  of  minor  toxicological significance. Repeated dose toxicity studies in rats and dogs given indinavir sulphate at doses up to 160  mg/kg/day  together  with  two  degradates  did  not  show  any  effects  indicative  of  additive  or synergistic toxicity. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

hyperbilirubinemia  showed  that  there  was  no  cause  for  specific  concerns  regarding  toxic  effects  of indinavir in relation to the age of the organism. However, since no significant margins of exposure between  plasma  levels  coupled  to  toxic  effects  in  animals  and  expected  therapeutic  levels  were identified, the safety of indinavir in HIV-infected children had to be assessed from clinical data.

## Reproduction toxicity

Indinavir  was  investigated  in  fertility  studies  in  male  and  female  rats,  in  a  developmental  study  in rabbits, in a developmental toxicity study in rats with postweaning evaluation, and a fostering/crossfostering study in rats. Indinavir did not cause maternal toxicity in the rabbit developmental toxicity study at doses up to 240 mg/kg/day (systemic exposure approximately 1.5 times the clinical exposure). There was no developmental toxicity in the foetuses other than an increased incidence of reduced 13th rib that was of questionable significance. In rats, maternal toxicity was characterised by body weight changes and decreased food consumption. Developmental toxicity in F1 generation, probably due to accumulation of indinavir in the milk (ratio milk/plasma 1.2 to 1.5) of lactating rats, was manifested as decreases in pup weights during and after lactation, and as an increase over controls in the incidence of supernumerary rib and cervical ribs at systemic exposure levels below or comparable with clinical exposure. There was no evidence of teratogenicity. As pointed out in section 4.6 of the SPC, data from studies in beagle dogs indicated a slight increase in the incidence of resorptions, but with no effects on viability of the foetus. Indinavir crossed the placenta with significant foetal exposure occurring in rats (foetal plasma AUC value estimated to approximately 20 % of maternal plasma AUC), but minimal exposure to the drug in rabbits (foetal plasma AUC value estimated to approximately 2 % of maternal plasma AUC). To  further  study  the  effect  of  indinavir  during  gestation  and  the  postnatal  period,  a  developmental toxicity study in dogs is in progress. Genotoxic and carcinogenic potential Carcinogenicity studies in mice were negative. In rats, an increased incidence of thyroid adenomas was  seen,  probably  related  to  an  increase  in  release  of  TSH  secondary  to  an  increase  in  thyroxine clearance. The relevance of the findings to humans is likely limited. The full carcinogenic potential of indinavir  cannot  be  assessed  due  to  systemic  exposure  levels  only  2  to  3  times  higher  than  the expected clinical exposure despite use of maximum tolerated doses. Results from genotoxicity tests were negative. Local tolerance The potential dermal and ocular irritating properties are not expected to be a safety concern during the intended therapy. Environmental risk Data  submitted  to  evaluate  the  potential  risk  of  indinavir  on  the  environment  suggested  that  no exposure levels of concern to the environment are to be expected. 3. Clinical aspects The  assessment  of  data  relies  on  the  impact  on  biological  markers  and  an  exploratory  analysis  of clinical efficacy. As reflected in the 'Points to consider in the assessment of new anti-HIV medicinal products'  adopted  by  the  CPMP  in  January  1996,  the  information  on  biological  markers  was  not sufficient to base an approval solely on these markers. It was felt that the predictivity of therapeutic changes in CD4 cell counts and viral load in terms of clinical benefits was either incomplete or not sufficiently evaluated. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamic studies

In vitro indinavir concentrations of 25 to 100 nM achieved 95% inhibition of viral spread in HIV-1 infected cells (CIC95). Human pharmacokinetic data indicate that a dose of 400 mg q 6h or 600 mg q 6h maintained mean blood levels above 100 nM throughout the dosing interval.

At the recommended dose regimen (800 mg t.i.d.), Cmax was about 11000 nM and geometric mean trough concentration about 211 nM, which is above the CIC95. Microbiology and resistance As discussed in part III, in vitro synergistic antiviral effects were observed in infected lymphoid cells when indinavir was combined with reverse transcriptase inhibitors. As  indicated  in  the  dose-finding  studies,  suboptimal  doses  of  indinavir  led  to  subsequent  loss  of activity even after patients were switched to higher doses. The proportion of patients that developed resistance  at  24  weeks  was  13  %  and  39  %  in  two  studies.  A  direct  comparison  between  indinavir monotherapy  and  combination  therapy  of  indinavir  and  zidovudine  showed  that  the  combination conferred  some  protection  against  indinavir  resistance.  Moreover,  the  combination  therapy  of indinavir  and  zidovudine  also  protected  from  zidovudine  resistance.  With  the  triple  combination indinavir-zidovudine-didanosine, these effects were statistically significant, with a reduction of virus expressing at least one resistance-associated amino acid substitution to both indinavir (from 13/24 to 2/20 at therapy week 24) and to the nucleoside analogues (from 10/16 to 0/20 at therapy week 24). As  anticipated,  no  cross-resistance  with  nucleoside  analogues  occurred.  Complete  cross-resistance between indinavir and ritonavir was demonstrated. Approximately two thirds of viral clinical isolates tested at the time of the initial submission that were resistant to indinavir-exhibited resistance to saquinavir. One half of these variants exhibited high level resistance to saquinavir. Pharmacokinetic studies Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated by conventional non-compartmental methods. Information  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  indinavir  in  humans  has  been  obtained  from  a  total  of 25 studies. Data from 374 subjects was presented, of whom 179 were HIV patients. The vast majority of  the  subjects  included  were  male  (84  %).  One  study  was  performed  in  subjects  with  mild  to moderate hepatic impairment. Indinavir is rapidly absorbed in the fasted state (Tmax of 0.8 hours) with an absolute bioavailability of approximately  60  %  within  the  dose  range  of  400  mg  to  800  mg.  The  bioavailability  of  a  single 800  mg dose was approximately 65 %. Administration of a 400 mg dose with a high-fat breakfast reduced the relative bioavailability to approximately 20 % compared to fasting conditions, whereas bioavailability was unaffected when an 800 mg dose was administered with a light meal. Following single  doses  of  600  and  800  mg  indinavir  in  HIV  patients,  mean  values  of  AUC  and  Cmax  were 13131 nM.h and 6853 nM, 24733 nM.h and 10134 nM, respectively. Plasma protein binding of indinavir is about 60%. The binding was concentration independent in the range 0.05 to 10 µg/ml (80-16000 nM), which covers the range of plasma levels in  vivo following administration of doses up to 800 mg t.i.d. There are no data with regard to distribution into the central nervous system in humans. Preclinical data show an extensive distribution into the lymphatic system, but only limited distribution across the blood brain barrier with a ratio of drug concentration in the brain to that in plasma of 0.18. Following single rising oral doses of 100-1000 mg of indinavir, area under the plasma concentration time curve (AUC0-24h) increased greater than dose proportionally. The non-linear increase in plasma levels  was  also  seen  at  steady  state.  This  is  suggested  to  result  from  a  saturation  of  the  first  pass metabolism of indinavir during the absorption phase when the concentration of indinavir is very high. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

During the elimination phase indinavir is rapidly eliminated with a terminal half-life of approximately 2 hours independent of the dose. Consistent with the short half-life, the accumulation of indinavir at steady state is rather modest.

Approximately 10 % of the dose is excreted unchanged in urine and the rest is eliminated through metabolism.  Seven  metabolites  were  identified in  vitro following  incubation  with  human  liver microsomes. In  vitro studies  with  human  liver  microsomes  employing  selective  inhibitors  and different P450 enzymes indicate that CYP3A4 and related 3A isozymes are the only enzymes that play a major role in the oxidative metabolism of indinavir. The in vitro metabolic profile was qualitatively confirmed in vivo .

No major pharmacokinetic differences were identified in Caucasians versus Blacks, or in HIV  patients  versus  healthy  volunteers.  Although  data  in  women  are  limited,  no  major  gender differences in the pharmacokinetic profile of indinavir were identified. There  was  only  limited  data  available  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  indinavir  in  children  following administration  of  the  capsule  formulation.    With  the  development  of  the  low  capsule  strength,  the pharmacokinetics of indinavir have been studied in a total of 95 children and adolescents, aged 3-18 years  old,  of  which  70  received  the  recommended  dose  (500  mg/m 2 (dose adjusted from calculated body surface area)). The vast majority (72 %) were ≤ 11 years old, but with only one child younger than  4  years.  Overall,  the  data  presented  indicated  that,  in  HIV-infected  paediatric  patients,  the indinavir  dose  of  500  mg/m 2 every  8  hours  produced  generally  similar  AUC0-8hr  compared  to  that observed in adults receiving the recommended indinavir dose of 800 mg every 8 hours. The geometric mean trough concentrations in paediatric patients were approximately one half of the values in adults. This constitutes a concern as it can not be excluded that trough levels of indinavir would not be of importance  for  efficacy/resistance  development.  Considering  the  high  frequency  of  nephrolithiasis already  seen  in  paediatric  patients  at  the  recommended  dose,  a  higher  dose  did  not  seem  to  be  an option. No study has been performed in patients with renal insufficiency. There are no pharmacokinetic data for subjects older than 60 years. During the post-authorisation phase, a multiple dose study has been performed in HIV seropositive female patients to assess the pharmacokinetics of indinavir in women compared  to  males.  There  were  no  clinically  significant  differences  in  the  pharmacokinetics  of indinavir in HIV seropositive women compared to HIV seropositive men. Due to increased drug exposure, a dose reduction to 600 mg t.i.d. is suggested in patients with mild to moderate hepatic insufficiency. Interactions An  extensive  drug  interaction  program  (14  studies)  was  planned  for  indinavir  with  12  studies completed at the time of the initial submission. Drugs were selected on the basis of the potential for pharmacokinetic interactions because of  involvement  with  CYP3A4  and/or  because  they  are frequently prescribed to HIV-infected patients. These findings are stated in the relevant parts of the Summary of Product Characteristics. Preliminary results from two interaction studies with rifabutin demonstrated the difficulty to predict the  effects  of  dose  adjustments.  Due  to  an  increase  in  the  plasma  concentrations  of  rifabutin  and  a decrease in the plasma concentrations of indinavir, a dosage reduction of rifabutin to half the standard dose and a dosage increase of indinavir to 1000-1200 mg every 8 hours is suggested when rifabutin is coadministered with indinavir. This dose regimen has not been confirmed in clinical studies and could result  in  a  clinically  significant  increase  in  the  plasma  concentrations  of  rifabutin.  Results  from  a confirmatory study will be submitted. Results  from  an  interaction  study  with  rifampicin  confirmed  that  indinavir  should  not  be  used concurrently with rifampicin because coadministration results in 90 % reduction in indinavir plasma concentrations. Considering this dramatic effect, indinavir should be used cautiously with other drugs that are potent inducers of CYP3A4 (phenobarbital, phenytoin, dexamethasone and carbamazapine). Coadministration may result in decreased plasma concentrations of indinavir and as a consequence an increased risk for suboptimal treatment and facilitation of development of resistance. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Although no interaction study with warfarin has been performed an interaction leading to increased levels of warfarin can presently not be ruled out.

Results from an interaction study with theophylline (a substrate for CYP1A2 and 3A4) suggest that there  is  no  clinically  significant  effect  of  indinavir  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  theophylline,  and review of adverse experiences indicated that the combination was generally well tolerated. This has been reflected in the SPC, section 4.5.

A published pharmacokinetic study has investigated the effect of repeated dosing with St John's Wort ( Hypericum perforatum )(300 mg three times daily with meals) on the pharmacokinetics of indinavir (Lancet 2000; 355: 547-8)

Results  from  interaction  studies  with  ketoconazole,  intraconazole,  nevirapine  and  delavirdine  have been  addressed  in  relevant  parts  of  the  SPC.  These  results  have  led  to  considerations  on  dose adjustments as indicated in the SPC section 4.2. Further interaction data have shown that the co-administration of methadone with indinavir does not impact on the pharmacokinetics of either of these two products. New interaction data of indinavir with other medicinal products have become available and therefore have led to an update of the information of the relevant section of the SPC. Co-administration of efavirenz 200 mg, which is a substrate of CYP 3A4 and indinavir 800 mg tid for 14 days was shown to result in decreased indinavir AUC and Cmax by 31 % and 16 % respectively. An increase of indinavir dose when both substances are co-is therefore at present recommended. The  possibility  of  interaction  between  indinavir  and  HMG-CoA  reductase  inhibitors,  either  or  not predominantly  metabolised  by  CYP3A4  cannot  be  excluded  considering  that  indinavir  inhibits CYP3A4  and  that  HMG-CoA  reductase  inhibitors  are  substrates  for  CYP3A4.  Not  all  HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors have however CYP3A4 as a major elimination pathway (e.g. pravastatin) but all are substrates of the transporter P-glycoprotein (PgP). Thus the increased levels of HMG-CoA levels might arise from the interaction. There are no clinical data available on the combination of indinavir with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, not predominantly metabolised by CYP3A4 are not available but caution should be exercised when co-administrated. Twice daily coadministration to volunteers of indinavir (800 mg) and ritonavir (100, 200, or 400 mg) with  food  for  two  weeks  resulted  in  increased  indinavir  AUC24h  of  178 %,  266 %,  and  220 %, respectively, compared to historical indinavir AUC24h values (indinavir 800 mg every 8 hours alone). In  addition,  twice  daily  coadministration  of  indinavir  (400 mg)  and  ritonavir  (400 mg)  resulted  in increased  indinavir  AUC24h  of  68 %.    In  the  same  study,  twice  daily  coadministration  of  indinavir (800 mg)  and  ritonavir  (100  or  200mg)  resulted  in  increased  ritonavir  AUC24h  of  72 %  and  96 % respectively, versus the same doses of ritonavir alone.  By contrast, twice daily coadministration of indinavir (800 mg and 400 mg) and ritonavir (400 mg) had a negligible effect (7 % and 7 % decrease respectively) on ritonavir AUC24h.  Currently, there are no safety or efficacy data available on the use of  this  combination  in  patients.  As  the  risk  of  nephrolithiasis  is  a  dose  related  phenomenon  that  is more likely to occur at high indinavir exposures, it was agreed to add a warning on the increased risk of nephrolithiasis, when the two substances are co-administered. Coadministration  of  indinavir  with  saquinavir  (600-mg  hard  capsules  or  800-mg  soft  capsules  or 1200-mg soft capsules single dose) in healthy subjects resulted in a 500 %, 620 %, and 360 % increase in saquinavir plasma AUC24h, respectively.  Relevant safety and efficacy data are not available for this combination.    The  design  of  the  study  does  not  allow  for  definitive  evaluation  of  the  effect  of saquinavir on indinavir, but suggests there is less than a two-fold increase in indinavir AUC8h during coadministration with saquinavir. Because indinavir is a cytochrome P-450 3A4 inhibitor, co-administration with sildenafil is likely to result in an increase of sildenafil plasma concentrations by competitive inhibition of metabolism.  The magnitude of this interaction has not been determined. However, based on data on the co-administration of sildenafil with saquinavir and ritonavir, which have shown 210 % and 1000 % increases in sildenafil AUC an interaction cannot be excluded. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Mean extrapolated AUC0-8h  of indinavir was reduced from 30.8 ± 8.4 µ g.h/ml to 12.3 ± 4.7 µ g.h/ml after  treatment  with  St  John's  Wort,  i.e.  by  approximately  60%.  The  extrapolated  concentration  8 hours after dose was reduced from 0.49 ± 0.44 µ g/ml to 0.048 ± 0.026 µ g/ml by St John's Wort, i.e. by about 90%. Cmax of indinavir was reduced by approximately 30%. Hence, St John's Wort caused a marked reduction in indinavir plasma levels. The results indicate that St John' Wort is an inducer of CYP3A4,  which  is  involved  in  the  metabolism  of  indinavir.    The  co-administration  is  therefore contraindicated.

Only the triple combination therapy with indinavir and two nucleoside analogues showed statistically significant superiority over indinavir monotherapy and conferred protection to emergence of resistance both to indinavir and the nucleosides analogues.

Despite the fact that no reports of interactions have been reported so far, increased pimozide levels carry the risk of QT prolongation and ventricular arrythmias. It is reasonable to expect an interaction between  pimozide  and  protease  inhibitors.  Therefore,  concomitant  administration  of  pimozide  and protease inhibitors should be contraindicated. Clinical experience The initial assessment of clinical efficacy relies on phase II and III studies with biological endpoints primarily  measured  until  24  weeks  of  therapy  in  277  patients  on  indinavir  monotherapy  with  the proposed dose, and 247 patients on combination therapies. The extension phase (48 weeks) comprised a limited number of patients. The inclusion criteria covered a diverse spectrum, with CD4 cell counts ranging from 0-500 cells/mm 3 (median levels at enrollment, 140 to 250). In fact, 35 % of patients were moderately immunosuppressed with CD4 levels of 250-300/mm 3 .  A  majority were young Caucasian males, and females represented 15 % of the patients in the phase III programme. Pharmacodynamic studies A  total  of  417  patients  were  enrolled  in  8  phase  II  studies  with  a  primary  treatment  period  of 24 weeks. These studies investigated the effect of indinavir in monotherapy or in combination with nucleoside analogues on biological endpoints, i.e. CD4 cell counts and serum HIV RNA. Combined results of these studies showed that the chosen dose of 800 mg q 8h exerted an optimal antiviral activity. Moreover, higher doses increased the risk of adverse events such as nephrolithiasis and hyperbilirubinemia. The effect on viral load was temporary in patients receiving suboptimal doses whereas the effect on CD4 cell counts was maintained during the 24 weeks. In these trials high viral load (&gt;20,000 copies/ml) was an inclusion criterion and three phase II studies (studies  019,  020  and  035)  were  carried  out  in  order  to  compare  the  effects  of  indinavir  with nucleoside analogues (zidovudine, didanosine, lamivudine) over a 24 week period. Study 019 was a double-blind study comparing the effect of indinavir, indinavir and zidovudine, and zidovudine. This study showed that the effect of indinavir alone or in combination with zidovudine was  significantly  superior  to  zidovudine  alone.  For  indinavir  patients  at  24  weeks,  45  %  on monotherapy  and  59  %  on  combination  treatment  had  &gt;2  log10  viral  load  decrease  from  baseline. There were no statistically significant differences between the indinavir groups but the proportion of patients  with  undetectable  virus  at  week  24  was  50  %  for  the  combination  group  and  9  %  for  the monotherapy group. Results of the following three early trials indicated a dramatic impact on viral replication as reflected by the magnitude and the duration of decrease in HIV-1 serum levels. The impact on CD4 cells was clear and sustained for the 24-week assessment period: Study 020 was an open study comparing the effect of indinavir, indinavir/zidovudine/didanosine and zidovudine/didanosine. A 2-log10 viral load decrease was seen at week 24 in 18 % of patients with indinavir monotherapy and in 21 % of patients with zidovudine/didanosine and 53 % in the triple therapy group. Forty seven per cent of the triple combination patients had undetectable virus levels at 24 weeks. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study 035 was a 52 week randomised study comparing the effect of the triple combination indinavir/ zidovudine/lamivudine, zidovudine/lamivudine and indinavir monotherapy.

Preliminary results of this trial, which were part of the initial submission, indicated a dramatic impact on viral replication as reflected by the magnitude and duration of decrease in HIV-1 serum levels. This protocol recruited 97 nucleoside-experienced patients (median ZDV 30 months) with a median CD4 count of 144 and a median baseline viral load of 4.6-log10 copies/ml. At week 24, the proportion of patients with viral load below 500 copies/ml was 90 % (95 % CI 73; 98) for IDV/ZDV/LAM), for IDV 43 % (25; 63) and for ZDV/LAM 0 % (0; 12). Corresponding figures utilising the ultra-direct assay and viral load &lt; 50 copies/ml were 68, 32 and 0 %, respectively. In 14/22 patients in the triple drug  group,  still  no  detectable  viral  RNA  was  detected  with  this  assay  at  week  40.  There  were  no confirmed AIDS events.

Confirmatory trials There were five large-scale phase III trials. Two of those trials have primary clinical endpoints, study 028  in  zidovudine  naive  patients  and  study  ACTG  320  in  zidovudine-experienced  patients.  Studies 033,  037  and  039  focus  predominantly  on  biological  endpoints.  High  levels  of  viral  load  were  no inclusion criterion in contrast to the early trials. The efficacy data in the original submission relied on analysis of biological endpoints derived from studies  028  and  033.  These  studies  were  both  double  blind,  randomised  and  involved  antiretroviral naive patients. The following section will focus on the results of the clinical endpoint trials. Results of the biological endpoint trials are summarised in the table 'Overview of efficacy trials'. ACTG 320 recruited  1156  ZDV  experienced  patients  with  CD4  counts  &lt;  200  cells/mm³  (38  %  of whom with  CD4  cells  &lt;  50  cells/mm³)  who  were  followed  for  a  median  of  38  weeks  (range  0-52 weeks).  In  these  patients,  indinavir  (800  mg  q  8h),  zidovudine  (200  mg  t.i.d.)  and  lamivudine (150 mg b.i.d.) in combination compared with lamivudine added to zidovudine reduced the probability of AIDS defining illness or death (ADID) at 48 weeks from 13 % to 7 % (Intention to treat). Study 028 recruited 996 treatment-naive patients with CD4 cells between 50 and 250 per mm³ who were followed for a median of 56 weeks (range 0-97 weeks). In these patients, indinavir (800 mg q 8h) with and without zidovudine (200 mg t.i.d.) compared with zidovudine alone reduced the probability of ADID at 48 weeks from 15 % to approximately 6 % (Intention to treat). After cut-off date for both ACTG 320 and Protocol 028, additional deaths were reported to the DSMB. All data on mortality have been included in a meta-analysis. Overall, comparing IDV in combination with nucleoside analogues and nucleoside analogues alone, the results indicate that IDV may increase overall survival (HR 0.6, two-tailed p = 0.08). The study results from trial ACTG 320 demonstrated a probability of death of 4.2 % (IDV-) and 1.6 % (IDV+) at 48 weeks, corresponding to a hazard ratio of 0.43, p = 0.048 (CD4 &lt; 50 cells: 0.4, p = 0.06; CD4 &gt; 50 cells: 0.5, p = 0.5). In study 028 there were no significant differences. In  study  ACTG  320,  superiority  with  indinavir  (IDV)  was  consistently  demonstrated  as  regards changes  in  CD4  count  and  viral  load  in  patients  with  more  (CD4  &lt;  50)  or  less  (CD4  50  to  200) advanced disease. The proportion of patients with viral load below the limit of quantification in the IDV containing arm was, based on data from a randomly selected population, about 60 % at week 24 (vs. 9 %). In study 028, the proportion of patients with viral load below the limit of quantification was about 40 to 50 % in the IDV/ZDV group at weeks 24 to 80. In summary, the antiviral effect tends to remain stable over prolonged periods of follow-up in indinavir treated patients. Similarly, effects on CD4 cell count tend to be more pronounced among patients treated with IDV in combination with nucleoside  analogues  compared  with  nucleoside  analogues.  In  study  ACTG  320,  the  mean  change from  baseline  at  week  40  was  121  (IDV+)  and  39  (IDV-)  CD4  cells  per  mm³.  In  study,  028  the corresponding figures at week 40 were 139 (IDV/ZDV) and 12 (ZDV) CD4 cells per mm³. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical efficacy in children

Two ongoing clinical trials have been designed to characterise the safety, antiretroviral activity, and pharmacokinetics  of  indinavir  (500  mg/m 2 every  8  hour)  in  combination  with  stavudine  and lamivudine: study 068 (n = 25 aged 4 to 15 years) and study ACTG 395 (n = 16 aged 5 to 13 years). Results from these studies are displayed below:

|                        | Study                                            | < 400 copies/ml (95 %CI)   | < 400 copies/ml (95 %CI)   | < 50 copies/ml (95 %CI)   | < 50 copies/ml (95 %CI)   |
|------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Noncompleter = Failure | 068 (24 weeks) 068 (60 weeks)                    | 61% 56% 56%                | 41; 81% 37; 76% 41; 81%    | 48% 36% 50%               | 27; 68% 17; 55%           |
|                        | ACTG395 (24 weeks)                               |                            |                            |                           | 26; 75%                   |
| Observed Cases         | 068 (24 weeks) 068 (60 weeks) ACTG395 (24 weeks) | 78% 82% 75%                | 59; 97% 64; 100% 59; 97%   | 61% 64% 67%               | 39; 84% 39; 89% 40; 93%   |

| Ante partum (Week 30 to 32) (n=11)   | Postpartum (Week 6) (n=11)   | Nonpregna nt Historical Controls (n=10) ‡   | GMR 95% CI Antepartum/ Postpartum   | GMR 95% CI Antepartum/ Historical Controls ‡   | GMR 95% CI Postpartum/ Historical Controls ‡   |
|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| 9231 §                               | 34869 §                      | 26597 §                                     | 0.26 (0.14, 0.50)                   | 0.35 (0.17, 0.70)                              | 1.31 (0.80, 2.15)                              |
| 4999 §                               | 13966 §                      | 11683 §                                     | 0.36 (0.17, 0.75)                   | 0.43 (0.19, 0.96)                              | 1.20 (0.73, 1.97)                              |
| 332 †                                | 138 †                        | 186 †                                       | na                                  | na                                             | na                                             |
| (LOQ to 448)                         | (LOQ to 2403)                | (70 to 425)                                 |                                     |                                                |                                                |

†

§ Geometric mean values.

Long-term data up to 60 weeks confirmed the durability of the effect of indinavir in combination with stavudine and lamivudine. Clinical efficacy during pregnancy Study PATCG 358 was designed to investigate the pharmacokinetics  (PK)  of  indinavir  [IDV]  (co-administered  with  lamivudine  [3TC]  and  zidovudine [ZDV]) in HIV-1 infected pregnant patients between 14 to 28 weeks gestation at enrollment, who were without prior complications or conditions (medical, obstetrical, etc.) and were protease inhibitor naïve. The first patient entered the trial in 1998 and the last 2002. Pregnant patients took IDV 800 mg orally every 8 hours until 12 weeks postpartum. Maternal pharmacokinetic evaluation occurred at Week 30 to 32 gestation (antepartum) and 6 weeks postpartum (postpartum). Altogether 16 women entered the trial,  but  11  were  fully  assessable, i.e. had full PK profiles ante- and post- partum. The first patient entered  the  trial  in  1998  and  the  last  2002.  The  study  report  is  dated  August  2003.  Different laboratories were used for the determination of indinavir concentration but within an individual patient the same laboratory was used. Cord concentrations of IDV were evaluated in samples from 8 mother / infant pairs. Table: Indinavir maternal pharmacokinetic parameters at antepartum and postpartum with indinavir. Pharmacokinetic  parameters  in  non-pregnant  patient  historical  controls  when  indinavir  800  mg  q8h was given with 3TC and ZDV Cmin are  median  values  with  ranges.    For  antepartum,  6  of  11  mother's  had  IDV  plasma concentrations  below  assay  limit  of  reliable  quantification  (LOQ)  and  for  postpartum  4  of  11 mother's had plasma concentrations below LOQ and therefore, geometric means and GMRs were not calculated. ‡ Historical control data from Protocol 053. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

GMR = Geometric mean ratio.

95% CI = 95% confidence interval around the geometric mean ratio.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For 6 of the 8 mother / infant pairs, the IDV cord concentrations were below the LOQ of the assay. One sample gave no detectable peak and the other sample gave a concentration of 65.0 nM.

Reduced  exposure  levels  of  indinavir  during  pregnancy  seem,  at  least  partly,  to  relate  to  enzyme induction. Available data are much too sparse, however, to support a recommendation as regards use of  indinavir  in  combination  with  ritonavir  for  the  treatment  of  HIV  infection  during  pregnancy. Further studies are clearly indicated, but indinavir is hardly the best candidate for such studies today.

The SPC sections 4.6 and 5.2 have been revised to reflect these data. Safety A total of about 2000 patients from faze I/II and ongoing phase III studies laid the basis for the initial safety assessment. However, a clear pattern emerged where dose-related events such as nephrolithiasis (4 %) and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (10 %) without hepatotoxicity were the most prominent features. Safety in females was only addressed in 10 % of the individuals in the phase II studies and in 15 % of the individuals in phase III. A total of 249 patients in phase II trials were exposed for a mean duration of 149 days with a majority treated for 151 to 180 days. A majority were Caucasian (84 %) and males (90 %) with a mean age of 37 years. Approximately 20 % of the patients in the different treatment groups had AIDS, and 50 % had  received  previous  antiretroviral  therapy  with  zidovudine.  The  long-term  follow-up  of  about 100 patients (48 weeks) did not disclose any new or increased frequencies of events. Two-phase III trials  have  included  about  1400  patients  with  the  proposed  indinavir  dose  in  monotherapy  and  in combination  with  zidovudine.  Data  from  pharmacological  studies  (330  patients  treated  for  a  mean duration 10-14 days) were included. Considering information from all sources,  12  deaths  were  noted.  One was possibly  associated with indinavir (hepatic failure). The  overall  incidence  rate  of  nephrolithiasis  including  flank  pain  with  or  without  haematuria (including  microscopic  haematuria)  observed  in  the  studies  was  approximately  10  %.  These  events occurred in between 2 days and 19 months following initiation of mono- or combination therapy with indinavir. The recommendation to consider reducing the dosage in patients with one or more episodes of nephrolithiasis was deleted because of lack of supporting clinical data. During  the authorisation procedure, there have  been  reports of increased bleeding including spontaneous skin haematomas and hemarthroses in type A and B haemophiliac patients treated with protease  inhibitors.  In  some  patients,  additional  factor  VIII  was  given.  In  more  than  a  half  of  the reported  cases,  treatment  with  protease  inhibitors  was  continued  or  reintroduced  if  treatment  was discontinued. A causal relationship has been suggested although the mechanism of action has not been elucidated. As these reports involved ritonavir, saquinavir and indinavir, a class-related side effect has been  suggested.  Appropriate  information  to  inform  both  health  professionals  and  patients  has  been introduced  in  the  warning  section  of  the  Summaries  of  Product  Characteristics  and  in  the  Package Leaflets for the three compounds. Safety in children In HIV-infected paediatric patients who received IDV 500 mg/m 2 every 8 hours in combination with NRTIs, IDV is generally well tolerated with the exception of a higher frequency of nephrolithiasis in children  (approximately  30%).  As  chronic  interstitial  nephritis  is  a  slowly  progressive  process, possible effects on global kidney function after several years of therapy are difficult to predict based on available safety data. Post Marketing experience Reports of haemolysis or haemolytic anaemia were notified. A specific mention has been added to the warning section 4.4 of the Summary of Product Characteristics regarding the occurrence of hemolytic anaemia in patients treated with indinavir. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

Several notifications  of  hyperglycaemia,  diabetes  mellitus  and  exacerbation  of  pre-existing  diabetes mellitus have been reported in patients treated by the protease inhibitors. Both the Pharmacovigilance

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Working Party and the Committee for Proprietary  Medicinal  Products  (CPMP) have  evaluated  this information.  During  its  meeting  in  June  1997,  the  CPMP  recommended  that  the  relevant  specialist physicians  in  charge  of  HIV  infected  patients  and  prescribing  these  medicinal  products  should  be informed  through  the  National  Competent  Authorities.  To  that  end,  a  'Dear  Doctor'  letter  was prepared  by  this  Committee  and  a  common  wording  for  the  warning  section  of  the  SPCs  for  all protease inhibitors was agreed on.

In January 2002 the CPMP requested the MAH for all authorised anti-retroviral medicinal products to conduct a retrospective review of clinical trials  and  post marketing data relating to the use of their product(s)  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment  and/or  HBV/HCV co-infection. Following review of the  submitted responses and discussions held during the CPMP meeting and the Pharmacovigilance

Additional adverse events were reported in the post marketing experience: hepatitis and rare reports of hepatic failure, hyperpigmentation, abdominal distension, crystalluria, alopecia, anaphylactoid reactions,  urticaria,  rash  including  erythema  multiforme  and  Stevens  Johnson  Syndrome;  interstitial nephritis, nephrolithiasis, in some cases with renal insufficiency or acute renal failure; and increased serum triglycerides. New adverse events have been reflected in relevant parts of the product information. With regard to the first annual re-assessment, the results of the reported studies corroborate the safety profile  of  Crixivan  as  previously  delineated  in  the  SPC,  although  cases  of  rash  including  erythema multiforme and Stevens Johnson Syndrome have been described. The reported incidence of serious adverse events considered to be related to therapy was about 2 % without obvious difference between regimens containing IDV or not. As  mentioned  in  the  interaction  section  above,  the  results  of  further  interaction  studies  have  been addressed in the relevant parts of the SPC. As indicated in section 4.2 of the SPC this may lead to considerations on dose adjustments. Continuous assessment of Crixivan long-term safety profile is performed throughout PSURs and the product information updated accordingly Events of special interest Lipodystrophy Further to  reports from the literature on the association of protease inhibitors with adverse events such as fat redistribution and other metabolic disorders, additional information was presented. These data confirmed that combination antiretroviral therapy, including regimens containing a protease inhibitor, was  associated  with  redistribution  of  body  fat  in  some  patients,  including  loss  of  peripheral subcutaneous fat, increased intra-abdominal fat, breast hypertrophy and dorsocervical fat accumulation (buffalo hump). Protease inhibitors may also be associated with metabolic abnormalities such  as  hypertriglyceridaemia,  hypercholesterolaemia,  insulin  resistance  and  hyperglycaemia.  The data  provided  did  not  permit  any  conclusion  about  the  causality.  A  class  labelling  wording  was however included into the SPC of all the protease inhibitors products, and further investigation will be performed to better define this adverse event. Muscle-related reactions Increased  CPK,  muscle-related  reactions  (myalgia,  myosis  and  rarely  rhabdomyolysis)  have  been reported with protease inhibitors. Although it was difficult to determine causality of these reactions due to confounding factors and scanty information, it was nevertheless considered necessary to update the relevant information on muscle-related adverse reactions of the Summary of Product Characteristics and to reflect this effect in the Package Leaflet. Liver impairment in HIV positive patients Further to the discussions held by the Ad-hoc Group of Experts on Anti-HIV medicinal products in November 2001, the CPMP agreed that liver impairment was of increasing concern in HIV positive patients  both  in  the  form  of  adverse  hepatic  effects  in  patients  with  normal  liver  function  prior  to antiretroviral treatment (ART) and as regards patients with chronic liver disease treated with ART. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Working Party meeting in October 2002, the CPMP adopted a list of questions (including general, product specific and SPC wording recommendations).

The review of the MAHs' responses has essentially confirmed that co-infected patients and patients with underlying liver disorders are at increased risk for adverse events, essentially confined to liver events.  Overall,  there  is  a  disturbing  lack  of  general  and  product  specific  knowledge  (e.g.  relevant pharmacokinetic data in patients with liver impairment), but there are ongoing activities.

For  some  of  the  products  still  undergoing  drug  development,  the  MAHs  have  confirmed  that  coinfected  patients  will  not  be  excluded  from  participation  in  the  studies.  The  CPMP  stressed  that whenever  feasible  a  minimum  number  of  co-infected  patients  should  be  included  in  forthcoming studies in order to provide a reasonable basis for a relevant safety (and efficacy) analysis. Following the review of responses submitted by all MAHs of antiretroviral medicinal products, a class labelling  on  'liver  disease'  has  been  agreed  and  implemented  in  the  product  information  for  all antiretroviral medicinal products. The SPC of Crixivan has been reworded in accordance with the CPMP recommendations to include, in section 5.2, data on AUC, Cmax and Cmin (including CV) derived from patients. These PK results in  patients give a more reliable description of the concentrations achieved in clinical practice at the recommended dose. 4. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Indinavir sulphate, the active substance of Crixivan, is one representative of the new class of protease inhibitors active against the Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1. The antiviral  activity  of  the  protease  inhibitors  results  from  blocking  the  action  of  the  protease,  an enzyme essential in viral replication. By interfering with the assembly of viral particles before release from  the  cell,  the  production  of  infectious  viral  particles  is  prevented.  The  high  selectivity  of  this mechanism of action results in negligible inhibition of mammalian proteases. Crixivan  capsules  are  presented  as  a  conventional  hard  gelatine  capsule  in  both  200  and  400  mg strengths containing indinavir freebase in the form of indinavir sulphate ethanolate. The  chemical  and  pharmaceutical  issues  of  the  consolidated  list  of  questions  were  adequately answered. The  preclinical  programme  was  comprehensive  and  included  relevant  studies  on  the  mechanism  of specific toxicity. No outstanding preclinical questions remained. The  toxicological  characterisation  was  in  part  deficient  due  to  the  difficulty  in  achieving  high exposure  in  the  non-rodent  species  and  indicated  that  particular  vigilance  for  unexpected  adverse effects may be warranted. The clinical benefits of Crixivan therapy have been substantiated by clinical endpoint data from two well-designed  clinical  studies  demonstrating  a  substantial  relative  risk  reduction  in  AIDS  defining events  and  deaths  in  patients  treated  with  IDV  containing  regimens.  The  safety  profile  of  IDV monotherapy and IDV in combination with nucleoside analogues remains essentially unaltered. From a clinical point of view, the benefit/risk relationship is therefore considered to be beneficial. The  new  strength  for  Crixivan  (333  mg  hard  capsules)  does  not  change  the  benefit/risk  profile  for Crixivan. When  reviewing  the  available  data  in  children  using  the  low  strength  of  Crixivan  (100  mg  hard capsules), the  efficacy of indinavir in children of 4 years of age and older has been demonstrated, but that there were still concerns on the exposure profile obtained with the recommended dosage regimen (500 mg/m 2 every 8 hour) with respect to efficacy and safety. However considering that there is still a medical unmet need in this population and that the antiretroviral efficacy has been demonstrated with the recommended dosage, it was  decided  that the benefit/risk profile of Crixivan is still favourable. Medicinal Product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Crixivan was favourable in the treatment of HIV-1 infected adults, adolescents, and children 4 years of age and older. In adolescents and children, the benefit of indinavir therapy versus the increased risk of nephrolithiasis should particularly be considered.

<!-- image -->