---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:07:54
document_pages: 23
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/daronrix-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: daronrix-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 43.236148
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-15 20:28:36.322078
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1. Introduction

An  influenza  pandemic  is  a  global  outbreak  of  influenza  disease  that  occurs  when  a  new  type  A influenza strain emerges in the human population, causes serious illness, and then spreads easily from person  to  person  worldwide.  Pandemics  are  different  from  seasonal  outbreaks  of  influenza,  as  the latter  are  caused  by  subtypes  of  influenza  viruses  that  are  already  present  among  people,  whereas pandemic outbreaks are caused by new subtypes or by subtypes that have not circulated among people for  a  long  time.  Consequently,  and  in  contrast  to  seasonal  influenza,  virtually  all  people  are immunologically naïve for such a pandemic strain.

Medicinal product no longer authorised EMEA/CHMP have established a fast track assessment procedure for pandemic influenza vaccines, as described  in  the Guideline  on  Submission  of  Marketing  Authorisation  Applications  for  Pandemic Influenza Vaccines through the Centralised  Procedure (CPMP/VEG/4986/03).  The  procedure involves the submission and evaluation of a core pandemic dossier during the interpandemic period, followed by a fast track assessment of the data for the recommended pandemic strain as a variation to the MAA. The dossier requirements for the core dossier are laid down in the Guideline on Dossier Structure  and  Content  for  Pandemic  Influenza  Vaccine  Marketing  Authorisations  Application (CPMP/VEG/4717/03). GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals has  submitted  a  Marketing  Authorisation  Application  (core  pandemic dossier)  for  Daronrix  in  line  with  the  above  mentioned  guidelines.  Daronrix  contains  the  mock-up strain  H5N1  (NIBRG-14)  derived  by  reverse  genetics  from  the  avian  influenza  virus  A/Viet Nam/1194/2004. The vaccine contains a mixture of aluminium hydroxide and aluminium phosphate as adjuvant. Manufacturing, non-clinical and clinical information has also been gained with other mockup vaccines containing the A/Hong Kong/1073/99 H9N2 and the A/Singapore/1/57 H2N2 influenza strains. From an epidemiological point of view it is very unlikely that influenza strain A/Vietnam /1194/2004 would be the next pandemic strain, since the virus will either undergo further antigenic drift or the pandemic will be caused by another subtype of influenza vaccines (antigenic shift). Antigenic shift and drift are natural phenomenona related to all influenza viruses. For example, additional mutations will be required to enable the virus to transmit effectively from human to human. It is highly unlikely, therefore, that Daronrix containing the antigens from the strain derived from A/Vietnam /1194/2004 will  provide  adequate  protection  when  using  during  a  pandemic.  In  line  with  the  developed  core dossier  concept,  a  variation  would  therefore  have  to  be  submitted  to  introduce  the  WHO/EU recommended strain, prepared from the influenza virus causing the pandemic, prior to use of Daronrix in a pandemic. This will assure that the pandemic vaccine will induce a satisfactory immune response to  the  influenza virus causing the pandemic. Daronrix has also not been developed for prophylactic use during the prepandemic period. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

## Composition

GlaxoSmithKline applies for a Pandemic Influenza Vaccine which is mainly built up on the knowledge, equipment and manufacturing experience gained with the already licensed inter-pandemic (seasonal) split antigen vaccine Fluarix.

Daronrix  is  a  suspension  for  injection,  presented  in  multidose  vials  and  multidose  ampoules. Monodose pre-filled syringes and monodose ampoules are possible additional presentations.

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The Mock-up vaccine application is based on the whole virion inactivated H5N1 Reverse Genetics Strain NIBRG 14, adjuvanted with aluminium. NIBRG 14 is derived from the highly pathogenic avian influenza strain A/Vietnam/1194/2004.

A  0.5  ml  dose  of  the  vaccines  contains  15  µg  H5N1  antigen.  The  total  amount  of  aluminium (Adjuvant)  per  dose  is  0.5  mg  (0.45  mg  as  aluminium  phosphate  and  0.05  mg  as  aluminium hydroxide). Thiomersal is added as a preservative. The other ingredients used as buffer or to ensure isotonicity are sodium chloride, disodium phosphate dodecahydrate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, potassium chloride, magnesium chloride hexahydrate.

## Active substance

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Manufacture The  manufacturing  process  of  the  monovalent  bulks  for  the  pandemic  influenza  vaccine  can  be divided in three main parts: 1. Propagation  of  the  working  seed  virus  in  fertilized  hen's  eggs,  harvesting  and  pooling  of infected allantoic fluids to obtain the 'crude monovalent whole virus bulk'. 2. Purification  of  the  crude  monovalent  whole  virus  bulk  by  an  adsorption  step  and  a  sucrose gradient (isopycnic ultracentrifugation) leading to the 'purified monovalent whole virus bulk'. 3. The  purified  monovalent  whole  virus  bulk  is  then  diluted  and  sterile  filtered.  Then  it  is inactivated  by  incubation  with  formaldehyde,  in  order  to  obtain  the  'monovalent  inactivated whole virus bulk', or 'Monovalent Bulk'. The first and second part of the manufacturing process, propagation and purification, is similar to the process of the licensed interpandemic influenza vaccine from GSK (Fluarix), with as only difference a simplification  in  the  fraction  collection  at  the  end  of  the  ultracentrifugation.  .  The  third  part, inactivation of the monovalent bulk, differs from the Fluarix process since the pandemic vaccine is a whole virus vaccine without splitting process. 1. Production of the Crude Monovalent Whole Virus Bulk The production of the vaccine is based on a seed lot system. A master seed (MS) and a working seed (WS) are prepared for the recommended pandemic virus strain. The total number of passages between the original virus and the WS does not exceed 15 and the final vaccine represents one passage from the Working Seed Lot. Each WS is tested for Sterility and Mycoplasma as well as for NA and HA identity, to confirm identity to the original prototype strain. During a pandemic, the applicant proposes to start with the production based on negative results for mycoplasma obtained by PCR. The release of the  final  container  will  then  only  be  performed  upon  completion  of  all  tests  for  absence  of mycoplasma.  The  passages  for  the  production  of  the  master  and  working  seeds  are  conducted  in Specific Pathogen Free (SPF). For the production of monobulk material embryonated hens' eggs are obtained from healthy flocks corresponding to specifications laid down by the company.

The  inoculum  is  prepared  on  the  day  of  inoculation  by  diluting  the  working  virus  seed  lot  with phosphate buffer containing gentamicin sulfate and hydrocortisone. The eggs are inoculated with virus inoculum and incubated. At the end of incubation the eggs are killed by cooling. The allantoic fluid is harvested by egg harvesting machines and collected in thermo-regulated stainless steel tanks. At this stage the product is called 'Crude Monovalent Whole Virus Bulk', which is immediately transferred to the clarification step.

## 2. Production of Purified Monovalent Whole Virus Bulk

The  first  step  of  purification  is  the  clarification  of  the  Crude  Monovalent  Whole  Virus  Bulk  by moderate centrifugation to remove big particles (e.g. parts of egg shells). The second step permits to further clarify the allantoic fluid by an adsorption step, followed by a resuspension.

The resuspended influenza sediment is filtered through a 6µ m filter membrane to remove potential remaining pellets. The influenza virus is further purified (removal of proteins and phospholipids) and concentrated  by  isopycnic  ultracentrifugation  in  a  linear  sucrose  gradient.  The  gradient  is  formed

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

using  two  sucrose  solutions  containing  thiomersal  in  order  to  control  the  process  bioburden,  as  the centrifugation is performed at room temperature. Three different fractions are recovered by measuring the  sucrose  concentration  via  a  refractometer.  Depending  on  the  biophysical  characteristics  of  the selected pandemic strain, the ranges recovered for the 3 fractions may be modified. The upper limit of Fraction  2  is  selected  to  balance  between  a  high  purity  coefficient  HA/protein  and  a  maximum recovery of whole virus. The lower limit of Fraction 2 is selected on the basis of the HA content found in the low sucrose gradient range. Fraction 2 is stored at 2-8°C until the next manufacturing step.

## 3. Production of Monovalent Inactivated Whole Virus Bulk

Fraction 2 is diluted with phosphate buffered saline  and filtered gradually ending with a sterile grade membrane of 0.22 µ m. A sonication of the virus material is performed to facilitate the filtration.

Medicinal product no longer authorised After filtration an inactivation of the virus with formaldehyde is performed. The resulting material is distributed in 10-litre glass bottles (Type I) and called the 'monovalent inactivated sterile whole virus bulk' or 'monovalent bulk'. Formulation of monovalent bulks takes place at Sächsisches Serumwerk Dresden (SSW) or alternatively at GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals (GSK Bio) in Rixensart. The storage temperature is preserved during transfer. In  addition  to  the  control  of  the  monovalent  inactivated  whole  virus  bulk  according  to  the  release specifications,  a  variety  of  in-process  tests  is  performed  at  the  main  manufacturing  steps.  Internal consistency  limits  will  be  established  from  historical  data  generated  on  a  minimum  of  15  batches produced at full industrial scale. Process validation was performed on 3 batches of monovalent bulk (H5N1) manufactured at full scale. Following  parameters  were  evaluated  to  demonstrate  process  consistency:  preparation  of  virus inoculation,  inoculation  and  incubation  of  embryonated  eggs,  harvesting  step,  clarification  by separation, adsorption and filtration, ultracentrifugation, Fraction 2 after dilution and filtration, final sterile  filtration  and  inactivation.  The  removal  of  ovalbumin  and  phospholipids,  neuraminidase identity, process yield, residual gentamicin sulphate and hydrocortisone were evaluated. Inactivation of  A/Viet Nam/1194/2004  (H5N1)  NIBRG-14  during  the  manufacturing  of  whole  inactivated  virus monobulks  was  validated  on  3  batches  (at  commercial  scale).  From  the  data  presented  it  can  be concluded that the formaldehyde inactivation guarantees complete inactivation of A/Viet Nam/1194/2004 (H5N1) NIBRG-14. Validation of mycoplasma inactivation by formaldehyde was performed using lots of H9N2 vaccine manufactured at pilot scale. · Specification Release specifications for the monovalent inactivated, whole virus bulk were set taking into account relevant pharmacopoeia and guideline texts.

All  analytical  methods  applied  to  the  pandemic  influenza  monovalent  bulk  are  also  applied  to  the licensed  interpandemic  vaccine  Fluarix,  and  were  fully  validated  for  Fluarix.  For  some  methods specific validations for the pandemic monovalent bulk have been conducted in order to demonstrate that the performance of the analytical methods is not adversely impacted by the composition of the pandemic vaccine matrix. The concerned methods are sterility, thiomersal content, endotoxin content (LAL), sucrose content and formaldehyde content, and results are provided. The validation reports for the assays for the determination of the haemagglutinin content, ovalbumin content and protein content are  provided: the company committed to set specification limits for these 3 assays on basis of data generated on a minimum of 15 batches produced at industrial scale.

## · Stability of the monovalent bulk

H9N2  and  H5N1  monovalent  bulks  were  included  in  the  stability  programme.  Monovalent  H9N2 bulks were stored at 2-8 °C for up to 12 months. The data on HA content measured by SRD clearly show  a  dramatic  reduction  of  70%  and  more.  To  further  analyse  the  stability  of  the  product  the applicant developed a mouse potency test and defined that, for a vaccine to meet the stability criteria, the antibody response of the vaccine in stability should not be significantly different from the antibody

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

response elicited by the vaccine at release. In practice, this criterion implies that, upon stability, the titres measured for the vaccine dilutions that are within the linear part of the response curve (mainly vaccine dilutions of 1:5 and 1:25) must not differ by more than one dilution step (1 log2) with the titres obtained at release. No loss of immunity was seen with the mouse potency assay over a storage period of 12 months. Stability results for 4 H5N1 bulks showed that the decrease in HA content measured by SRD is less marked than with H9N2: about 75 % of the initial HA content remained after 6 months storage at 2-8°C..

A shelf life for the monovalent bulk of 3 months at 2-8 °C is supported by the stability data and was accepted at the time of initial authorisation.

## Other ingredients

Medicinal product no longer authorised All excipients are European Pharmacopoeia Grade. Aluminium phosphate (adjuvant) is not described in the European Pharmacopoeia and is controlled following a GSK monograph. Product development and finished product · Pharmaceutical Development The development of GSK Biologicals' pandemic influenza vaccine builds on the experience with the licensed interpandemic split antigen influenza vaccine (Fluarix). The approach for pandemic influenza vaccines is to increase vaccine supply resources by using whole virus instead of split and adjuvanting the vaccine with aluminium. In an early development phase, the reactogenicity profiles of monovalent aluminium adjuvanted whole virus vaccines were investigated using lots derived for the H3N2 strain. To evaluate immunogenicity in  unprimed  populations,  monovalent  \"mock-up  pandemic  vaccines\"  (with  the  reference  viruses A/Singapore/1/57  (H2N2)  and  A/Hong Kong/1073/99  (H9N2))  were  tested  in  two  bioequivalence studies. The H9N2 strain offered the opportunity to study the vaccination with an avian virus that was transmissible to humans, but had not been circulating in humans so far. The present core pandemic dossier describes the H5N1 mock-up vaccine. Supportive information and results obtained with the clinical lots derived from the other three strains (H9N2, H3N2 and H2N2) are also provided. · Manufacture of the Product The manufacturing process of the pandemic influenza final vaccine consists of three steps: 1. Formulation of the final bulk by mixing the monovalent bulk with the adjuvant and excipients: -Preparation of the aluminium adjuvant -Adsorption of the influenza monovalent bulk. The  aluminium  adjuvant  is  produced  shortly  before  the  formulation.  The  autoclaved  aluminium adjuvant  is  stored  at  2  -  8  °C  awaiting  final  formulation  with  the  influenza  monovalent  bulk.  The validation of the shelf life of 6 months at room temperature is ongoing and will be submitted as soon as they become available. For the adsorption process, the calculated amount of formulation buffer is first  transferred  to  the  formulation  vessel,  followed  by  the  calculated  volume  of  Thiomersal  stock solution, aluminium adjuvant and monovalent bulk. The final bulk is stirred for 15 minutes to allow adsorption of the antigen.

The formulated final bulks will be kept in the formulation vessel until filling into final containers at SSW,  or  alternatively  filled  into  high-density  polyethylene  (HDPE)  containers  and  shipped  to Rixensart  or  Wavre  for  filling  into  final  containers.  For  filling  at  SSW,  the  storage  duration  in  the formulation vessel is set to maximum 7 days at 2-8°C prior to the filling start. The HDPE containers are wrapped with two polyethylene plastic bags each, sealed and stored at 2-8°C prior to shipping to GSK Bio Rixensart or Wavre for filling and packaging. Currently, the final bulk is held in the HDPE containers for up to 30 days prior to filling in final containers.

The final bulk will be tested for sterility, Thiomersal content and free formaldehyde. The company will  test  the  completeness  of  adsorption  of  the  HA  to  the  aluminium  (in  accordance  of  the  PhEur

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

monograph on vaccines for human use) of the first 15 full-scale batches as characterisation testing. If the degree of adsorption is stable, than this testing will be discontinued.

2. Filling of the vaccine into final containers
3. Labeling and packaging.

## · Product Specification

The specifications have been set in accordance to existing pharmacopoeias and guidance. In terms of the  heamagglutinin  (HA)  content,  the  applicant  explored  alternatives  to  confirm  the  identity  and potency of the final vaccine. The use of a sandwich Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) following desorption was investigated. The proposal of the applicant to use the ELISA test to assess the  antigen  content  in  the  final  vaccine,  as  well  as  the  identity  is  acceptable  and  should  be  used  to complement the mouse potency test.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Stability of the product A mouse potency test has been developed to evaluate the antigen stability because the Single Radial Diffusion (SRD) method cannot be applied to adsorbed formulations. The stability of the H5N1 final containers  was  evaluated  by  testing  4  batches  of  adsorbed  vaccines  and  4  batches  of  unadsorbed vaccine in this mouse potency assay. The HI titres measured for the adsorbed and unadsorbed vaccine lots  remain  stable  for  up  to  at  least  6  months.  Taking  into  account  the  reduced  shelf  life  of  the monovalent bulk (3 months) and supportive data obtained with H9N2 final lots, the proposed shelf-life of 12 months at 2 - 8 °C was accepted at the time of initial authorisation. Nevertheless, since stability of the vaccine is also strain dependent the stability program of the H5N1 final lots will be completed as committed and any out of specification results should be communicated immediately. Issues related to manufacture and quality control under pandemic conditions Due  to  the  constrains  in  a  pandemic  situation  the  applicant  provided  additional  information  with regard to the optimisation of the manufacturing process, alternative testing for mycoplasma, the supply of SPF and production eggs and measures already in place to comply with BSL2+ containment. The handling of the production parameters that may be strain-dependent are already optimised due to the time constrains of the yearly production. To further improve the virus adsorption to the adjuvant significant  modifications  in  the  manufacturing  process  would  be  needed,  thus  the  company  will therefore continue to apply the formulation process described in the MAA, which is acceptable. For  a  faster  testing  of  the  seed  material  for  mycoplasma  the  applicant  proposes  to  start  with  the production based on negative results obtained by PCR. The release of the final container will then only be performed upon completion of all tests for absence of mycoplasma. With regard to the availability of eggs the applicant stated that from January 2006 onwards a full year capacity  of  total  production  amount  of  eggs  is  available  from  two  different  qualified  suppliers (pandemic back up in case of pandemic threat).

## 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects

The  manufacturing  process  of  the  whole  virion  antigen  of  Daronrix  is  similar  to  the  approved manufacturing process of the seasonal inactivated split vaccine Fluarix (the splitting and purification steps are specific for the Fluarix). Taking this into consideration, the applicant submitted a reduced non-clinical package for Daronrix. This is in accordance with the guideline on dossier structure and content for pandemic influenza vaccine marketing authorisation application, CPMP/VEG/4717/03.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

Two primary pharmacodynamic studies were ongoing at the time of authorisation, and the applicant committed  to  provide  the  final  reports  post  authorisation  (follow-up  measures).  The  humoral  and cellular immuneresponse to whole cell adjuvanted influenza vaccine is investigated in naïve C57Bl/6 mice. In a second study the immunogenicity of whole cell adjuvanted influenza vaccine and protection against  homologous  challenge  is  evaluated  in  naïve  ferrets.  Both  studies  are  using  the  H5N1 A/Vietnam/1194/2004 vaccine.

Secondary  pharmacodynamic  studies,  safety  pharmacology  studies  and  pharmacodynamic  drug interaction studies were not performed. This is in accordance with the relevant guidelines, the note for guidance on preclinical pharmacological and toxicological testing of vaccines (CPMP/SWP/465/95) and  the  guideline  on  dossier  structure  and  content  for  pandemic  influenza  vaccine  marketing authorisation application, CPMP/VEG/4717/03.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetics Experimental studies to demonstrate absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of the active ingredients  in  Daronrix  have  not  been  performed.  This  is  in  line  with  the  relevant  guidelines CPMP/SWP/465/95 and CPMP/VEG/4717/03. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity / repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) Daronrix is a whole virion inactivated influenza vaccine. The manufacturing process of the antigen is similar to the approved manufacturing process of the seasonal inactivated split vaccine Fluarix (except for the deoxycholate splitting step which is specific for the Fluarix) thus the no single dose toxicity/ repeat dose toxicity studies are required according CPMP/VEG/4717/03. · Genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and reproduction toxicity No genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and reproduction toxicity studies were conducted. This is in line with the relevant guidelines CPMP/SWP/465/95 and CPMP/VEG/4717/03. · Local tolerance The applicant has conducted a local tolerance  studies  with  influenza  candidate  vaccines  H5N1  and H5N1/A1  in  male  and  female  rabbits  after  two  intramuscular  injections  at  27  µg/dose.  The  test vaccines were compared to the reference vaccine (Fluarix) and saline, which acted as the control. Erythema  at  the  injection  site  was  observed  in  one  two  female  rabbits,  one  in  the  H5N1 treated group and one in the H5N1/A1 treated group. Fasciitis was observed in all vaccine treated groups, indicating an inflammatory response. There was no difference in severity between the different vaccines. Perivascular  cuffing  as  observed  in  the  vaccine  treated  animals  is  consistent  with  an  inflammatory reaction induced locally by a vaccine formulation. There was no difference in severity or incidence between the vaccines.

The  muscle  necrosis  recorded  only  for  the  H5N1/A1  vaccine  suggests  of  a  more  irritant  response, when compared with the other test and reference vaccines.

The microscopic findings of granulomatous/needle track myositis were comparable across all groups, indicating a local inflammatory reaction caused by the administration method rather than the candidate vaccines (H5N1 and H5N1/A1) or reference vaccine (Fluarix).

In  conclusion,  27µg/500µl-dose of H5N1/A1 induces an increased local effect (muscle necrosis) as compared to H5N1 and Fluarix.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Other toxicity studies

Animal  studies  with  inactivated  adjuvanted  virus  vaccines  (e.g.  RSV,  measles  virus)  have  shown evidence of vaccine-enhanced disease (treatment with vaccine and subsequently challenged with live virus).  Aluminium  adjuvanted  inactivated  virus  vaccines  may  induce  too  strong  a  Th2  response, which, upon challenge with live virus, results in vigorous T-cell recall producing immune-enhanced disease.  There  is  therefore  a  theoretical  concern  that  alum  adjuvanted  whole  virus  vaccines,  when given to naïve populations (e.g. infants, young children) might predispose them to (even) more serious influenza disease during a pandemic (immune enhancement).

The applicant will address this issue in the ferret challenge model to evaluate the protective efficacy of candidate flu vaccines. An outline of the study to investigate the possible disease enhancement with Daronrix was submitted. If the results of these studies are inconclusive a study in a cotton rat model is envisaged. The applicant commits to submit the non-clinical reports (immunogenicity study in naïve mice and challenge studies in naïve ferrets) when they become available and submits a variation to amend the product information, e.g. if the outcome of animal studies would raise any concerns for the use of this vaccine in children.

- Number of seroconversions or significant increase in antihaemagglutin antibody titre &gt; 30%

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment After  injection,  the  active  substance  is  taken  up  by  immunocompetent  cells  and  metabolised.  The aluminium  adjuvant  and  some  other  excipients  may  be  excreted  in  the  environment,  but  in concentrations that do not merit concern. Overall, it can be concluded that neither the inactivated whole influenza virus nor the excipients will enter in the environment in quantities that merit ecological concern. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Clinical  trials  on  protective  efficacy  for  the  mock-up  vaccine  cannot  be  performed.  Therefore  a detailed  characterisation  of  the  immunological  response  to  the  mock-up  vaccines  is  required.  The vaccine  virus  strains  chosen  for  these  studies  should  allow  simulating  a  situation  where  the  target population for vaccination is immunologically naïve. The  criteria  for  these  studies  are  laid  down  the  Guideline  on  dossier  structure  and  content  for pandemic influenza vaccine marketing authorisation application, CPMP/VEG/4717/03. With no other criteria  to  suggest  at  present,  mock-up  vaccine  should  be  able  to  elicit  sufficient  immunological response to meet all three of the current standards set for existing vaccines in adults or older adults laid down in CPMP/BWP/214/96: In adults aged 18-60 years: · Number of seroconversions or significant increase in antihaemagglutin antibody titre &gt; 40% · Mean geometric increase &gt; 2.5; · Proportion of subjects achieving an Haemagglutin inhibition (HI) titre &gt; 40 or SRH titre &gt; 25 mm 2 &gt; 70%. In adults &gt; 60 years:

- Mean geometric increase &gt; 2.0;
- Proportion of subjects achieving an HI titre &gt; 40 or SRH titre &gt; 25 mm 2 &gt; 60%.

In addition neutralising antibodies should be present. The development program for Daronrix is based on this guideline.

Early investigations on the reactogenicity profile of a monovalent aluminium adjuvanted whole virus vaccine were  performed  using lots derived from  the H3N2  strain included in the licensed interpandemic vaccine during the season of 1998-1999, i.e. A/Sydney/5/97. Following demonstration of  clinically  acceptable  rates  of  local  and  general  symptoms  in  this  study,  further  studies  were performed with A/HongKong/1073/99 (H9N2) and H2N2.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

H9N2 represents an avian virus, which is transmissible to humans, but had not been circulating in the human population so far. H2N2 circulated from 1957 until 1968. Thus, individuals born after 1968 were also regarded to be immunologically naïve.

Since  the  avian  influenza  strain  H5N1  strain  considered  as  a  possible  candidate  to  cause  the  next influenza  pandemic,  the  applicant  decided  to  base  the  mock-up  dossier  on  studies  performed (immunogenicity and safety) with A/Vietnam/1194/2004 (H5N1) strain containing vaccine

The clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant.

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

Study  Flu-059  evaluated  the  reactogenicity  and  immunogenicity  of  different  formulations  of  a monovalent (H9N2) whole virus vaccine (using different antigen doses, with or without aluminium as adjuvant) in subjects above 60 years of age.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  relation  to  vaccines,  pharmacodynamic  studies  are  essentially  included  in  the  immunogenicity studies  that  characterise  the  immune  response  to  vaccines.  The  detailed  characterisation  of  the immunological response to the mock-up vaccines is the surrogate parameter for efficacy (CPMP/VEG/4717/03) and these data are discussed below. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic studies were not performed in accordance with the Guideline on clinical evaluation of new vaccines (CHMP/VWP/164653/2005) and the Guideline on dossier structure and content for pandemic influenza vaccine marketing authorisation application (CPMP/VEG/4717/03). Clinical efficacy The  reactogenicity  profiles  of  the  monovalent  aluminium  adjuvanted  whole  virus  formulations (A/H3N2) containing decreased antigen doses were evaluated in feasibility study Flu-037 in healthy subjects aged between 18-60 years (see safety). Following  demonstration  of  clinically  acceptable  rates  of  local  and  general  symptoms  in  the  latter study, study Flu-038 was performed in immunologically naïve (18-30 years old, born after 1968) and primed cohorts (&gt;30 years old, born before 1968) with different doses of a monovalent whole virus vaccine (H2N2 strain) to evaluate immunogenicity. In study Flu-041, the immunogenicity of different doses of a monovalent whole virus vaccine (avian strain H9N2) was assessed in an unprimed cohort of 18-60 year old subjects. The study also included two  monovalent  vaccine  groups  using  A/H2N2,  the  strain  used  in  study  Flu-038,  for  comparative purpose. Both studies (Flu-038 and Flu-041) were conducted with non-circulating influenza strains to establish the proof of concept for a pandemic influenza vaccine and indicated the need for a two-dose schedule. Study  Flu-045,  evaluated  the  cell-mediated  and  humoral  immune  response  of  a  monovalent aluminium-adjuvanted whole virus formulation (A/H9N2) according to two different schedules in a 18-30 year old cohort considered as immunologically naïve to the H9N2 strain. The study aimed to determine the most optimal vaccination regimen in case of influenza pandemic.

The pivotal study H5N1-001 was conducted in healthy adults aged 18 to 60 years with a monovalent adjuvanted whole virion vaccine containing the mock-up strain H5N1 (A/Vietnam/1194/2004).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Dose-response studies and main clinical studies

## · Flu-038

Study Flu-038 was an open, randomised, comparative, multi-centre trial with four groups to evaluate the  immunogenicity  and  safety/reactogenicity  of  a  monovalent  H2N2  whole  virus  vaccine  as compared to a monovalent H2N2 split virus vaccine.

Four hundred (400) healthy adults and patients with well-controlled underlying diseases (cardiovascular,  respiratory  or  metabolic  disorder),  who  were  18-30  years  old  (unprimed  cohort)  or above 30 years old (primed cohort) were enrolled in the study. Subjects were randomised to receive vaccination with a monovalent aluminium-adjuvanted whole virus formulation (A/H2N2) of different antigen concentrations (1.9, 3.8 and 7.5 µ g HA per dose) or a split virus vaccine (15 µ g HA per dose) without aluminium adjuvant according to a 2-dose schedule (day 0, day 21).

Results :  In  the  H9N2  adjuvanted  vaccine  groups,  seroconversion  and  seroprotection  rates  ranged between 16.7%-28% and 20.8%-28% respectively 10 days after the first dose in 18-30 years old, and between 33.3%-40% and 37.5%-40% respectively at 21 days.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Results: For  the  unprimed cohort (18-30 years old), seroconversion to haemagglutination inhibition (HI)  antibodies  was  seen  in  17.6%-29.2%  of  vaccine  recipients  ten  days  after  the  first  dose,  and seroprotective  levels  of  HI  titres  ( ≥ 1:40)  were  obtained  in  19.1%  to  31.3%  of  subjects  in  the  four study  groups.  Twenty-one  days  after  the  first  dose,  40.0%-58.3%  of  the  18-30  year  old  subjects showed seroconversion and 40.0%-62.5% had seroprotective HI titres. No significant dose response effect was seen after the first dose based on any of the serological criteria. After the second dose, GMTs, seroconversion rates, seroprotection rates and seroconversion factors tended to be higher with increasing amounts of HA per dose, although the group immunized with 3.8 µ g HA demonstrated consistently higher immunological parameters than the group immunized with 7.5 µ g HA. The highest percentage of individuals with seroprotective titres was observed in the groups vaccinated with either 3.8 µ g HA or 15 µ g HA. In  the  primed  cohort  of  31-60  years  old,  seroconversion  and  seroprotection  rates  ranged  between 8.8%-83.3%  and  76.5%-100%  respectively  in  the  four  groups  ten  days  after  the  first  dose,  and between 11.8%-86.1%% and 76.5%-100% respectively at 21 days. After the second dose, all subjects except 3 from the 1.9 µ g HA vaccine group had seroprotective HI titres. In the primed cohort of &gt; 60 years old, all subjects were seroprotected after the second dose with seroconversion rates ranging from 38.5% to 81.8%. · Flu-041 Study Flu-041 was an open, randomised, comparative, multi-centre trial with six groups to evaluate the immunogenicity and safety/reactogenicity of a monovalent H9N2 whole virus vaccine. Three-hundred (300) healthy adults and patients with well-controlled underlying diseases, who were 18-30 years old and above 30 years old (unprimed cohort) were enrolled. Subjects were randomised to receive  vaccination  with  a  monovalent  aluminium-adjuvanted  whole  virus  formulation  (A/H9N2) containing 1.9, 3.8 or 7.5 µg HA per dose or a non-adjuvanted whole virus vaccine (15 µg HA per dose) according to a 2-dose schedule (day 0, day 21). Two other groups received a monovalent aluminium-adjuvanted whole virus formulation (A/H2N2) containing 1.9 µg HA per dose or a monovalent non-adjuvanted split virus vaccine (15 µg HA per dose).

In  the  comparator  group  (H9N2  plain  vaccine,  15  µg  HA),  seroconversion  and  seroprotection  rates were 25.0% and 33.3% respectively 10 days after the first dose, and 50.0% and 58.3% respectively at 21 days.

Following administration of a second dose at day 21, the GMTs,  seroconversion factors, seroconversion  rates  and  seroprotection  rates  increased  in  all  H9N2  vaccine  groups,  fulfilling  all CHMP requirements for annual registration procedures of  influenza  vaccines.  Similar  trends  in  the immune  response  were  observed  following  administration  of  the  H2N2  adjuvanted  whole  virus vaccine (1.9 µg HA).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  subjects  above  30  years  old  who  received  H9N2  formulations,  all  serological  parameters  were decreased as compared to those seen in the 18-30 year old age group.

## · Study H5N1-001

Study H5N1-001 is a partially-blind randomised multicentre study in adults aged between 18 and 60 years designed to evaluate the reactogenicity and immunogenicity of one and two doses of pandemic monovalent (H5N1) influenza vaccines (whole virus formulation) administered at different doses (3.8 µg, 7.5 µg, 15 µg and 27 µg HA) adjuvanted or not with Aluminium salts.

## -Study Participants

The study subjects were healthy adults aged between 18 and 60 years. Female subjects were either of non-childbearing potential, i.e., either surgically sterilised or one year post-menopausal. For women of childbearing potential, abstinence or using adequate contraceptive was required from 30 days prior to first vaccination, until two month after completion of the vaccination series.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  ATP  cohort  for  analysis  of  immunogenicity  included  all  evaluable  subjects  for  whom  data concerning immunogenicity endpoint measures are available. This included subjects for whom assay results  are  available  for  antibodies  against  at  least  one  study  vaccine  antigen  component  after vaccination. -Treatments Subjects were randomised to receive vaccination monovalent whole virus influenza vaccines H5N1 (A/Vietnam/1194/2004) adjuvanted or not with Aluminium salts at different doses (3.8 µg, 7.5 µg, 15 µg and 27 µg HA) adjuvanted or not with Aluminium salts. The subjects were vaccinated at day 0 and day 21. -Objectives The  primary  objectives  were  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  reactogenicity  and  the  humoral  immune response  (in  term  of  anti-haemagglutinin  antibody)  of  one  and  two  doses  of  pandemic  monovalent (H5N1) whole influenza vaccines containing different antigen doses adjuvanted or not with Al. The  secondary  objectives  were  to  evaluate  the  humoral  immune  response  (in  term  of  neutralising antibody) and cell-mediated immune response (CMI) of one and two doses of pandemic monovalent (H5N1) whole influenza vaccines containing different antigen doses, adjuvanted or not with Al. Outcomes/endpoints The co-primary endpoints were defined as follows: · Geometric mean titer (GMT) of serum anti-HA antibodies with 95% CI at days 0, day 21 and days 42. · Seroconversion rate with 95% CI at day 21 day and day 42 defined as the proportion of subjects with either a pre-vaccination anti-HA titer &lt; 1:10 and a post-vaccination titre ≥ 1:40, or a prevaccination titer ≥ 1:10 and a minimum four-fold increase in post-vaccination titer. · Seroprotection rate with 95% CI at day 0, 21 and day 42 defined as the proportion of subjects with a serum anti-HA titer ≥ 1:40. · Conversion factor at day 21 and day 42 defined as the fold increase in serum anti-HA GMT on day 21 or 42 compared to day 0. Sample size

The target sample size was 400 enrolled subjects (50 subjects in each group) in order to reach 360 evaluable subjects (45 subjects in each group).

The co-primary GMT endpoint was used to estimate the sample size. Using a conservative approach, the alpha error has been corrected (divided by 6) to allow up to six independent comparisons between vaccine groups to assess the adjuvantation effect (with or without Al) and haemagglutinin-dose effect (3.8, 7.5, 15 and 27 µ g of HA).

A sample size of 45 evaluable subjects per group had 96% power to detect a 3-fold increase in the H5N1 antibody response between two groups, assuming the common deviation is 0.5 (in log unit) and using a two-group- t-test with a 0.008 two-sided significance level.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Results

## Baseline data

The demographic profile of the different vaccine groups of subjects was comparable with respect to mean age, gender and racial distribution. In the total vaccinated cohort, the mean age at the time of informed consent was 35.4 years with a standard deviation of 13.25 years. Female subjects (58.5%) were  more  represented  than  male  subjects  and  the  population  was  predominantly  white/caucasian (99.8%).

## Numbers analysed

The Total  Vaccinated  cohort  included  all  vaccinated  subjects  for  whom  data  are  available.  For  the Total  analysis  of  immunogenicity,  this  included  vaccinated  subjects  for  whom  data  concerning immunogenicity  endpoint  measures  are available. The  Total Vaccinated cohort analysis  was performed per treatment actually administered.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised For each treatment, at each time-point when a serological result was available the following data were tabulated: · Geometric mean antibody titers (GMTs) of anti-HA antibodies with 95% CIs. · Seroconversion factor of anti-HA antibodies with 95% CIs. · Seroconversion rate of anti-HA antibodies with 95% CIs. · Seroprotection rate of anti-HA antibodies with 95% CIs.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Outcomes and estimation

Hemagglutination inhibition responses against vaccine strain H5N1 A/Vietnam/1194/2004 of the monovalent pandemic influenza A vaccine (H5N1) in adults from study H5N1-001 (ATP immunogenicity cohort)

| Study (Age of vaccination)   | Timepoint     | Strain     | HA (µg per dose)   | Al    | N     | GMT          | GMT    | GMT     | SCF   | SCF      | SCF    | authorised   | authorised   | authorised   | SCR   | SCR        | SCR        |
|------------------------------|---------------|------------|--------------------|-------|-------|--------------|--------|---------|-------|----------|--------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------|------------|------------|
| Study (Age of vaccination)   | Timepoint     | Strain     |                    |       |       |              | 95% CI | 95% CI  |       | 95% CI   | 95% CI | 95%          | 95%          | 95%          | %     | SPR 95% CI | SPR 95% CI |
| Study (Age of vaccination)   | Timepoint     | Strain     |                    |       |       | Value        | LL     | UL      | GMR   | LL       | UL     | %            | LL           | UL           |       | LL         | UL         |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           | Pre           | H5N1 whole | 27                 | -     | 48    | 5.6          | 4.7    | 6.7     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 2.1   | 0.0        | 11.1       |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | -     | 47    | 5.1          | 4.9    | 5.3     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 0.0   | 0.0        | 7.5        |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | -     | 48    | 5.1          | 4.9    | 5.5     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 0.0   | 0.0        | 7.4        |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | -     | 49    | 5.0          | 5.0    | 5.0     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 0.0   | 0.0        | 7.2        |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 27                 | Al    | 49    | 5.6          | 4.8    | 6.5     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 4.1   | 0.5        | 14.0       |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | Al    | 48    | 5.5          | 4.8    | 6.2     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 2.1   | 0.0        | 11.1       |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | Al    | 49    | 5.5          | 5.0    | 6.1     | -     | longer - | -      | -            | -            | -            | 0.0   | 0.0        | 7.2        |
| H5N1-001 18-60 yrs           |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | Al    | 49    | 5.8          | 5.0    | 6.8     | -     | -        | -      | -            | -            | -            | 2.0   | 0.0        | 10.8       |
|                              | Post I (D21)  | H5N1 whole | 27                 | -     | 48    | 39.4         | 22.6   | 68.7    | 7.0   | 4.1      | 12.2   | 54.2         | 39.2         | 68.6         | 56.3  | 41.2       | 70.5       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | -     | 47    | 23.2         | 14.6   | 36.7    | 4.5   | 2.9      | 7.1    | 46.8         | 32.1         | 61.9         | 46.8  | 32.1       | 61.9       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | -     | 48    | 24.0         | 13.8   | 41.5    | 4.7   | 2.7      | 8.0    | 43.8         | 29.5         | 58.8         | 43.8  | 29.5       | 58.8       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | -     | 49    | 18.5         | 11.2   | 30.4    | 3.7   | 2.2      | 6.1    | 32.7         | 19.9         | 47.5         | 32.7  | 19.9       | 47.5       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 27                 | Al    | 49    | 80.6         | 46.4   | 139.7   | 14.5  | 8.3      | 25.4   | 69.4         | 54.6         | 81.7         | 73.5  | 58.9       | 85.0       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | Al    | 48    | 32.7         | 19.3   | no 55.4 | 6.0   | 3.5      | 10.1   | 47.9         | 33.3         | 62.8         | 50.0  | 35.2       | 64.8       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | Al    | 49    | 31.7         | 19.4   | 51.7    | 5.7   | 3.5      | 9.4    | 49.0         | 34.4         | 63.7         | 53.1  | 38.3       | 67.5       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | Al    | 49    | 37.5         | 21.4   | 65.7    | 6.4   | 3.7      | 11.3   | 49.0         | 34.4         | 63.7         | 55.1  | 40.2       | 69.3       |
|                              | Post II (D42) | H5N1 whole | 27                 | -     | 48    | 72.8         | 42.3   | 125.4   | 13.0  | 7.1      | 23.6   | 70.8         | 55.9         | 83.0         | 70.8  | 55.9       | 83.0       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | -     | 47    | 55.7         | 36.1   | 86.1    | 10.9  | 7.1      | 16.8   | 70.2         | 55.1         | 82.7         | 70.2  | 55.1       | 82.7       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | -     | 48    | 40.9         | 24.1   | 69.3    | 7.9   | 4.7      | 13.4   | 58.3         | 43.2         | 72.4         | 58.3  | 43.2       | 72.4       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | -     | 49    | 28.7         | 17.5   | 46.9    | 5.7   | 3.5      | 9.4    | 51.0         | 36.3         | 65.6         | 51.0  | 36.3       | 65.6       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 27                 | Al    | 49    | 180.4        | 114.6  | 283.9   | 32.4  | 19.6     | 53.6   | 89.8         | 77.8         | 96.6         | 89.8  | 77.8       | 96.6       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 15                 | Al    | 48    | product 67.7 | 40.2   | 114.1   | 12.4  | 7.1      | 21.8   | 70.8         | 55.9         | 83.0         | 70.8  | 55.9       | 83.0       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 7.5                | Al 49 | Al 49 | 50.5         | 29.9   | 85.3    | 9.1   | 5.4      | 15.6   | 63.3         | 48.3         | 76.6         | 63.3  | 48.3       | 76.6       |
|                              |               | H5N1 whole | 3.8                | Al 49 | Al 49 | 61.6         | 37.0   | 102.6   | 10.5  | 6.2      | 18.0   | 67.3         | 52.5         | 80.1         | 69.4  | 54.6       | 81.7       |

SCF: seroconversion factor (i.e ratio of the post-vaccination GMT and the pre-vaccination GMT); SCR: seroconversion rate (i.e proportion of subjects who were either seronegative at pre-vaccination and have a protective post-vaccination titre of ≥ 1:40, or who were seropositive at pre-vaccination and have a 4-fold increase in titre); SPR: seroprotection rate (i.e proportion of subjects with HI titre ≥ 1:40)

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical studies in special populations

## · Eldery population: Flu-059

Study Flu-059 was an open, randomised, comparative, multicentre trial with seven groups to evaluate the humoral immune response of various formulations of a monovalent H9N2 whole virus vaccine.

Three hundred eighty five (385) healthy elderly subjects above 60 years of age and patients with wellcontrolled  underlying  disease  in  the  same  age  group  were  enrolled.  Subjects  were  randomised  to receive vaccination with a monovalent whole virus formulation (A/H9N2) containing 1.9, 3.8, 7.5 or 15 µg HA per dose without aluminium adjuvant or a monovalent aluminium-adjuvanted whole virus vaccine (A/H9N2) containing 1.9, 3.8 or 7.5 µg HA per dose according to a 2-dose schedule (day 0, day 21).

The HI GMT at day 74 indicated that higher antibody levels were obtained if two doses of vaccine were  administered  several  weeks  apart  instead  of  several  days  apart.  While  acknowledging  the limitations  of  the  CMI  analysis  (existing  pre-vaccination  CMI  response,  heterogeneity  of  responses between  groups,  small  sample  size),  an  increase  in  the  cellular  immune  response  in  terms  of  both lymphoproliferation and IFNγ secretion was observed post vaccination and remained stable over time. However, no boosting effect on the CMI response was observed irrespective of the schedule used.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Results :  Ten  days  after  administration  of  the  first  dose,  seroconversion  and  seroprotection  rates ranged  from  1.9%-21.8%  and  11.1%-34.5%  respectively  in  the  plain  H9N2  vaccine  groups,  as compared to 15.7%-25.9% and 21.6%-37.0% respectively in the adjuvanted H9N2 vaccine groups. At day 42, a seroconversion factor above 2 was obtained in all H9N2 vaccine groups. GMTs tended to be higher with the aluminium-adjuvanted formulation as compared to the plain formulation for the 7.5 µg  HA  dosage  in  particular.  In  initially  seronegative  subjects  who  received  the  H9N2  aluminium adjuvanted vaccine containing 7.5µg HA, seroprotective levels of 56.4% were found. Results  obtained  meet  the  required  CHMP  criteria  for  seroconversion  (&gt;30%)  and  geometric  mean titre increase (&gt;2.0). However seroprotective levels at day 42 of 56.4% did not meet the pre-defined CHMP requirement for elderly subjects (&gt;60%). Supportive studies · Flu-045 Study Flu-045 was an open, randomised, comparative, monocentre trial with two groups to evaluate the  immunogenicity  (humoral,  cell  mediated)  of  a  monovalent  H9N2  vaccine  according  to  two vaccination schedules. Fifty subjects aged 24.7 ± 2.45 years old (mean ± SD) were enrolled. Subjects were randomised to receive  vaccination  with  a  monovalent  aluminium-adjuvanted  whole  virus  formulation  (A/H9N2) containing 3.8 µg HA per dose according to two different schedules: a 0, 10 day or 0, 63 day schedule. Results: Ten days after administration of the first dose, seroconversion and seroprotection rates were 12.0% and 16.0% respectively following the 0, 10-day schedule, and 25.0% for both values following the 0, 63 day schedule. Eleven days after administration of the second dose in the 0, 10-day group (Day 21), seroconversion and seroprotection rates increased up to 80.0% and 84.0% respectively. In the 0, 63 day group, 25.0% of subjects had protective levels of HI titres prior to administration of the second dose (Day 63) as compared to 87.5% eleven days after the second dose (Day 74). In both groups, all CHMP criteria were fulfilled eleven days after the second dose.

## Discussion on clinical efficacy

The development of Daronrix benefits from the experience with Fluarix, GSK Bio's interpandemic influenza vaccine. Fluarix is an inactivated split influenza vaccine containing 15 µg haemagglutinin (HA)  of  each  of  the  three  influenza  virus  strains  (A/H1N1,  A/H3N2  and  B).  In  order  to  increase

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

vaccine  supply  opportunities  in  case  of  influenza  pandemic,  several  modified  vaccine  formulations have been investigated.

Initial  dose  finding  studies  with  an  H2N2  vaccine  established  the  dose  of  3.8  µg  HA  to  achieve adequate  seroprotection  in  the  age  group  18  to  30  years  and  to  fulfill  all  three  criteria  defined  by CHMP  (CPMP/BWP/214/96).  This  was  confirmed  for  the  H9N2  strain.  However  subsequent investigation  of  the  immunogenicity  of  this  dosage  in  the  age  group  30  to  60  revealed  that  only borderline  values  for  seroprotection  were  achieved,  although  the  required  CHMP  criteria  for seroconversion  (&gt;40%)  and  geometric  mean  titre  increase  (&gt;2.5)  were  largely  exceeded.  From  the individual serology data, it becomes apparent, that many of the vaccinees included in the clinical trials show some pre-existing immunity against the H9N2 antigen. Thus, these subjects may not be regarded as  immunologically  naïve  and  allow  no  conclusion  on  the  immunogenicity  of  the  vaccine  in  a pandemic situation, where a really 'new' influenza virus strain/antigen is circulating.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Subsequently, the dossier was shifted to a H5N1 mock-up vaccine and further data were provided for this vaccine in order to establish efficacy of the mock-up vaccine. For H5N1, more than 90% of the vaccinees were seronegative prior to vaccination. All three CHMP criteria are fulfilled by vaccines containing 27 or 15 µg hemagglutinin (HA). For 7.5 and 3.8 µg HA adjuvanted  with  aluminium,  seroconversion  rate  and  seroconversion  factor  are  in  compliance  with CHMP requirements, while seroprotection rate with 63.3%, and 69.4% respectively, slightly fail the set requirement of 70%. On that basis, a pandemic mock-up vaccine containing 15 µg HA, achieving a seroprotection rate of 70.8% could be approved. However, it has to be noted that 27 µg HA achieve a superior protection rate of nearly 90% and in terms of vaccine efficacy may be the preferred option. The applicant commits to provide the data on neutralising antibodies and CMI with the final study report of study H5N1-001. No data are provided with respect to the immunogenicity and safety of a H5N1 mock-up vaccine in the  elderly.  However,  in  study  Flu-059  the  humoral  immune  response  of  various  formulations  of  a monovalent H9N2 whole virus vaccine was evaluated in healthy elderly subjects above 60 years of age. Results obtained in this study meet the required CHMP criteria for seroconversion (&gt;30%) and geometric  mean  titre  increase  (&gt;2.0).  For  initially  seronegative  subjects  who  received  the  H9N2 aluminium adjuvanted vaccine containing 7.5µg HA, seroprotective levels of 56.4% were obtained at day 42, which did not meet the pre-defined CHMP requirement for elderly subjects (&gt;60%). The small sample size limits the significance of these results. Clinical safety Study H5N1-001 Patient exposure Overall 400 subjects were enrolled and vaccinated in the study. The primary analysis of safety and reactogenicity was based on the total vaccinated cohort. No subject was excluded from the ATP cohort for analysis of safety. Adverse events A tabulation of solicited local and general symptoms can be found in the following tables:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## The percentage of doses followed by solicited local symptoms (pain, redness, swelling, ecchymosis, induration) including those of grade 3 intensity (Total vaccinated cohort)

| Study (schedule)                                               | N                                                              |                                                                | Pain % 95%CI %                                                 | Pain % 95%CI %                                                 | Pain % 95%CI %                                                 | Redness 95%CI                                                  | Redness 95%CI                                                  | Redness 95%CI                                                  | Swelling % 95%CI                                               | Swelling % 95%CI                                               | Swelling % 95%CI                                               | authorised Ecchymosis % 95%CI                                  | authorised Ecchymosis % 95%CI                                  | authorised Ecchymosis % 95%CI                                  | Induration % 95%CI                                             | Induration % 95%CI                                             | Induration % 95%CI                                             |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Group                                                          |                                                                |                                                                |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             | LL                                                             | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |
| H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 51.0                                                           | 40.7                                                           | 61.3                                                           | 17.3                                                           | 10.4                                                           | 26.3                                                           | 8.2                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 15.5                                                           | 0.0 0.0                                                        | 0.0 0.0                                                        | 3.7                                                            | 9.2                                                            | 4.3                                                            | 16.7                                                           |
| (HA 27 µ g)                                                    |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 45.9                                                           | 35.8                                                           | 56.3                                                           | 13.3                                                           | 7.3                                                            | 21.6                                                           | 7.1                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 14.2                                                           | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 11.2                                                           | 5.7                                                            | 19.2                                                           |
| (HA 15 µ g)                                                    |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 40.0                                                           | 30.3                                                           | 50.3                                                           | 11.0                                                           | 5.6                                                            | 18.8                                                           | 8.0                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.2                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 6.0                                                            | 2.2                                                            | 12.6                                                           |
| (HA 7.5 µ g)                                                   |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | longer 0.0                                                     | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 29.0                                                           | 20.4                                                           | 38.9                                                           | 12.0                                                           | 6.4                                                            | 20.0                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.9                                                            |
| (HA 3.8 µ g)                                                   |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 102                                                            | Total                                                          | 55.9                                                           | 45.7                                                           | 65.7                                                           | 10.8                                                           | 5.5                                                            | no 18.5                                                        | 6.9                                                            | 2.8                                                            | 13.6                                                           | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 6.9                                                            | 2.8                                                            | 13.6                                                           |
| (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                                |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 6.9                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 57.1                                                           | 46.7                                                           | 67.1                                                           | 19.4                                                           | 12.1                                                           | 28.6                                                           | 9.2                                                            | 4.3                                                            | 16.7                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 8.2                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 15.5                                                           |
| (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                                |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | product 0.0                                                    | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 64.0                                                           | 53.8                                                           | 73.4                                                           | 13.0                                                           | 7.1                                                            | 21.2                                                           | 10.0                                                           | 4.9                                                            | 17.6                                                           | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.5                                                            | 16.0                                                           | 9.4                                                            | 24.7                                                           |
| (HA 7.5 µ g/ Al)                                               |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            |
| H5N1 whole                                                     | 101                                                            | Total                                                          | 45.5                                                           | 35.6                                                           | 55.8                                                           | 12.9                                                           | 7.0                                                            | 21.0                                                           | 10.9                                                           | 5.6                                                            | 18.7                                                           | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 14.9                                                           | 8.6                                                            | 23.3                                                           |
| (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                               |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |

N = number of doses followed by at least one solicited symptom sheet completed;

% = percentage of doses followed by a report of the specified symptom;

95% CI = exact 95% confidence interval; L.L. = lower limit, U.L. = upper limit

Grade 3 pain = severe (pain that prevents normal activity) ; Grade 3 redness, swelling, induration = largest surface diameter &gt;50mm

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The percentage of doses followed by solicited general symptoms (fatigue, fever, headache, myalgia, shivering) including those of grade 3 intensity and those considered to be related to vaccination (Total vaccinated cohort)

| Study (schedule) Group                                         | N                                                              | Relationship to vaccination                                    | Fatigue % 95%CI % LL UL                                        | Fatigue % 95%CI % LL UL                                        | Fatigue % 95%CI % LL UL                                        | Fever 95%CI LL                                                 | Fever 95%CI LL                                                 | UL                                                             | Headache % 95%CI LL UL                                         | Headache % 95%CI LL UL                                         | Headache % 95%CI LL UL                                         | authorised Myalgia % 95%CI LL UL                               | authorised Myalgia % 95%CI LL UL                               |                                                                | %                                                              | Shivering 95%CI LL UL                                          | Shivering 95%CI LL UL                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 13.3                                                           | 7.3                                                            | 21.6                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            | 12.2                                                           | 6.5                                                            | 20.4                                                           | 17.3                                                           | 10.4                                                           | 26.3                                                           | 9.2                                                            | 4.3                                                            | 16.7                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Related                                                        | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 8.2                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 15.5                                                           | 4.1                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 10.1                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 11.2                                                           | 5.7                                                            | 19.2                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            | 20.4                                                           | 12.9                                                           | 29.7                                                           | 11.2                                                           | 5.7                                                            | 19.2                                                           | 4.1                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 10.1                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         | 98                                                             | Related                                                        | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 15.0                                                           | 8.6                                                            | 23.5                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 26.0                                                           | 17.7                                                           | 35.7                                                           | 18.0                                                           | 11.0                                                           | 26.9                                                           | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.5                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Related                                                        | 7.0                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 13.9                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 13.9                                                           | 8.0                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.2                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 19.0                                                           | 11.8                                                           | 28.1                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | longer 25.0                                                    | 16.9                                                           | 34.7                                                           | 14.0                                                           | 7.9                                                            | 22.4                                                           | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.9                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        | 100                                                            | Related                                                        | 8.0                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.2                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 9.0                                                            | 4.2                                                            | 16.4                                                           | 5.0                                                            | 1.6                                                            | 11.3                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     | 102                                                            | Total                                                          | 22.5                                                           | 14.9                                                           | 31.9                                                           | 4.9                                                            | 1.6                                                            | 11.1                                                           | 24.5                                                           | 16.5                                                           | 34.0                                                           | 25.5                                                           | 17.4                                                           | 35.1                                                           | 12.7                                                           | 7.0                                                            | 20.8                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     | 102                                                            | Grade 3                                                        | 2.9                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | no 3.6                                                         | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 6.9                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.3                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     | 102                                                            | Related                                                        | 9.8                                                            | 4.8                                                            | 17.3                                                           | 4.9                                                            | 1.6                                                            | 11.1                                                           | 8.8                                                            | 4.1                                                            | 16.1                                                           | 8.8                                                            | 4.1                                                            | 16.1                                                           | 8.8                                                            | 4.1                                                            | 16.1                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     | 98                                                             | Total                                                          | 11.2                                                           | 5.7                                                            | 19.2                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            | 11.2                                                           | 5.7                                                            | 19.2                                                           | 7.1                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 14.2                                                           | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     | 98                                                             | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | product 0.0                                                    | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     | 98                                                             | Related                                                        | 7.1                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 14.2                                                           | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g/ Al)                                    | 100                                                            | Total                                                          | 13.0                                                           | 7.1                                                            | 21.2                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 10.0                                                           | 4.9                                                            | 17.6                                                           | 23.0                                                           | 15.2                                                           | 32.5                                                           | 6.0                                                            | 2.2                                                            | 12.6                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g/ Al)                                    | 100                                                            | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g/ Al)                                    | 100                                                            | Related                                                        | 7.0                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 13.9                                                           | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 12.0                                                           | 6.4                                                            | 20.0                                                           | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                    | 101                                                            | Total                                                          | 21.8                                                           | 14.2                                                           | 31.1                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 24.8                                                           | 16.7                                                           | 34.3                                                           | 18.8                                                           | 11.7                                                           | 27.8                                                           | 11.9                                                           | 6.3                                                            | 19.8                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                    | 101                                                            | Grade 3                                                        | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                    | 101                                                            | Related                                                        | 6.9                                                            | 2.8                                                            | 13.8                                                           | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 5.0                                                            | 1.6                                                            | 11.2                                                           | 7.9                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.0                                                           | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.0                                                            |

N = number of doses followed by at least one solicited symptom sheet completed; % = percentage of doses followed by a report of the specified symptom;

95% CI = exact 95% confidence interval; L.L. = lower limit, U.L. = upper limit

Grade 3 = severe (symptom that prevents normal activity); Grade 3 fever = &gt;39°C

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(cont'd): The percentage of doses followed by solicited general symptoms (sweating increase, arthralgia) including   those of grade 3 intensity and those considered to be related to vaccination (Total vaccinated cohort)

| Study (schedule)                                               | N                                                              | Relationship to vaccination                                    | Sweating increase % 95%CI                                      | Sweating increase % 95%CI                                      | Sweating increase % 95%CI                                      | Arthralgia % 95%CI                                             | Arthralgia % 95%CI                                             | Arthralgia % 95%CI                                             |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Group                                                          |                                                                |                                                                |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |                                                                | LL                                                             | UL                                                             |
| H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old | H5N1-001 (2 dose schedule at 0, 21 days) in 18 to 60 years old |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Total                                                          | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Related                                                        | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Total                                                          | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            | 5.1                                                            | 1.7                                                            | 11.5                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g)                                         |                                                                | Related                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 2.0                                                            | 0.2                                                            | 7.2                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Total                                                          | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.9                                                            | 6.0                                                            | 2.2                                                            | 12.6                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 7.5 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Related                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.5                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Total                                                          | 8.0                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.2                                                           | 7.0                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 13.9                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g)                                        |                                                                | Related                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.9                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Total                                                          | 7.8                                                            | 3.4                                                            | 14.9                                                           | 17.6                                                           | 10.8                                                           | no 26.4                                                        |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.3                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 27 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Related                                                        | 5.9                                                            | 2.2                                                            | 12.4                                                           | 7.8                                                            | 3.4                                                            | 14.9                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Total                                                          | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            | 4.1                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 10.1                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole (HA 15 µ g/ Al)                                     |                                                                | Related                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.6                                                            | 3.1                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.7                                                            |
| H5N1 whole µ                                                   |                                                                | Total                                                          | 8.0                                                            | 3.5                                                            | 15.2                                                           | 13.0                                                           | 7.1                                                            | 21.2                                                           |
| (HA 7.5 g/ Al)                                                 |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | product 3.6                                                    | 0.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 3.6                                                            |
| H5N1 whole µ                                                   |                                                                | Related                                                        | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.9                                                            | 7.0                                                            | 2.9                                                            | 13.9                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                    |                                                                | Total                                                          | 5.0                                                            | 1.6                                                            | 11.2                                                           | 9.9                                                            | 4.9                                                            | 17.5                                                           |
| H5N1 whole (HA 3.8 µ g/ Al)                                    |                                                                | Grade 3                                                        | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            | 1.0                                                            | 0.0                                                            | 5.4                                                            |
|                                                                |                                                                | Related                                                        | 3.0                                                            | 0.6                                                            | 8.4                                                            | 4.0                                                            | 1.1                                                            | 9.8                                                            |

<!-- image -->

N = number of doses followed by at least one solicited symptom sheet completed; % = percentage of doses followed by a report of the specified symptom; 95% CI = exact 95% confidence interval; L.L. = lower limit, U.L. = upper limit

Grade 3 = severe (symptom that prevents normal activity)

<!-- image -->

## Medicinal product no longer authorised Relationship to Sweating increase Arthralgia vaccination % 95%CI % 95%CI LL UL LL UL Total 5.1 1.7 11.5 5.1 1.7 11.5 Grade 3 0.0 0.0 3.7 0.0 0.0 3.7 Related 3.1 0.6 8.7 2.0 0.2 7.2 Total 2.0 0.2 7.2 5.1 1.7 11.5 Grade 3 0.0 0.0 3.7 1.0 0.0 5.6 Related 0.0 0.0 3.7 2.0 0.2 7.2 Total 4.0 1.1 9.9 6.0 2.2 12.6 Grade 3 0.0 0.0 3.6 0.0 0.0 3.6 Related 1.0 0.0 5.4 3.0 0.6 8.5 Total 8.0 3.5 15.2 7.0 2.9 13.9 Grade 3 0.0 0.0 3.6 0.0 0.0 3.6 Related 0.0 0.0 3.6 4.0 1.1 9.9

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

During the 7-day follow up period, pain at the injection site was the most commonly reported solicited local  symptom  in  all  vaccine  groups.  There  was  a  trend  for  a  higher  incidence  of  pain  with  the adjuvanted formulations as compared to the plain ones. Overall, only five cases of grade 3 pain were observed (one in the plain vaccine group containing 15 µ g HA, two in the adjuvanted group with 27 µ g HA and one in each of the adjuvanted groups containing 7.5 µ g  HA and 3.8 µ g  HA).  Incidences  of redness,  swelling,  ecchymosis  and  induration  were  reported  with  lower  frequencies.  Symptoms  of grade 3 intensity  were  rarely  reported:  only  one  case  of  grade  3  redness  was  observed  in  the  plain vaccine  group  containing  3.8 µ g  HA,  and  one  case  of  grade  3  induration  in  the  adjuvanted  vaccine group containing 7.5 µ g HA.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Regarding  the  incidence  of  solicited  general  symptoms  during  the  7-day  follow-up  period,  fatigue, myalgia  and  headache  were  the  most  commonly  reported  adverse  events.  These  symptoms  were uncommonly graded as severe. A trend for a higher incidence of grade 3 cases was observed in the adjuvanted vaccine groups as compared to the plain ones. Eight cases of grade 3 fatigue (one with 7.5 µ g  HA, 3 with 27 µ g  HA/Al, 1 with 15 µ g  HA/Al and 3 with 3.8 µ g  HA/Al), 7 cases  of  grade  3 headache (one with 7.5 µ g HA, 2 with 27 µ g HA/Al, 1 with 15 µ g HA/Al and 3 with 3.8 µ g HA/A) and 6 cases of grade 3 myalgia (one with 7.5 µ g HA, 3 with 27 µ g HA/Al and 2 with 3.8 µ g HA/Al) were reported overall. Other general solicited symptoms were mild or moderate in intensity. Of note, fever was  reported  with  a  frequency ≤ 2.0%  in  all  vaccine  groups  (except  in  the  aluminium  adjuvanted group containing 27 µ g HA where the incidence was 4.9%) with only one case of grade 3 fever in the plain vaccine group (7.5 µ g HA). Unsolicited  symptoms  of  any  or  grade  3  intensity,  or  considered  as  causally  related  to  vaccination were  reported  with  similar  frequencies  with  the  plain  and  adjuvanted  formulations.  In  the  plain vaccine groups, 10.2% to 22.0% of doses were followed by unsolicited symptoms, as compared to 13.0% to 20.4% of doses in the adjuvanted vaccine groups. Unsolicited symptoms graded as severe or considered as causally related to vaccination were observed following 0.0% to 4.0% and 0.0%-1.0% of  doses  respectively  in  the  plain  groups,  as  compared  to  1.0%  to  4.0%  and  0.0%-4.0%  of  doses respectively in the adjuvanted groups. No  data  on  co-administration  of  the  mock-up  vaccine  with  other  vaccines  are  available.  This  is reflected in the SPC under section 4.5. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths In study H5N1-001, two serious adverse events (SAEs) were reported during the study period until Day 51 post vaccination. Both SAEs were reported in the plain vaccine groups (one with 15 µ g HA and one with 7.5 µ g HA) and were assessed as not related to vaccination. Safety in special populations No safety data are available for patients at particular risk for influenza complications (children, adults with poorly controlled underlying diseases). Supportive studies In total 1329 subjects were vaccinated with a monovalent vaccines containing H2N2, H9N2 or H3N2. About 735 vaccinees received the adjuvanted vaccine.

The adjuvanted whole virus formulation with the final 3.8µg antigen (H2N2) content was studied in the  study  Flu-038,  and  local  solicited  signs  were  reported  more  frequently  than  general  solicited symptoms. There was an age-dependent decrease in the frequency of reporting.

Pain was the predominant solicited local AE reported by 75% of subjects below 30 years and 38% above 30 years of age. Only one dose was followed by a grade 3 pain. No severe (grade 3) induration, redness or swelling was reported.

Fatigue (8% to 28 %), headache (6% to 23%), malaise (0% to 22%), myalgia (11% to 25%) and pain in limb (6% to 13%) were the predominant solicited general AEs. None of these AEs were considered causally related to the vaccination and there was no general symptom with a grade 3.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The adjuvanted H9N2 whole virus vaccine with the final 3.8µg antigen content was studied in the 18 to 60 years old population (Flu-41) and in an elderly population above 60 years (Flu-059). The results found with H9N2 strain showed similar results than the ones generated for the H2N2 strain and local solicited  signs  were  reported  more  frequently  than  general  solicited  symptoms).  There  was  also  an age-dependent decrease in the frequency of reporting.

Pain  was  the  predominant  solicited  local  AE  reported  after  10.9%  to  62%  of  doses  in  all  subjects. Redness, swelling and induration were reported following 8.2% to 26%, 7.3% to 28% and 18.8% to 32%  of  doses,  respectively.  Only  one  dose  was  followed  by  a  grade  3  pain.  No  severe  (grade  3) induration, redness or swelling was reported.

Fatigue (4.5% to 22%), headache (6.4% to 10%), malaise (8% to 10%), myalgia (4.5% to 36%) and pain  in  limb  (6%  to  16%)  were  the  predominant  solicited  general  AEs.  The  incidence  of  general symptoms related to vaccination was low (8% or less), except for myalgia (28% in 18-30 year old subjects). Three general symptoms (i.e. myalgia, fatigue, malaise) were reported with a grade 3 score.

## · Summary of the risk management plan for Daronrix

Medicinal product no longer authorised A  total  of  11  subjects  reported  SAEs.  All  SAEs  except  one  were  considered  to  be  unrelated  to vaccination.  One  SAE  (faciocephalgia)  was  assessed  by  the  investigator  as  unlikely  related  to vaccination. The study vaccination was discontinued and the subject was withdrawn from the study. · Post marketing experience Data from post-marketing surveillance with interpandemic trivalent vaccines are included in the SPC as per the requirement of core SPC for pandemic influenza vaccines Discussion on clinical safety An  increased local reactogenicity (specifically for pain) was observed with the adjuvanted formulations as compared to the plain vaccines. However, incidences of general adverse events were usually  comparable  between  these  formulations  except  for  arthralgia  which  tended  to  be  more frequently reported in the adjuvanted vaccine groups containing 27 µ g HA and 7.5 µ g HA, as compared to the respective non adjuvanted formulations. Symptoms of grade 3 intensity (local or general), and general  symptoms  related  to  vaccination  were  reported  with  low  frequencies.  Differences  observed between adjuvanted and plain vaccine groups were therefore considered to be clinically acceptable. 5. Pharmacovigilance · Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The  CHMP considered that  the  Pharmacovigilance  system  as  described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements. · Risk Management Plan The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information.

| Safety issue                           | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                      | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                     |
|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Neurological adverse events (e.g. GBS) | - Active surveillance in pandemic cohorts - Passive surveillance (via spontaneous reporting of adverse events - GSKBio's routine pharmacovigilance system) | Mentioned as occurring as a class effect in trivalent vaccines in section 4.8 of the SPC. |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety profile of the final pandemic vaccine                                                                                                        | - Pandemic cohorts - Special PSUR reporting requirements in the pandemic situation                                                                                            | NA                                                                                              |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Immunogenicity of the final pandemic vaccine                                                                                                        | Pandemic cohorts (subset of subjects)                                                                                                                                         | NA                                                                                              |
| Limited safety data in children, pregnant women, individuals with clinically severe underlying medical conditions and immunocompromised individuals | - Routine pharmacovigilance - Active surveillance as part of pandemic cohort study - Plan of clinical trial programme to investigate these groups is being provided as a FUM. | Appropriate information on lack of data in these groups in sections 4.2, 4.6 and 5.1 of the SPC |

The applicant will address this issue in the ferret challenge model to evaluate the protective efficacy of candidate  flu  vaccines.  The  applicant  commits  to  submit  the  non-clinical  reports  (immunogenicity study in naïve mice and challenge studies in naïve ferrets) when they become available and submits a variation  to  amend  the  product  information,  e.g.  if  the  outcome  of  animal  studies  would  raise  any concerns for the use of this vaccine in children

Medicinal product no longer authorised conditions and immunocompromised individuals 6. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Quality The  application  is  for  a  core  pandemic  dossier,  based  on  data  generated  with  3  mock-up  strains: H5N1, H9N2 and H2N2. The data with the two latter strains is supportive to the data generated with the H5N1 reverse genetics strain, derived from A/Viet Nam/1194/2004. The manufacture of the drug substance, the monovalent antigen bulk, has been validated at full-scale with  the  H5N1  antigen.  The  specifications  set  for  the  bulk  antigen  and  the  final  vaccine  are appropriate. The stability of the monovalent H5N1 antigen bulk is 3 months at 2-8 °C and of the drug product is 12 months at 2-8 °C. Due  to  the  constrains  in  a  pandemic  situation  the  applicant  provided  additional  information  with regard to the optimisation of the manufacturing process, alternative testing for mycoplasma, the supply of SPF and production eggs and measures already in place to comply with BSL2+ containment. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology The applicant submitted a reduced non-clinical package for Daronrix, this is in accordance with the Guideline  on  dossier  structure  and  content  for  pandemic  influenza  vaccine  marketing  authorisation application (CPMP/VEG/4717/03). Animal  studies  with  inactivated  adjuvanted  virus  vaccines  (e.g.  RSV,  measles  virus)  have  shown evidence of vaccine-enhanced disease (treatment with vaccine and subsequently challenged with live virus).  Aluminium  adjuvanted  inactivated  virus  vaccines  may  induce  too  strong  a  Th2  response, which, upon challenge with live virus, results in vigorous T-cell recall producing immune-enhanced disease.  There  is  therefore  a  theoretical  concern  that  alum  adjuvanted  whole  virus  vaccines,  when given to naïve populations (e.g. infants, young children) might predispose them to (even) more serious influenza disease during a pandemic (immune enhancement).

## Efficacy

For H5N1, more than 90% of the vaccinees were seronegative prior to vaccination. All three CHMP criteria are fulfilled by vaccines containing 27 or 15 µg haemagglutinin (HA). For vaccines containing 7.5 and 3.8 µg HA adjuvanted with aluminium, seroconversion rate and seroconversion factor are in compliance with CHMP requirements, while seroprotection rate with 63.3%, and 69.4% respectively, slightly fail the set requirement of 70%. On that basis, a pandemic mock-up vaccine containing 15 µg HA, achieving a seroprotection rate of 70.8% could be approved. However, it has to be noted that 27

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

µg HA achieve a superior protection rate of nearly 90% and in terms of vaccine efficacy may be the preferred option.

No data are provided with respect to the immunogenicity and safety of a H5N1 mock-up vaccine in the  elderly.  However,  in  study  Flu-059  the  humoral  immune  response  of  various  formulations  of  a monovalent H9N2 whole virus vaccine was evaluated in healthy elderly subjects above 60 years of age. Results obtained in this study meet the required CHMP criteria for seroconversion (&gt;30%) and geometric  mean  titre  increase  (&gt;2.0).  For  initially  seronegative  subjects  who  received  the  H9N2 aluminium adjuvanted vaccine containing 7.5µg HA, seroprotective levels of 56.4% were obtained at Day  42,  which  did  not  meet  the  pre-defined  CHMP  requirement  for  elderly  subjects  (&gt;60%).  The small sample size limits the significance of these results.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The CHMP concluded that in absence of data with the H5N1 mock-up vaccine in subjects over 60 years  of  age,  it  is  not  possible  to  establish  a  posology  in  elderly.  However,  from  Public  Health considerations, the CHMP did not consider it appropriate to restrict the indication to adults from 18-60 years. Regarding  the  use  in  children,  there  are  some  remaining  (theoretical)  concerns  on  possible  disease enhancement in a naïve population primed with a whole virus aluminium adjuvanted vaccine. This theoretical risk of immune enhancement has not yet been studied. The  applicant reflects these issues in the SPC  (general indication in section 4.1, no dose recommendations for elderly and children in section 4.2 and data presented in section 5.1). Furthermore  the  applicant  commits  to  perform  immunogenicity  and  safety  studies  in  elderly  (&gt;60 years of age) and children (3 to 9 years of age) with Daronrix. The applicant will update the CHMP on an annual basis of the study progress. Safety During the 7-day follow up period, pain at the injection site was the most commonly reported solicited local symptom. Incidences of redness, swelling, ecchymosis and induration were reported with lower frequencies.  Regarding  the  incidence  of  solicited  general  symptoms  during  the  7-day  follow-up period, fatigue, myalgia and headache were the most commonly reported adverse events. The safety profile of the vaccine, as it is revealed by the clinical studies performed, is satisfactory, especially in a pandemic situation. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials and post-marketing data from the interpandemic trivalent vaccines have been included in the Summary  of  Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. User consultation The applicant performed a readability testing on the English version of the package leaflet (PL) in 10 persons using a semi-structured questionnaire. In conclusion, the main objectives of the user consultation have been achieved, namely to assess the readability  of  the  PL,  to  identify  problems  regarding  comprehensibility  and  usefulness  of  the information and to describe possible changes to the PL to improve readability.

## Benefit/risk assessment

An  influenza  pandemic  is  a  global  outbreak  of  influenza  disease  that  occurs  when  a  new  type  A influenza strain emerges in the human population, causes serious illness, and then spreads easily from person  to  person  worldwide.  Though  there  may  be  no  vaccines  available  at  the  beginning  of  a pandemic, efficacious and safe vaccines are regarded as an important tool to counteract this severe threat  to  public  health,  allowing  protection  from  (severe)  disease  or  death.  The  formulation  of  a pandemic vaccine has to take into account that, in contrast to seasonal influenza, all people will be immunologically naïve for the circulating pandemic strain. This naivety is expected to make it more difficult to elicit a protecting immune response in vaccinees. However, it may deserve some further

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

discussions, what serological status and background immunity against new haemagglutinins may be characteristic for a naïve population.

With this background the applicant developed Daronrix, a monovalent, whole virion, inactivated and adjuvanted  vaccine,  containing  15  µg  haemagglutinin  (HA)  from  the  influenza  strain  A/Vietnam /1194/2004 (H5N1) per 0.5 ml dose. In the submitted core pandemic dossier, the applicant reported, as required according CPMP/VEG/4717/03, the manufacturing experience and testing and the findings from non-clinical tests and clinical trials using the NIBRG 14 (H5N1) mock-up strain.

Clinical  trials  on  protective  efficacy  for  the  mock-up  vaccine  cannot  be  performed.  Therefore  a detailed  characterisation  of  the  immunological  response  to  the  mock-up  vaccines  is  required.  The vaccine  virus  strains  chosen  for  these  studies  should  allow  simulating  a  situation  where  the  target population for vaccination is immunologically naïve. The evaluation of the clinical efficacy is mainly based on the quantification of HI titres in vaccinees and subsequent analysis of the derived parameters seroprotection rate, seroconversion rate and factor, what generally is accepted as surrogate markers for efficacy of influenza vaccines. The criteria for these studies are laid down the Guideline on dossier structure and content for pandemic influenza vaccine marketing authorisation application, CPMP/VEG/4717/03.  All  three  CHMP  criteria  are  fulfilled  with  the  vaccine  containing  15  µg haemagglutinin (HA) from the influenza strain A/Vietnam /1194/2004 (H5N1) per 0.5 ml dose. The initial  studies  with  whole  virion,  inactivated  and  adjuvanted  H2N2  and  an  H2N9  vaccines  are supportive to the clinical trial done with the H5N1 vaccine.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The safety profile of the mock-up vaccine is acceptable. From an epidemiological point of view it is very unlikely that influenza strain A/Vietnam /1194/2004 would be the next pandemic strain, since the virus will either undergo further antigenic drift or the pandemic will be caused by another subtype of influenza vaccines (antigenic shift). Antigenic shift and drift are natural phenomenona related to all influenza viruses. For example, additional mutations will be required to enable the virus to transmit effectively from human to human. It is highly unlikely, therefore,  that  Daronrix  containing  the  strain  derived  from  A/Vietnam  /1194/2004  will  provide protection when using during a pandemic. In line with the developed core dossier concept, a variation would  have  to  be  submitted  to  introduce  the  WHO/EU  recommended  strain  prepared  from  the influenza virus causing the pandemic, prior to use of Daronrix in a pandemic. This will assure that the vaccine will induce a satisfactory immune response to the pandemic influenza virus. For the same scientific reasons, and in absence of any studies demonstrating that antibodies elicited by Daronrix  (containing  the  strain  derived  from  A/Vietnam  /1194/2004)  will  react  with  other  H5N1 subtypes (in the neutralising antibody assay), this vaccine has not been demonstrated to have a role in use in the prepandemic period. No predictions can be made of the immunogenicity of Daronrix against strains other than A/Viet Nam/1194/2004. During the pandemic, the applicant will collect safety and effectiveness data of the pandemic vaccine and submit this information to the CHMP for evaluation (specific obligation). A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion  that  pharmacovigilance  activities  in  addition  to  the  use  of  routine  pharmacovigilance  were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns During  the  pandemic,  the  applicant  will  conduct  a  prospective  cohort  study  as  identified  in  the pharmacovigilance plan (specific obligation).

## Recommendation

Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by concensus that the risk-benefit balance of Daronrix for the prophylaxis of influenza in an officially declared pandemic situation was favourable and therefore recommends the granting of the marketing authorisation under exceptional circumstances.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  CHMP  recommends  granting  this  marketing  authorisation  for  Daronrix  under  exceptional circumstances,  because  in  the  present  stage  of  knowledge  comprehensive  scientific  information required for the vaccine containing the actual pandemic strain cannot be gathered.

The  missing  scientific  information  relates  to  the  safety  and  effectiveness  of  the  pandemic  vaccine. These data can only be obtained once the actual strain causing the pandemic is included in the vaccine and  during  actual  use  of  the  vaccine.  Therefore  the  company  has  agreed  the  following  specific obligations:

- -To collect,  during  the  pandemic,  clinical  safety  and  effectiveness  data  of  the  pandemic vaccine and submit this information to the CHMP for evaluation.
- -To  conduct,  during  the  pandemic,  a  prospective  cohort  study  as  identified  in  the Pharmacovigilance plan.

<!-- image -->