---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:46:56
document_pages: 13
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/depocyte-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: depocyte-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.0524014
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-25 11:36:04.643786
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the initial scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Depocyte.  For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

DepoCyte is a novel formulation of cytarabine (ara-C) encapsulated in multivesicular lipid particles that  act  as  a  slow  release  reservoir.  It  is  intended  for  intrathecal  administration  for  the  treatment  of lymphomatous meningitis. The following dose regimen is recommended.

## Active substance

· Induction therapy: 50 mg administered intrathecally (by lumbar puncture or intraventricularly via an Ommaya reservoir) every 14 days for 2 doses (weeks 1 and 3). · Consolidation therapy: 50 mg administered intrathecally (by lumbar puncture or intraventricularly  via  an  Ommaya  reservoir)  every  14  days  for  3  doses  (weeks  5,  7  and  9) followed by an additional dose of 50 mg at week 13. · Maintenance therapy: 50 mg administered intrathecally (by lumbar puncture or intraventricularly via an Ommaya reservoir) every 28 days for 4 doses (weeks 17, 21, 25 and 29). Lymphomatous  meningitis  occurs  in  up  to  a  quarter  of  patients  with  Non-Hodgkin's  Lymphoma (NHL),  being  more  frequent  in  AIDS-related  NHL  than  in  non-AIDS  NHL.  Treatment  of  this complication  aims  at  the  palliation  of  its  frequent  symptoms,  such  as  cranial  nerve  palsies,  focal sensory and/or motor deficits, headache and encephalopathy. Ara-C is an active agent against NHL and, following intrathecal administration, is known to induce responses in patients with lymphomatous meningitis. Ara-C is a cell-cycle phase specific antimetabolite  that  inhibits  DNA  synthesis.  It  is  most  effective  in  the  clearance  of  the  CSF  of malignant cells when it is maintained at cytotoxic concentrations in the environment of the malignant cells for many days. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition DepoCyte is a sterile, injectable suspension of the antimetabolite ara-C encapsulated into multivesicular lipid-based particles (DepoFoam) for sustained release. Each vial of DepoCyte contains a suspension of 50 mg encapsulated ara-C in 5 ml of solution. The primary components of the container-closure system are · 5 ml, Ph.Eur. Type I flint glass vials, 13 mm opening · 13 mm, grey, butyl rubber stoppers with fluoresin or Teflon coated product contact surfaces · Aluminium flip off seals Medicinal product no longer authorised

The active substance is cytarabine (ara-C), which is listed in the current versions of the USP and Ph. Eur.

The applicant has presented a harmonised USP/Ph. Eur. specification. Tests include determination of residual methanol,  ethanol  and  acetonitrile, determination  of  5-methylcytarabine  and  bacterial endotoxins.  The  limits  for  residual  solvents  are  within  the  limits  set  out  in  the  ICH  guideline  on residual solvents.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Batch analysis data were provided on ten consecutive batches of active substance. The results confirm the  consistency  and  uniformity  of  the  synthesis.  The  only  related  substances  observed  were  uracil arabinoside and 5-methylcytarabine. Ethanol was the only organic solvent present.

Primary stability data were generated on five batches of active substance. Up to 48 months data were available.  No  significant  deviations  from  initial  values  were  noted.  The  data  provided  support  the proposed retest period of 36 months.

## Other ingredients

Cholesterol, sodium chloride and water for injection are described in the PhEur and conform to these specifications. The specifications for dioleoylphosphatidylcholine (DOPC) and dipalmitoylphosphatidyl-glycerol (DPPG) are acceptable.

Product development and finished product The  drug  encapsulating  particles  (DepoFoam)  are  a  proprietary  drug  delivery  system  that  aims  to provide sustained release of therapeutic compounds. The microscopic spherical particles are composed of  numerous  non-concentric  internal  aqueous  chambers  separated  by  bilayer  lipid  membranes.  The components  of  DepoFoam  particles  are  synthetic  analogues  of  common,  naturally  occurring  lipids. The  DepoFoam  formulation  of  ara-C  (DepoCyte)  is  stored  under  refrigeration  in  a  ready-to-use injectable form. DepoFoam  particles  release  the  drug  over  a  period  of  time  which  can  be  modified  by  the  lipid composition, chemical properties of the drug to be encapsulated, and manufacturing parameters used in production. The drug may be released from DepoFoam particles by erosion and/or reorganisation of the lipid membranes of particles in vivo . DepoFoam particles are different from other lipid-based drug delivery systems such as unilamellar and multilamellar liposomes. The main structural difference is that, in contrast to unilamellar liposomes, multivesicular  liposomes  (MVL)  contain  multiple  aqueous  chambers  per  particle.  In  contrast  to multilamellar liposomes, the multiple aqueous chambers in MVL are non-concentric. The presence of internal  aqueous  chambers  may  serve  to  confer  increased  mechanical  strength  to  the  vesicle.  The multivesicular nature of MVL also indicates that, unlike conventional unilamellar liposomes, a single breach  in  the  external  membrane  of  an  MVL  will  not  result  in  total  release  of  internal  aqueous contents. The manufacturing process, used to produce DepoCyte clinical product to support the phase III study, was  established  at  an  appropriate  scale  for  clinical  supply.  This  process  was  compared  with  the manufacturing process proposed for the commercial production by means of a bioequivalence study. The composition of DepoCyte used during clinical trials is the same as that intended for commercial distribution. The basic steps in the process and the composition of the chemicals used in production of DepoCyte have not changed during the development and scale-up of the manufacturing process. Changes in the process relate to the equipment, the scale and the site of manufacture of the product. An aseptic process that is totally enclosed manufactures DepoCyte. The product suspension is filled into vials and sealed under aseptic conditions. Vials  and  stoppers  used  to  fill  the  product  are  cleaned,  then  depyrogenated  (vials),  or  sterilized  by autoclaving  (stoppers).  Filling  equipment  that  contacts  the  product  is  sterilized  by  autoclaving. Sterilization and depyrogenation component validation has been performed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Validation  of  the  process  has  been  performed  on  three  nominal  batches  and  in  three  worst  case batches.

The product is being manufactured in a facility that holds the necessary Manufacturing Authorisation (see Annex II of the Opinion).

Determination of sterility and  monitoring of  bacterial endotoxins is performed according to the Ph. Eur. Impurity limits in the product specification are justified by toxicology studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Initial release data from the 10x scale validation batches were provided. Data on 13 commercial scale batches  have  also  been  provided.  All  results  indicate  a  reliable  and  consistent  performance  of  the product in clinical use.

## Stability of the product

Data were generated on nine batches. Photostability studies were carried out on a single (10x) batch. Twenty-four months data were available. The results support a shelf-life of 24 months.

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

In summary, the documentation of substances, materials, methods of production as well as the quality controls is sufficient to ensure a product of appropriate and consistent quality. Information has been provided  in  the  dossier  demonstrating  that  the  medicinal  product  is  made  in  compliance  with  the CPMP Note for Guidance on minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via medicinal products.

The  better  cytotoxic  profile  suggested  by  these  studies  for  DepoCyte,  coupled  to  the  already established  use  of  the  drug  in  the  treatment  of  haematologic  malignancies  in  humans,  justified  the subsequent  development  of  DepoCyte  for  intrathecal  administration  for  the  treatment  of  neoplastic meningitis of patients with solid tumours, taking into account the possibility that effective ara-C levels could persist in the CSF and intrathecal tissues without significant systemic exposure, at a dose lower than that used for systemic administration.

3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Ara-C  is  an  analogue  of  deoxycytidine  and  has  multiple  effects  on  DNA  synthesis.  It  undergoes phosphorylation to form ara-CTP, which competitively inhibits DNA polymerase α in  opposition to the normal substrate deoxycytidine 5'-triphosphate (dCTP). The effects of ara-C on DNA polymerase extend not only to semiconservative DNA replication, but also to DNA repair. More importantly, araC is incorporated into DNA. This feature is the major cytotoxic lesion in ara-C-treated cells. Drugs like aphidicolin which prevent the ara-C incorporation into DNA also block its cytotoxicity. Pharmacodynamics In vitro studies The  clinical  efficacy  of  ara-C  is  dependent  on  the  dose  and  on  the  schedule  because  of  its  short biological half-life. Ara-C completely inhibited multiplication of mouse L-cells in culture during an exposure interval from 4 to 28 hours but had no effect on cell viability. At a higher concentration of it slowly  decreased  the  survival.  Also  in  cultured  human  myeloid  leukaemia  cells,  B-lymphoid leukaemia cells and T-lymphoid leukaemia cells, the concentrations of ara-C inducing a 50% cell kill over a 48 hours exposure were in the range of 0.3, 2 and 0.02 µ M respectively. In cultured normal human  bone  marrow  cells,  after  24  hours  of  incubation,  the  IC50  of  ara-C  was  1.7 µ M  and  was decreased to 0.008 µ M when the incubation time was prolonged up to 5 days. The dependence of the cytotoxic effect of ara-C on the schedule has been further elucidated by studies of  cultured  bone  marrow  cells  from  untreated  patients  with  acute  myeloid  leukaemia,  where  it  was observed that cytotoxicity increased when cells were exposed for long periods, thus allowing lower concentrations to be effective. In vivo studies No  pharmacodynamic  studies  with  DepoCyte  were  conducted  related  to  the  proposed  indication. However,  some  studies  using  ara-C  entrapped  in  multivesicular  liposomes  are  available  and  were related to the subsequent development of DepoCyte. The i.p.  administration  of  ara-C  in  multivesicular  liposomes has  been shown  to prolong  survival  in mice inoculated with L1210 cells. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Drug interactions

Although drug interactions have been reported following the IV administration of ara-C, the difference in clearance of ara-C from the CSF and plasma is so large that no clinically significant levels of ara-C

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

are found in the plasma. Likewise, the medicinal products for which interactions have been reported generally do not cross the blood-brain barrier well enough to interact significantly with ara-C.

## Pharmacokinetics

## Introduction

Seven pharmacokinetic studies  were  conducted  in  rodents  and  primates.  Two  of  these  studies  used preliminary formulations. Additional studies examined and compared the intrathecal pharmacokinetics of 3 H-cytarabine and 14 C-DOPC with those of standard ara-C.

## Absorption and Distribution

After lumbar injection of DepoFoam-encapsulated 3 H-ara-C in rats, the radiolabel rapidly distributed throughout the neuraxis with peak levels at 160 minutes post-dose. Cisternal-to-lumbar CSF ratios of the  radiolabel  were  &lt;  1  indicating  that  the  active  substance  preferentially  resided  near  the  injection site.  The  cisternal/lumbar  ratio  was  greater  for 3 H  (active  substance)  than  for 14 C  (lipid)  which provided  evidence  that  the  free  active  substance  has  greater  mobility  along  the  neuraxis  than  the DepoFoam particles. Similar biphasic CSF and plasma kinetic profiles of 3 H and 14 C indicated that the release of active substance was directly related to the breakdown of the DepoFoam particles. The 3 H label distributed into the systemic circulation after release of the DepoFoam particles. After lumbar intrathecal injection of ara-C encapsulated into DepoFoam prepared with 14 C-DOPC, the 14 C  label  rapidly  distributed  throughout  the  neuraxis,  preferentially  residing  near  the  injection  site. About 10% of the radiolabel was incorporated into CNS tissues early post-dose and remained stable still being present at 504 days post-dose. The amount incorporated into CNS tissues decreased from the  injection  site,  which  was  most  likely  driven  by  the  high  concentration  gradient  achieved immediately  post-dose.  The  detection  of 14 C  in  the  plasma  throughout  the  study  indicated  that  the DepoFoam particles break down in the intrathecal space and lipids are liberated and apparently cleared from the CNS. Metabolism No formal  metabolism  studies  were  conducted  with  DepoFoam-encapsulated  ara-C.  However,  data was obtained from the double-labelled studies in the rat. The disappearance of 3 H radiolabel from the CSF and CNS tissues was associated with a concomitant increase in the amount of 3 H label in the plasma. The moiety(ies) bearing this label were not characterised. The  presence  of 14 C  as  phospholipid,  monoglycerides  and/or  fatty  acids  in  plasma  indicated  that DOPC or the hydrolysis products released during DepoFoam particle breakdown were cleared from the CNS into the periphery. The lipids might be incorporated into standard catabolic pathways. Excretion and half-life Data  from  the  double-labelled  studies  in  the  rat  indicated  that  following  its  release  from  the DepoFoam matrix, ara-C is cleared from the CSF. Like standard ara-C it may be removed from the central compartment by bulk flow with little metabolism. Once in the systemic circulation the 3 H label appeared to be primarily cleared by the kidneys as evidenced by the accumulation of 3 H label in the urine. Concerning DOPC, a large part of the applied 14 C dose could not be accounted for by the end of the study.  About  10%  was  incorporated  into  CNS  tissues,  there  was  minor  incorporation  of  label  into peripheral tissues, no excretion in faeces and &lt;6% excreted in the urine. Most of this radiolabel might eventually have been expired as 14 CO2. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the rat the half-life of ara-C within the cranial compartment following a 1 mg dose was 148 hours, whilst that of an equal dose of standard ara-C was 2.7 hours. Free ara-C concentrations in the CSF remained  above  the  estimated  minimal  cytotoxic  level  of  0.1  µg/ml  for  16  days  post-dose  with  of DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C.

In  a  similar  study  in  the  monkey  dosed  with  DepoFoam-encapsulated  ara-C  at  2  mg,  ara-C concentrations in  lumbar  CSF decreased  biexponentially with initial and  terminal half-lives  of  14.6 and 156 hours respectively whilst that of standard ara-C was 44 minutes. CSF concentrations of the active substance remained above the minimal cytotoxic level for more than 672 hours post-dose.

In  more  recent  intrathecal  dosing  studies  employing  clinical-  and  commercial-scale  DepoFoamencapsulated ara-C in monkeys, elimination phase half-lives were 16.0 to 21.8 hours for ara-C in CSF

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

following intrathecal administration of a single 6 mg dose. As described above, concentrations of the active substance decreased biexponentially with an initial rapid decline over the first 12 to 24 hours followed by a slower decline over the next few days. Mean residence times in the CSF ranged from 3 to 5.6 hours; the active substance was no longer detectable by 120 hours post-dose.

## Drug interactions

Following intrathecal administration, no clinically significant levels of ara-C have been found in the plasma.  Medicinal  products  for  which  interactions  have  been  reported  generally  do  not  cross  the blood-brain barrier well, therefore the likelihood of interactions is small.

## Toxicology

Single-dose toxicology Two studies  were conducted in Rhesus monkeys. In both studies of DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C was administered via the intrathecal route. Although both studies were conducted in 1995 they were not in accordance with GLP. The  purpose  of  the  first  study  was  to  establish  the  MTD,  to  gather  preliminary  toxicokinetic information  and  to  establish  dexamethasone  dosing  (to  be  used  to  alleviate  any  inflammatory responses  due  to  the  long  duration  of  ara-C  exposure)  for  the  subsequent  multi-dose  study. DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C was administered by bolus injection and/or infusion. A dose of 5 mg was well tolerated, at 10 mg transient tremors and convulsion were seen, and at 15 mg most animals developed stiffness of back and hypoactivity within 10 days of dosing. One animal, dosed at 20 mg, developed acute inflammation of the meninges in association with a catheter infection. The  purpose  of  the  second  study  was  to  assess  the  acute  toxicity  and  to  gather  toxicokinetic  data following a MTD dose which was considered to be 10 mg based on the results of the first study. A dose of 10 mg was administered by infusion, followed after a treatment-free period by another dose of 10 mg by slow bolus injection. Overt signs of toxicity were limited to a stiffened back in the lumbar area. Slow bolus injection resulted in consistently greater CSF ara-C levels than infusion. Repeated-dose toxicology Eighteen Rhesus  monkeys  were  treated intrathecally by infusion.  The  doses  of  DepoFoamencapsulated  ara-C  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  the  single  dose  study.  Each  animal received  a  total  of  4  doses  of  test  article  (1  dose/cycle,  14  day  cycle).  Dexamethasone  was  coadministered to all animals. Animals were euthanised 14 days after the fourth dose except for 1 male and 1 female in the vehicle and high dose of DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C treatment groups which constituted the recovery groups and which were euthanised 93-202 days after the fourth dose. Overt signs of toxicity, limited to the group receiving the highest dose of DepoFoam encapsulated araC,  consisted  of  transient  recumbency  and  back  stiffness  in  2/6  animals.  Periodic  decreases  in  food consumption occurred in both of the DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C treated groups, although this did not produce a significant effect on body weight. The most notable histopathological findings occurred in all animals treated with DepoFoam particle based materials and was characterised by meningeal inflammation and/or astrocytic activation in brain and/or  spinal  cord  tissues.  Meningeal  inflammation  in  DepoFoam  control  or  of  DepoFoamencapsulated ara-C treated animals was slight in severity and diffusely spread throughout the spinal column.  No  evidence  of  meningeal  inflammation  was  reported  for  DepoFoam  or  of  DepoFoamencapsulated ara-C treated animals following the treatment-free period. Genotoxicity Ara-C has been shown to be mutagenic and clastogenic in vitro and in vivo . Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Carcinogenicity

Although there was no evidence of carcinogenicity in rodent studies,  antimetabolites such as ara-C may  act  as  co-carcinogens.  It  is  likely  that  DepoCyte  will  have  the  mutagenic  and  carcinogenic potential of ara-C.

## Reproduction toxicity

Ara-C is a developmental toxicant and a teratogen in various species and several cytarabine-associated peri-  and  post-natal  toxicities  have  been  reported.  Therefore  it  is  likely  that  DepoCyte  would  have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

similar adverse effects on reproduction, although systemic exposure to ara-C following the proposed therapeutic use may be very small.

## Local tolerance

Local tolerance testing formed part of the toxicity studies conducted using the intrathecal route. No experimental data have been specifically generated.

## Special toxicity studies

The  particle  components  of  the  DepoFoam  matrix  are  synthetic  analogues  of  naturally  occurring lipids. The safety of DOPC may be supported by the extensive toxicology database available on highly purified  soya  phosphatidylcholine.  This  compound  was  of  low  toxicity  by  several  routes  of administration in several species. However, the intrathecal route was not tested. Concerning DPDG the  available  literature  indicated  that  liposomes  formulated  with  negatively  charged  phospholipids such  as  DPPG  were  well  tolerated  even  at  high  doses  when  administered  i.v.  to  mice.  Again  no information on the effects of intrathecal administration is available.

Ara-C is a well-known S phase-specific antimetabolite that, after intracellular activation to ara-CTP, inhibits DNA synthesis by competitively binding DNA polymerase; ara-C is also incorporated into the DNA, impairing repair mechanisms. The bone marrow and the gastrointestinal epithelium are targeted by ara-C with ensuing myelossupression and nausea, vomiting and mucositis. It is active in rapidly proliferating  lymphatic or  haematological malignancies. However, it is believed to be less active in solid tumours.

Environmental Risk Assessment Ara-C is extensively metabolised by patients. A large part (80%) of the administered dose is found in the  urine  by  24  hours.  Approximately  90%  of  the  urinary  output  is  the  inactive  metabolite  1β -Darabinofuranosyluracil (ara-U). Any discharge to aquatic or terrestrial ecosystems is minimal. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects The preclinical package of studies conducted with of DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C was limited. The product contains three novel lipid excipients (triolein, DOPC and DPPG). The pharmacokinetics of DOPC are not fully known. A large part of the radioactivity appeared to be unaccounted for, and might ultimately be expired as radiolabelled CO2. The number of animals used in the toxicology studies was very limited, and in the repeat dose toxicity studies  the  maximum  number  was  four,  and  not  nine,  as  intended  for  clinical  use.  This  has  been justified  by  the  fact  that  the  applied  dose  of  10  mg/animal  is  equivalent  to  100  mg/patient  or approximately 2 times the studied clinical dose. Based on this exposure, 4 cycles of treatment were considered sufficient. Of concern is that intrathecal administration of DepoFoam caused meningeal inflammation, which was evident  after  only  four  treatments.  This  is  particularly  relevant  in  view  of  the  concerns  about  the occurrence of arachnoiditis during clinical use. However, the meningeal inflammation appeared to be fully reversible after a lengthy treatment-free recovery period. 4. Clinical aspects The clinical data consisted of phase I, phase III and phase IV data with DepoCyte in various patient populations.  The  main  clinical  data  consisted  of  a  series  of  35  patients  from  a  phase  III  trial  of DepoCyte versus a  standard  formulation  of  ara-C  for  the  intrathecal  treatment  of  lymphomatous meningitis. Overall, 237 patients were entered in phase III and phase IV studies. Pharmacokinetic data were obtained as part of a phase I study (n=19) and 2 population pharmacokinetic studies (n=11 and 13 for the US and the European study, respectively). Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetics of ara-C were investigated in a phase I dose-ranging study after intraventricular and intralumbar administration of DepoFoam-encapsulated ara-C in patients with neoplastic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

meningitis. Nineteen patients with haematological and non-haematological neoplasia and a pathological diagnosis of leptomeningeal spread were enrolled.

A  fixed  dose  of  50  mg  was  selected  on  the  basis  of  the  phase  I  study,  which  concluded  that  the maximum  tolerated  dose  was  75  mg,  and  that  dexamethasone  should  be  given  for  5  days  with DepoCyte in all future studies.

Ara-C was measured in CSF samples obtained before each injection and at several time points after the injection. These samples were analysed for free and encapsulated ara-C and for ara-U. Ara-C and ara-U  levels  were  also  measured  in  plasma  samples  by  HPLC.  The  maximum  tolerated  dose  was defined  as  the  one  that  produced  grade  II  or  worse  toxicity  in  the  CNS,  according  to  the  CALGB criteria, or grade III in any other organ system.

In  addition  an  intrathecal  PK  substudy  of  the  phase  III  trial  was  performed  to  determine  the pharmacokinetics  of  ara-C  after  the  administration  of  50  mg  of  DepoCyte  via  the  intra-ventricular versus the intra-lumbar routes in patients with neoplastic meningitis as well as to compare the PK of two different formulations of DepoCyte. Distribution and half-life Following intrathecal DepoCyte administration in patients, either by injection into the lumbar sac or through an intraventricular  reservoir,  peaks  of  free  ara-C  were  observed  within  5  hours  in  both  the ventricular and lumbar sac. These peaks were followed by a biphasic elimination profile consisting of an initial sharp decline and subsequent slow decline with a terminal phase half-life of 100 to 263 hours over a dose-range of 12.5 mg to 75 mg. In contrast, intrathecal administration of 30 mg free ara-C has shown a biphasic CSF concentration profile with a terminal phase half-life of about 3.4 hours. Pharmacokinetic parameters of intrathecal administration of DepoCyte  (75 mg)  in neoplastic meningitis  patients  following  injection  into  either  the  lumbar  sac  or  through  an  intraventricular reservoir suggest that exposure to the drug in the ventricular or lumbar spaces is similar regardless of the route of administration. Compared to free ara-C, DepoCyte  increases the biological t1/2 by a factor of 27 to 71 depending upon the  route  of  administration  and  the  compartment  sampled.  Encapsulated  ara-C  concentrations  and DepoFoam particle counts followed a similar distribution pattern. AUCs of free and encapsulated araC after ventricular injection of DepoCyte appeared to increase linearly with increasing dose, indicating that the release of ara-C from DepoCyte and the pharmacokinetics of ara-C are linear in human CSF. Systemic exposure to ara-C was determined to be negligible following intrathecal administration of 50 and 75 mg of DepoCyte. Metabolism and elimination The  primary  route  of  elimination  of  ara-C  is  metabolism  to  the  inactive  compound  ara-U, ( 1β -Darabinofuranosyluracil  or  uracil  arabinoside) followed  by  urinary  excretion  of  ara-U.  In  contrast, conversion  to  ara-U  in  the  CSF  is  negligible  after  intrathecal  administration  because  of  the significantly lower cytidine deaminase activity in the CNS tissues and CSF. The CSF clearance rate of ara-C is similar to the CSF bulk flow rate of 0.24 ml/min. Drug interaction studies Interaction  studies  using  DepoCyte  have  not  been  conducted.  Several  drug  interactions  have  been noted  in  patients  receiving  ara-C,  including  inhibition  of  gentamicin  and  flucytosine  activity  and reduced  absorption  of  digoxin.  DepoCyte  is  likely  to  have  a  similar  drug  interaction  profile  to  the standard  agent;  however,  because  plasma  levels  are  negligible  following  intrathecal  DepoCyte administration, the risk of systemic interactions appears small. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical efficacy

The  main  clinical  data  are  derived  from  a  randomised  clinical  trial  of  DepoCyte versus a  standard formulation of ara-c for the intrathecal treatment of lymphomatous meningitis. The main clinical data submitted  with  the  original  application  consisted  of  the  data  for  28  patients  with  lymphomatous meningitis.  During  the  evaluation,  an  update  was  provided  and  in  total,  data  on  35  patients  with lymphomatous meningitis from the phase III trial were presented. Supportive data was provided from a small subgroup of lymphomatous meningitis patients (n=6) included in the phase I study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  phase  III  trial  in  lymphomatous  meningitis  was  one  of  three  phase  III  trials  conducted  with DepoCyte.  The  remaining  two  studies  were  a  phase  III  trial  of  DepoCyte versus methotrexate  in patients with solid tumours (n=61 with 31 and 30 patients randomised to DepoCyte and methotrexate, respectively) and a phase III  trial of DepoCyte versus a standard formulation of  ara-c in leukaemic meningitis, which was terminated prematurely (n=7).

Data  from  a  Phase  IV  study  in  solid  tumour  neoplastic  meningitis  were  also  provided  (n=89  and n=110 for the initial application and the update, respectively).

## Main clinical study

## Patients and methods

The  pre-specified  sample  size  was  40  patients.  Due  to  insufficient  recruitment  at  the  end  of  the recruitment period, an unplanned interim analysis was carried out and the results were submitted with the marketing authorisation application. The interim analysis was based on 28 patients (14 versus 14 for  DepoCyte versus ara-C  respectively).  Thereafter,  7  additional  patients  completed  treatment  and updated clinical efficacy results were provided (final analysis). In total, the study enrolled 35 patients (18 versus 17 for DepoCyte versus ara-C respectively).

Eligibility  criteria  included  histologically  proven  diagnosis  of  lymphoma  (AIDS  or  non-AIDS), positive cytology in CSF sampled from the lateral ventricle or the lumbar sacc, no compartmentalisation of CSF flow, age ≥ 3, expected survival ≥ 2 months and recovery from toxicity due  to  prior  intrathecal  treatment.  Prospective  stratification  according  to  AIDS-related versus nonAIDS-related lymphomatous meningitis was implemented. Patients were randomised to receive DepoCyte 50 mg once every 2 weeks or free ara-C 50 mg twice a week for 1 month (induction). Patients whose CSF cytology converted to negative and who did not have neurologic progression received  an  additional  3  months  of  consolidation  therapy.  For  patients randomised to DepoCyte, consolidation therapy consisted of DepoCyte 50 mg every 14 days for one month  and  then  monthly  for  2  months.  For  patients  randomised  to  the  control  arm,  consolidation treatment consisted of unencapsulated ara-C 50 mg once weekly for one month followed by 50 mg every  2  weeks  for  two  months.  Patients  who  remained  in  remission  at  the  end  of  consolidation treatment  were  to  continue  for  an  additional  four  months  of  maintenance  treatment.  Maintenance treatment  consisted  of  DepoCyte  50  mg  monthly  for  4  months,  or  free  ara-C  50  mg  monthly  for  4 months, for the two treatment arms, respectively. Concomitant systemic chemotherapy or limited field radiotherapy were allowed. Local irradiation had to be given for symptomatic or bulky CNS disease and concurrent partial brain or limited-field spinal radiation therapy was strongly recommended for radiologically visible CNS disease. Whole brain or cranio-spinal irradiation during the induction, consolidation and maintenance periods was prohibited. The primary efficacy endpoint was response defined as confirmed cytological conversion (complete cytological  response  according  to  central  cytology  review)  and  lack  of  neurologic  progression evaluation at the time of assessment (4 weeks after the beginning of treatment). Central cytopathology review was blinded to study treatment and chronology of CSF samples and was carried out on all CSF cytology slides after study completion. The primary analysis of response rate was carried out in the intent-to-treat population (all randomised patients). Other  endpoints  investigated  were  duration  of  response  and  progression-free  survival,  neurological signs and symptoms, Karnofsky performance status, quality of life (QOL) and overall survival. QOL assessments  used  the  FACT-CNS  instrument  and  Mini  Mental  State  examination.  Exploratory analyses of quality of life were performed using Q-TWIST (Time without symptoms and toxicity) and QOL-adjusted survival analysis methodology. The trial was performed according to GCP standards and agreed international ethical principles. Results Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  the  entire  population  (n=35),  8  patients  in  the  DepoCyte  arm  and  5  in  the  ara-C  arm  received concurrent  systemic  chemotherapy.  Also,  4  patients  in  the  DepoCyte  arm  and  1  in  the  ara-C  arm received concurrent CNS radiotherapy. One patient who obtained a complete response with DepoCyte received concurrent whole brain irradiation for CSF flow block (despite whole brain irradiation being

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

prohibited  by  the  protocol).  Data  on  the  extent  of  CNS  irradiation  treatments  prior  to  or  during chemotherapy were lacking.

In the interim analysis, response rate was 10/14 (71%, 95% binomial confidence interval: 42, 92) in the  DepoCyte  arm versus 2/14  (14%  patients,  95%  binomial  confidence  interval:  2,  43)  in  the unencapsulated ara-C arm and a statistically significant association between treatment and response was observed (Fisher's exact test p-value = 0.006).

In the final analysis, response rate was 13/18 (72%, 95% binomial confidence interval: 47, 90) in the DepoCyte  arm versus 3/17 (18%  patients,  95%  binomial  confidence  interval: 4, 43) in the unencapsulated ara-C arm and a statistically significant association between treatment and response was  observed  (Fisher's  exact  test  p-value  =  0.002).  Response  scored  on  the  basis  of  the  local institutional  non-blinded  cytologist's  reading  was  16/18  (89%)  in  the  DepoCyte  arm versus 6/17 (35%)  in  the  free  ara-C  arm.  Duration  of  response  was  similar  across  treatment  arms.  The  median duration of response was 34 versus 16 days for DepoCyte versus ara-C, respectively.

It  is  acknowledged  that,  despite  the  small  sample  size,  this  is  the  largest  randomised  trial  ever performed  in  this  patient  population.  In  this  population,  DepoCyte  produced  a  high  response  rate according to rigorously defined criteria and independent central review of responses was carried out. Although strong evidence to support a claim of superiority of  DepoCyte compared to conventional unencapsulated ara-C is lacking, the observed response rate may indicate that inferiority of DepoCyte is unlikely.

Neurological  progression-free  survival  was  not  statistically  significantly  different  between  the  two treatment  arms  (n=35;  median:  77 versus 48  days  for  DepoCyte versus ara-C,  respectively). Cytological progression-free survival was also not statistically significantly different across treatment arms (n=28; median: 61 versus 33 days for DepoCyte versus ara-C, respectively). Overall survival was similar  across  treatment  arms  (n=35;  median:  97 versus 96  days  for  DepoCyte versus ara-C, respectively). Karnofsky  performance  status,  Mini  Mental  State  and  the  FACT-CNS  instrument  did  not  show statically  significant  differences  between  the  groups.  No  statistically  significant  difference  in  time without  toxicity  due  to  either  treatment  or  progression  was  noted  by  Q-TWIST  analysis  (n=35; median: 115 versus 68 days for DepoCyte versus ara-C, respectively). Other clinical efficacy data From  the  supportive  clinical  data  submitted,  3  out  of  6  patients  with  in  lymphomatous  meningitis showed  a  complete  cytological  response.  No  patients  showed  improvements  in  neurological  status. The median survival time for patients with lymphoma was 86 days. Discussion on clinical efficacy A  statistically  significant  difference  in  favour  of  DepoCyte  for  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  is claimed  based  on  the  the  open  label,  randomised  trial  comparing  DepoCyte  and  conventional unencapsulated ara-C in 28 patients with lymphomatous meningitis. Similar results are claimed on the basis of the final analysis carried out in 35 patients. Despite the claimed statistical significance of the observed results, due to the small sample size and the  methodological  drawbacks  of  unplanned  analyses,  the  main  clinical  trial  in  lymphomatous meningitis fails to show any compelling evidence of superior clinical efficacy of DepoCyte compared to conventional ara-C. A low response rate for the standard arm was noted compared to historical series. It is possible that this could be at least in part explained by the strict response criteria used in the study. No apparent pattern in response by concomitant treatments was noted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

More  importantly,  DepoCyte  has  a  more  convenient  schedule  of  administration  compared  to conventional unencapsulated ara-C, as it reduces the need for multiple injections and this may have a favourable  impact  on  quality  of  life.  Other  intrathecal  chemotherapy  programs  commonly  used  in Europe require 2-3 lumbar punctures each week.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical safety

The safety data concerning DepoCyte mainly consist of data from patients who received the 50 mg dose of DepoCyte. Additional safety data were obtained from 9 patients who received subcutaneous DepoCyte, and 9 other patients who received other doses than 50 mg DepoCyte (in the pilot study). In  the  main  clinical  study,  17/18  and  16/17  patients  actually  started  treatment  with  DepoCyte  and unencapsulated ara-C, respectively. In the phase III trial of DepoCyte versus methotrexate in patients with solid tumours (n=61), 29/31 and 30/30 actually started treatment  with  DepoCyte  and methotrexate, respectively. Adverse events were graded according to CALGB Expanded CTC criteria. The  total  number  of  patients  actually  treated  with  DepoCyte  and  the  total  number  of  cycles administered in the various studies included in the safety database are summarised in Table 1.

<!-- image -->

|                                 | Total No. patients   |   Total No. cycles |
|---------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------|
| Lymphomatous meningitis         | 17                   |                 89 |
| Solid tumour meningitis         | 29                   |                102 |
| Leukaemic meningitis            | 4                    |                 18 |
| Phase IV trial                  | 110                  |                386 |
| US pharmacokinetics trial       | 11                   |                 44 |
| European pharmacokinetics trial | 13                   |                 50 |
| Total                           | 184 longer           |                689 |

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Total number of patients actually treated with DepoCyte and total number of cycles administered in Phase III, IV and in the population pharmacokinetics studies Lymphomatous meningitis Solid tumour meningitis Leukaemic meningitis Phase IV trial US pharmacokinetics trial European pharmacokinetics trial Total Adverse events, serious adverse event/deaths Treatment-related  adverse  events  are  shown  in  Table  2.  In  the  main  clinical  study  of  patients  with lymphomatous meningitis, the more frequently observed Grade 3-4 treatment-related adverse events for DepoCyte (total number of cycles = 89) were headache, which was observed in 5 cycles (5.6 %), arachnoiditis in 4 cycles (4.5%) and neutropenia in 3 cycles (3.3%). Other treatment-related adverse events included agitation, abnormal CSF chemistries, confusion, fever, somnolence, thrombocytopenia, each observed in 2 cycles (2.2%), whilst asthenia, hydrocephalus, hypestesia, pain, vomiting were each observed in 1 cycle (1.2%). For unencapsulated ara-C (n=56.25), the observed Grade 3-4 treatment-related adverse events were asthenia, headache, somnolence, thinking abnormal, each observed in 1 cycle (1.8%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2. Treatment-related adverse events of any grade per cycle (Phase III study in lymphomatous meningitis)

|                              | DepoCyte Total No. of cycles=89 No. of cycles (%)   | Ara-C Total No. of cycles=56.25 a No. of cycles (%)   |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Abdominal pain               | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Agitation                    | 4 ( 4.5)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Anaemia                      | 0 ( 0 )                                             | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Anorexia                     | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Arachnoiditis b              | 5 ( 5.6)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Asthenia                     | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 5 ( 8.9)                                              |
| Cerebrospinal fluid abnormal | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 ) authorised                                    |
| Confusion                    | 6 ( 6.7)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Deafness                     | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Diarrhoea                    | 0 ( 0 )                                             | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Dizziness                    | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Fever                        | 7 ( 7.9)                                            | 3 ( 5.3)                                              |
| Headache                     | 21 (23.6)                                           | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Hydrocephalus                | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Hypesthesia                  | 3 ( 3.4)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Nausea                       | 8 ( 9.0)                                            | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Neutropenia                  | 3 ( 3.4)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Pain                         | 4 ( 4.5)                                            | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Paresthesia                  | 0 ( 0 )                                             | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Peripheral oedema            | 2 ( 2.2) longer                                     | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Somnolence                   | 6 ( 6.7)                                            | 2 ( 3.6)                                              |
| Thinking abnormal            | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Thrombocytopenia             | 2 ( 2.2)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Vertigo                      | 2 ( 2.2) no                                         | 0 ( 0 )                                               |
| Vomiting                     | 7 ( 7.9)                                            | 0 ( 0 )                                               |

a Cycle length definition: Cycle length was 2 weeks during which the patient received either 1 dose of DepoCyte or 4 doses of ara-C or methotrexate. Ara-C and methotrexate patients not completing all 4 doses are counted as a fraction of a cycle. b Arachnoiditis: defined according to individual physician's criteria. Drug-induced arachnoiditis, a syndrome manifested primarily by headache, nausea, vomiting, fever, neck  rigidity,  neck  or  back  pain,  meningism,  CSF  pleocytosis,  with  or  without  altered  state  of consciousness was the most common adverse event. A more detailed analysis of this syndrome, using an objective definition was produced (Table 3). Arachnoiditis was defined as the occurrence, within 4 days of the injection, of either: · Neck rigidity, neck pain or meningism, or · At least two of the following at the same time: nausea, vomiting, headache, fever, back pain or CSF pleocytosis. Arachnoiditis was graded based on the most severe of the constituent adverse events. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The proportion of patients who had at least one episode of arachnoiditis in all trials of DepoCyte was about 49% of patients treated with DepoCyte, compared to about 33 - 42% of patients who received conventional therapy. In 19% of patients treated with DepoCyte, possible or definite cases of serious arachnoiditis associated with alterations in level of consciousness were observed. On a per-cycle basis, there was no difference in overall occurrence of grade 3-4 arachnoiditis across treatment arms in the main clinical study (Table 3). A retrospective analysis suggested that use of dexamethasone reduced the incidence of arachnoiditis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3. Arachnoiditis a per cycle

|                     | Lymphomatous Meningitis (Phase III)   | Lymphomatous Meningitis (Phase III)   | Solid Tumour Meningitis (Phase III)   | Solid Tumour Meningitis (Phase III)   | Solid Tumour Meningitis (Phase IV)   |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Total No. of cycles | DepoCyte 89                           | Ara-C 56.25                           | DepoCyte 102                          | MTX 69.5                              | DepoCyte 386                         |
| Grade 3-4           | 6%                                    | 7%                                    | 4%                                    | 3%                                    | 8%                                   |
| Any Grade           | 18%                                   | 16%                                   | 23%                                   | 19%                                   | 17%                                  |

| Adverse Event         | DepoCyte Phase III, IV and population pharmacokinetic studies   | Ara-C Phase III study in Lymphomatous Meningitis no   | Methotrexate Phase III study in Solid Tumour Meningitis   |
|-----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Total No. of cycles a | 689                                                             | 56.25                                                 | 69.5                                                      |
| Headache              | 25%                                                             | 12%                                                   | 22%                                                       |
| Nausea                | 19%                                                             | 16%                                                   | 17%                                                       |
| Vomiting              | 17% product                                                     | 16%                                                   | 24%                                                       |
| Fever                 | 13%                                                             | 21%                                                   | 12%                                                       |
| Back pain             | 11%                                                             | 9%                                                    | 14%                                                       |
| Convulsions           | 7%                                                              | 2%                                                    | 9%                                                        |
| Neck pain             | 5%                                                              | 4%                                                    | 3%                                                        |
| Neck rigidity         | 3%                                                              | 4%                                                    | 0%                                                        |
| Hydrocephalus         | 2%                                                              | 0%                                                    | 3%                                                        |
| Meningism             | 1%                                                              | 4%                                                    | 0%                                                        |

a Arachnoiditis: objective definition in the text. b Cycle length definition: see table 2. Another analysis focussed on other symptoms of meningeal irritation and included any adverse events, which could possibly be clinical representations of meningeal irritation in the pooled patient population (Table 4). Table 4. Adverse events possibly reflecting meningeal irritation per cycle (in patients who started protocol treatment in the Phase III, IV and in the population pharmacokinetics studies) a Cycle length definition: see Table 2. As anticipated in this patient population, serious adverse events were common and occurred with a similar  frequency  in  patients  receiving  either  DepoCyte,  conventional  unencapsulated  ara-C,  or methotrexate. One treatment-related death was reported from the pilot study. This was associated with encephalopathy developing 36 hours after an intraventricular dose of 125 mg DepoCyte. One possibly treatment-related death, involving status epilepticus, was reported from the PK study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Discussion on clinical safety

Treatment-related arachnoiditis was the most common adverse event although the precise relationship with treatment was difficult to assess in this patient population. The incidence of arachnoiditis was similar  in  patients  treated  with  DepoCyte versus conventional  ara-C.  In  addition,  the  occurrence  of arachnoiditis did not result in DepoCyte treatment discontinuation. The arachnoiditis associated with DepoCyte was considered to be generally mild, reversible and easily managed with steroids.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation

## Quality

The documentation of substances, materials, methods of production as well as the quality controls is sufficient to ensure a product of appropriate and consistent quality. In conclusion, the quality of this product  is  considered  to  be  acceptable  when  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  defined  in  the SPC.

## Pre-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

Intrathecal administration of DepoFoam caused meningeal inflammation, which was evident after only 4  treatments.  This  was  of  concern  in  view  of  the  occurrence  of  arachnoiditis  during  clinical  use. However, the meningeal inflammation appeared to be fully reversible after a lengthy treatment-free recovery period. Clinical Efficacy The  main  clinical  trial  in  lymphomatous  meningitis  failed  to  show  any  compelling  evidence  of superior clinical efficacy of DepoCyte compared to conventional unencapsulated ara-C. However, the observed response rate indicated that inferiority of DepoCyte is unlikely. More importantly, however, DepoCyte  has  a  more  convenient  schedule  of  administration  compared  to  conventional  ara-C. Particularly, it reduces the need for multiple injections and this may impact quality of life favourably. Clinical Safety Like other intrathecally administered agents, DepoCyte produced some degree of meningeal irritation which,  however,  was  manageable,  did  not  lead  to  treatment  discontinuation.  Arachnoiditis  was  the most  common  adverse  event  observed  with  DepoCyte.  However,  the  arachnoiditis  associated  with DepoCyte  was  considered  to  be  generally  mild,  reversible  and  manageable.  The  incidence  of arachnoiditis  was  similar  in  patients  treated  with  DepoCyte versus conventional  ara-C  and  did  not result  in  protocol  treatment  discontinuation.  In  conclusion,  from  the  clinical  safety  data  presented DepoCyte did not show new toxicity compared to standard ara-C. Benefit/risk assessment The main clinical trial in lymphomatous meningitis failed to show compelling evidence of superior clinical  efficacy  of  DepoCyte  compared  to  conventional  ara-C.  Although  a  statistically  significant association  between  response  and  treatment  was  noted,  results  were  difficult  to  interpret,  due  to methodological difficulties related with unplanned interim analyses. However, in an oral explanation, the applicant provided some justification for this methodological approach, based on the difficulties of completing  the  intended  recruitment  due  to  the  complexity  of  performing  a  randomised  study  with intrathecal  regimens  in  this  patient  population.  Also,  despite  the  interim  analysis,  the  population included in the final analysis was close to the intended target recruitment. In addition, the randomised lymphomatous meningitis trial is the largest that has ever been completed with intrathecal treatment in this setting. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  CPMP  concluded  that,  from  a  point  of  view  of  clinical  efficacy,  enough  evidence  had  been submitted to confirm an at least similar activity compared to standard ara-C. Standard ara-C treatment was considered to be an adequate reference treatment in this patient population, although the extent to which  this  treatment  is  established  in  the  management  of  this  rare  condition  remained  a  matter  of debate.  In  view  of  the  more  convenient  schedule  of  administration  of  DepoCyte,  compared  to conventional  unencapsulated  ara-C,  the  clinical  efficacy  data  presented  and  the  acceptable  safety profile, the benefit risk profile of DepoCyte was considered to be favourable.

## Recommendation

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  DepoCyte  in  the  treatment  of  intrathecal  treatment  of  lymphomatous meningitis was favourable, and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation for the indication: 'Intrathecal treatment of lymphomatous meningitis.  In the majority of patients such treatment will be part of symptomatic palliation of the disease'.