---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:06:28
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/dynepo-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: dynepo-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 9.8140555
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 08:46:34.295125
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion and scientific discussion on procedures, which have been finalised before 1 March 2002. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Medicinal product no longer authorised Epoetin delta is a recombinant human erythropoietin produced by an ATCC continuous human cell line using gene activation technology. It is indicated in 'Treatment of anaemia in patients with chronic renal failure. It may be used in patients on dialysis and patients not under dialysis'. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Dynepo is a ready to use aqueous solution for injection, available in glass vials or in glass pre-filled syringes with fixed needle. Composition The products are composed of Epoetin delta and excipients commonly used in this type of product: sodium phosphate monobasic monohydrate, sodium phosphate dibasic heptahydrate, polysorbate 20 (antiadsorbent), sodium chloride (osmotic agent) and water for injections. The finished product is presented either in vials (2000, 3000, 4000 and 10000 IU/ ml for a delivery volume of 1 ml) or in pre-filled syringes (1000, 2000, 3000, 4000 and 10000 IU for a delivery volume of 0,5, 0,5, 0,3, 0,4 and 0,5 ml respectively). Active substance The active substance of Dynepo, epoetin delta, is human erythropoietin prepared using gene activation technology from the culture of a continuous human cell line. Epoetin delta has the same amino acid sequence and glycosylation pattern as human erythropoetin. The use of the continuous human cell line has been satisfactorily addressed. The  applicant  has  provided  a  detailed  description  of  the  inserted  DNA  sequences  and  the  cell  line development.  The  master  cell  bank  and  working  cell  bank,  prepared  from  a  selected  clone,  were adequately tested for viability, sterility, mycoplasma and viruses. Fermentation Epoetin delta is produced by a fermentation process that is comprised of cell expansion of the working cell bank, inoculation of cell culture vessels and cell growth in a large scale fermentor. At the end of the fermentation phase, the cells are harvested and the supernatant is further processed. Purification

Purification is accomplished by a sequence of chromatographic and filtration steps, including a viral filtration.  The  purification  process  has  been  developed  to  remove  process-  and  product  related impurities.

The  company  has  validated  the  fermentation  and  purification  process,  and  has  set  appropriate  inprocess  controls.  Information  has  been  provided  for  all  fermentation  media,  reagents  and  solvents used.  Satisfactory  information  has  been  submitted  to  demonstrate  both  TSE  compliance  and  viral safety.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Characterisation

Biochemical characterisation has been performed to investigate the primary structure as well as posttranslational modifications by a range of methods  (amino  acid composition and N-terminal sequencing; peptide mapping by reverse phase chromatography following trypsin or Glu-C digestion; native  and  denaturating  IEF;  MALDI-TOF-MS  (molecular  mass);  SDS  PAGE  after  glycosidase digestion; Circular Dichroism, oligosaccharide profiling and charge analysis; purity by RP-HPLC and by SDS-PAGE; in vitro activity by a commercial ELISA kit and in vivo potency determination using the exhypoxic polycythaemic mouse assay.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The purification process has been designed to remove isoforms with low potency. The low residual levels and size of DNA in the active substance are not considered a risk. Acceptable method validation data and reports have been provided. Manufacturing process validation has been performed on an acceptable number of batches demonstrating consistent production of the active substance. Satisfactory information has been provided on the critical steps of the manufacturing and delivery processes (culture, purification, characterisation and transportation). Appropriate specifications have been set for analysis of the active substance at release and at the end of the shelf-life. Other ingredients All excipients in the product (sodium phosphate monobasic, monohydrate; sodium phosphate dibasic, heptahydrate; polysorbate 20 (of vegetable origin); sodium chloride; water for injections) comply with the appropriate specifications and monographs of the current Ph. Eur. Satisfactory control specifications and certificates are provided for the packaging materials. Product development and finished product Buffer is prepared in a compounding vessel and filtered through a 0.22 µm filter. To this a pre-defined amount of active substance is added. Buffer solution is added to reach the target batch weight for the active substance. The formulated bulk is sterilised through two in-line 0.22 µ m filters and aseptically filled  in  vials  or  pre-filled  syringes.  The  manufacturing  process  for  the  finished  products  has  been validated  and  is  controlled  by  in-process  controls.  Specifications  have  been  set  for  testing  the formulated bulk prior to filtration. The  finished products (vials and pre-filled syringes) are tested according to agreed release specifications. Identification, bioassay and impurities by RP-HPLC testing are identical to those tests performed for purified bulk active substance, all of which have been validated. Monomer content is determined  by  SEC.  This  method  is  stability  indicating,  and  can  detect  increase  in  aggregates following stressed storage conditions. The exhypoxic mouse bioassay is used to determine potency. The release specifications  for  potency are 80-125  %  of stated  potency (of 178,000 U/mg).  Fiducial limits for potency not less than 64 % and not more than 156 % will be met (p=0.95). The bioassay has been  validated  for  accuracy,  specificity,  linearity,  repeatability,  intermediate  precision  and  between laboratory reproducibility. The  minor  deviations from  the bioassay described in the Ph.Eur. monograph are considered acceptable.

## Stability of the product

Real  time  stability  data  support  the  shelf  life  and  storage  conditions  as  described  in  the  product information.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

## In vivo studies

The pharmacodynamics of epoetin delta was investigated in rats and dogs during 1-month studies by either intravenous (iv) or subcutaneous (sc) administration.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The administration of epoetin delta, 3 times weekly, to both rats and dogs was demonstrated to increase erythropoiesis  within  7  days  and  resulted  in  a  dose-dependent  increase  in  haematocrit  (HCT), haemoglobin  (HGB),  reticulocyte-  and  red  blood  cell  (RBC)  production.  Where  iron  sources  were adequate, there was no associated fall in mean cell volume (MCV), mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) or mean cell haemoglobin concentration (MCHC). Epoetin delta was shown to be effective by both routes proposed for  clinical  administration.  Pharmacological  responses  increased  for  at  least  3  to  4  weeks after initiation of administration and declined toward normal values following cessation of exposure. There was a tendency for efficacy to fall with time, which may be associated with the formation of neutralising  antibodies  or  development  of  tolerance.  The  production  of  antibodies  in  pre-clinical models would not however be unexpected with the introduction of a human protein into a non-human system. However, it is noteworthy that during the clinical trials, there was no impact of tolerance and no indication of development of neutralising antibodies to epoetin delta based on the clinical response (see clinical part). In a chronic dog toxicology study, erythropoietic stimulation persisted throughout the 6-month treatment period. For similar doses, sc administration was associated with equal or greater erythropoietic effects compared to iv injection. Epoetin delta was shown to be comparable to epoetin alfa in both rats and dogs. General pharmacodynamics The pharmacodynamic effects of epoetin delta appear to be consistent with the known pharmacological  actions  of  erythropoietin.  A  battery  of  safety  pharmacology  studies  also  revealed effects consistent with the known properties of erythropoietin. Safety  pharmacology  studies  in  the  mouse,  rat,  guinea-pig  and  dog,  together  with  studies  using isolated rabbit Purkinje fibres was performed with epoetin delta. No  effects  on  the  central  nervous  or  respiratory  systems,  or  on  the  resting  membrane  potential  or action potential characteristics of isolated rabbit Purkinje fibres were detected. The administration of epoetin delta to conscious, transducer-implanted dogs resulted in minor ECG changes at 1240 U/kg, which was the highest concentration tested and approximately 10 times the anticipated clinical dose. In  addition,  changes  in  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  also  observed,  although  these  were considered to be secondary to either the effects on blood viscosity induced by the elevated HCT or to an  increase  in  total  peripheral  resistance.  Both  of  these  effects  have  been  postulated  as  possible mechanisms  responsible  for  the  development  of  hypertension  in  patients  treated  with  recombinant hamster/human erythropoietin. Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetics of epoetin delta was evaluated in the rat and dog following repeated s.c. or i.v. injection over periods of one to 6 months by measuring serum concentrations of erythropoietin.

Following i.v. Administration  the  initial  dose  exposure  in  rats,  as  indicated  by  AUC  ( 0-24h ),  was generally  linear.  In  dogs,  however,  disproportionate  increases  in  exposure  were  observed.  The magnitude of the difference was less pronounced at lower doses. The bioavailability of epoetin delta following s.c. Administration  was  approximately  50%  in  both  the  rat  and  the  dog,  compared  to  an equivalent i.v. dose. There were no significant gender differences with either species.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  t½  of s.c. doses  was  between  18  and  20  h,  compared  to  between  7  and  12  h  following i.v. injection, which suggests that slight accumulation of drug would be expected after administration 3 times  weekly,  although  no  clinically  significant  accumulation  would  be  anticipated.  Moreover, exposure  decreased  over  the  course  of  one-month,  however,  which  compensates  for  and  prevents accumulation and no accumulation of erythropoietin was thus observed in animals given epoetin delta 3-times  a  week.  ELISA  does  not  distinguish  between  endogenous  and  administered  EPO  and  falling AUC over time may thus suggest increased clearance, reduced endogenous production or both. However, the observed decrease in exposure over time following repeated intravenous administration did not have an impact on the clinical efficacy (see Clinical aspects). Furthermore, studies  conducted  with  epoetin delta and epoetin alfa have shown that the pharmacokinetic profiles are similar.

Both  epoetin  delta  and  epoetin  alfa  produced  dose-dependent  and  reversible  interrelated  effects associated  with  the  known  pharmacology  of  erythropoietin.  These  effects  included  erythropoietic stimulation,  evidence  of  iron  deficiency,  reduced  glucose  levels  and  bone  marrow  hypercellularity occasionally  progressing  to  myelofibrosis  at  doses  and  concentrations  above  those  projected  for clinical use. Myelofibrosis is an expected response following prolonged overstimulation of erythropoiesis as observed in rats and dogs with other erythropoietins. In addition, supraphysiological increases  in  red  cell  mass  led  to  increased  turnover  of  red  cell  components,  and  chronic  blood hyperviscosity and vascular stasis. Changes in numerous serum chemistry values were also observed, but  were  likely  due  to  the  hyperstimulation  of  erythropoiesis  and  increased  red  cell  metabolic demands,  and  hence,  are  most  likely  of  little  clinical  relevance.  The  morphological  findings  in  the spleen,  kidney,  liver  and  bone  marrow  are  considered  to  be  degenerative  manifestations  associated

Medicinal product no longer authorised No studies on distribution, metabolism and excretion were performed, which is acceptable given the similarity of epoetin delta to naturally occurring human erythropoietin. The metabolism and excretion of epoetin delta is expected to be similar to that of the endogenous material. No pharmacokinetic studies were performed with pregnant animals and this has been appropriately reflected in the SPC. Toxicology Single dose toxicity Single dose toxicity of epoetin delta was studied following i.v. administration of 0-62.000 U/kg in rats and 0-31.000 U/kg in dogs. All animals survived to termination and there were no unusual clinical signs or gross pathological findings. Repeat dose toxicity Studies of up to one and 3 months duration were performed in the rat and up to 6 months duration in the dog. Increased  mortality  and  histopathological  changes  in  kidney,  heart,  and  gastrointestinal  tract  were observed  after  3  months  of  i.v.  dosing  in  the  rat.  These  effects  are  likely  to  have  limited  clinical relevance  since  they  were  related  to  chronic  blood  hyperviscosity,  vascular  stasis,  thromboses, increased peripheral resistance and hypertension as reported in the literature. Hypoxia-induced liver damage secondary to anaemia probably also contributed to the increased  mortality. This have  been reported  in  a  variety  of  studies  in  which  human  erythropoietin  was  administered  to  rodents  and  is likely related to the formation of neutralising anti-epoetin delta antibodies which cross reacted with endogenous  rat  erythropoietin.  Such  an  immune-mediated  response  to  a  non-self  protein  in  rats  is unlikely to have clinical relevance. The effect of repeated i.v. administration of epoetin delta in the dog also included a comparison with epoetin alfa. Red colouration of skin, eyes, and gums were a common clinical feature noted in these studies. There were a number of unscheduled deaths for both compounds and the cause of death in many of these could not be conclusively determined from microscopic examinations but was likely related to the effects of polycythaemia on tissue perfusion.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with tissue hypoxia secondary to polycythemia and most of these changes appeared to resolve during the respective recovery periods.

Findings for both epoetin delta and epoetin alfa were similar and neither EP compound produced any systemic effects unrelated to erythropoietic stimulation.

## Immunotoxicity

Formation of anti-epoetin delta antibodies occurred in rats treated by either i.v. or s.c. administration and is considered to have contributed to the development of anaemia, hypoxia-induced liver damage and decreased survival in rats. Antibody formation was observed in a few dogs treated with epoetin delta for one month by either route of administration, but did not appear to induce any signs of toxicity and no antibody formation was detected in dogs treated for 3 or 6 months by iv administration.

In a pre- and post-natal development study using daily i.v. doses of up to 1500 U/kg from gestation day 6, through lactation and weaning, treatment-related pharmacological effects were observed on the F0  females  and  their  offspring.  Secondary  effects  on  the  physical  development  of  animals  of  the  F l generation  were  also  observed.  These  effects  were  generally  slight  or  moderate  and  did  not  impair normal  development  of  the  F1  generation  up  to  and  including  the  production  of  the  F 2 generation. Similar  effects  have  been  observed  in  previous  reproductive  toxicity  studies  with  recombinant hamster/human erythropoietin.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Genotoxicity Epoetin delta was found to be non-mutagenic and non-clastogenic when tested in a standard battery of in vivo and in vitro assays. Carcinogenicity No in  vivo carcinogenicity  studies  have  been  performed  with  epoetin  delta  since  it  is  considered similar to a human protein and it is non-genotoxic in a standard battery of tests. One in vitro cell proliferation assay was performed and was designed to compare the in vitro effects of epoetin delta and epoetin alfa on the growth of 6 different cell lines. Results of this study suggested that epoetin delta will act only on its intended target cells and will produce similar effects as normal human erythropoietin. Reproduction Toxicity In a rat fertility study, epoetin delta was well tolerated, producing a slight reduction of body weight gain and slight to moderate effects on semen at all dose-levels. These effects were not considered to be toxicologically significant as no adverse effects on either mating or fertility indices occurred and there were  no  histological  changes  observed  in  the  testes.  Similar  effects  on  sperm  parameters  and spermatozoids in rats were also observed with the comparator product epoetin alfa. Epoetin  delta,  when  administered  daily  by  i.v.  injection  to  pregnant  female  rats  at  doses  of  up  to 1500 U/kg  produced  no  signs  of  maternal  toxicity.  A  slight  reduction  of  foetal  body  weight  and delayed  ossification  of  numerous  bone  structures  were,  however,  observed.  There  was  no  dose relationship. These skeletal anomalies were not accompanied by morphological alterations and are not considered to be teratogenic effects. Similar effects were also observed in a rabbit teratogenicity study. These findings were also observed in animals treated with epoetin alfa, which is suggestive that they are class-related effects rather than compound specific.

## Local Tolerance

Epoetin  delta  as  a  ready-prepared  aqueous  solution,  was  injected  as  single  i.v.,  intra-arterial, paravenous, s.c. or intramuscular doses to groups of female albino New Zealand White rabbits. The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

injections  were  well  tolerated,  with  no  macroscopic  or  microscopic  evidence  of  increased  irritation compared to controls for all routes of administration.

Epoetin delta was also tested for pyrogenicity in male rabbits and no rectal temperature rises of more than 0.6 ˚ C above predose temperatures were observed over 3 hours following an i.v. administration. Therefore, epoetin delta is considered to be non-pyrogenic.

## Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk Assessment

Medicinal product no longer authorised No  formal  risk  assessment  has  been  conducted,  however,  epoetin  delta  is  very  similar  to  naturally occurring  human  erythropoietin.  As  already  stated,  it  would  be  expected  that  the  metabolism  and excretion  would  be  similar  to  that  of  the  endogenous  material  and  hence,  no  potentially  harmful effects to the environment are expected. Product interactions Interaction studies have not been performed, but it was considered acceptable to address this issue in the clinical part. Any evidence of product interactions will be reported post-authorisation. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects Overall  pharmacokinetic  and  pharmacodynamic  studies  provided  adequate  evidence  for  efficacy  of epoetin delta and consistent effects associated with the known pharmacology of erythropoietin were produced. The efficacy of epoetin delta was demonstrated in rats and dogs in a series of multidose studies and was shown to be equivalent to epoetin alfa. The pharmacokinetics of the compounds are also similar. The kinetics of epoetin delta are not linear, nor are they stable with time. However, the observation of a decrease in exposure following repeated intravenous administration, both pre-clinically and clinically, did not have an impact on the clinical efficacy (see Part IV: Clinical aspects). The pharmacodynamic effects of epoetin delta appear to be consistent with the known pharmacological actions of erythropoietin. The increase in blood pressure and decrease in heart rate observed in the safety pharmacology study are considered to be secondary to the effects of elevated HCT on blood viscosity, or an epoetin delta-mediated increase in total peripheral resistance. Both of these hypotheses have been suggested as mechanisms responsible for the development of hypertension in patients treated with recombinant epoetin alfa. The toxicological findings produced by epoetin delta are similar to those of epoetin alfa and includes no  systemic  effects  unrelated  to  erythropoietic  stimulation.  No  untoward  findings  were  seen  in reproduction or genotoxicity studies. Of minor concern, however, are the adverse effects on sperm morphology and motility and the reduced survival and ossification seen in F1 pups. In this case, the relationship to epoetin delta pharmacology is less  clear.  However,  as  there  were  no  effects  on  fertility  and  mating,  no  histological  changes  were observed  and  similar  effects  were  seen  with  epoetin  alfa,  it  is  likely  that  this  finding  is  of  no toxicological significance. Further, these effects were seen at doses far in excess of the clinical dose and are not considered to be toxicologically significant.

One in  vitro cell  proliferation  assay  was  performed,  which  indicated  that  epoetin  delta  only  caused increases  in  proliferation  in  cells  known  to  respond  to  erythropoietin  or  suspected  of  having erythropoietin receptors. In addition, positive effects of epoetin delta were always similar to those seen with epoetin alfa. Furthermore, the level and size of any residual host cell DNA in the finished product are such that there is no significant safety risk to patients.

## 4. Clinical aspects

Erythropoietin is an essential growth factor required for production of red blood cells. The stimulus for  erythropoietin  production  is  believed  to  be  the  oxygen  content  of  blood  delivered  to  the  renal peritubular  interstitial  cells.  When  the  peritubular  renal  cells  are  functioning  correctly,  individuals

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with low blood haemoglobin (HGB) concentrations will produce increased quantities of erythropoietin,  resulting  in  increased  red  blood  cell  production.  Chronic  renal  failure  (CRF)  is characterised by a progressive loss of kidney function resulting from inherited disorders or conditions such as diabetes mellitus or hypertension. Anaemia of CRF is a chronic condition where failure of the diseased kidney to produce sufficient quantities of erythropoietin is the predominant pathophysiologic mechanism.

Over the past fifteen years it has been shown that genetically engineered erythropoietin administered to  anaemic  CRF  patients  resulted  in  clinically  significant  increases  in  HGB.  Epoetin  alfa  has  been given to treat CRF anaemia in patients on dialysis as well as in those not yet receiving dialysis.

In CRF patients HGB started to increase with time for the four treatment groups from study day 10. Results were comparable between epoetin delta and epoetin alfa for the two doses evaluated and were not  statistically  differentiated  at  the  0.10  level.  Both  treatments  displayed  a  trend  of  dose  and concentration related  increases  in  the  pharmacodynamic  parameters  used  to  evaluate the  activity  of epoetin delta although not statistically significant. To detect an overall dose effect (i.e. between 50 and 100U/kg, p&lt;0.05) it was necessary to get an average of results for both epoetin delta and epoetin alfa.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Epoetin delta is a glycoprotein containing 165 amino acids with two disulfide bonds and four sites of carbohydrate  attachment.  Epoetin  delta  consists  of  human  erythropoietin  produced  by  genetic engineering in a continuous human cell line and can be given intravenously (i.v.) or subcutaneously (s.c.). For Epoetin delta it is recommended to adjust the dose individually to maintain the target haemoglobin in the range 10 to 12 g/dl. A starting dose is recommended of 50 IU/kg three times a week if given intravenously or twice a week if given subcutaneously. All  clinical  trials  were  performed  according  to  Good  Clinical  Practice  (GCP)  standards  and  agreed international  ethical  principles  such  as  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  the  ICH  E6  ICH  GCP guideline. Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics The pharmacodynamic effects of epoetin delta were examined in two 4-week clinical pharmacology studies. One  randomised,  double-blind, placebo-controlled, single followed by multiple dose, escalating study in twenty-one healthy male subjects. One randomised, double-blind, parallel group, epoetin  alfa-controlled,  single  followed  by  multi-dose  study in  forty  subjects  (60%  women)  with chronic renal failure requiring haemodialysis who had been receiving epoetin alfa for at least 90 days with resulting HGB values between 10 to 12 g/dl. The patients started with an haemoglobin between 10 and 12, but epoetin alfa was withdrawn until the haemoglobin fell by 20% or to 9 g/dL whichever was lower. Increases  in  four  main  parameters  were  used  to  define  the  pharmacodynamic  response: haemoglobin  (primary  parameter)  and  haematocrit,  reticuloyctes  count  and  total  erythrocyte  count (RBC) (secondary parameters). Epoetin delta was administered i.v. as a single dose, followed by three times weekly over a dose range of 15-100 U/kg in healthy subjects and 50 or 100 U/kg in chronic renal failure subjects. In  healthy  subjects  epoetin  delta  had  a  non-linear  dose-related  effect  on  the  pharmacodynamic parameters studied with increased HGB slope with increased dose (p=0.0001). The 15 IU/kg dose was close to the no-effect dose while 40U/kg and 100U/kg doses were distinguishable from placebo. Over a four week period the increase in haematocrit was 0.12 and 0.18 %/day with 40 and 100 IU/kg, which is comparable to results for epoetin alfa for the same two doses.

Based upon these preliminary data, clinical activity can be expected based on a starting dose of 50 U/kg,  three  times  weekly  within  1-2  weeks  of  initiating  therapy.  The  magnitude  and  onset  of  the response will be comparable to that of epoetin alfa.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetic properties of epoetin delta were examined in both healthy subjects (dose range 15  U/kg  to  100  U/kg)  and  subjects  with  chronic  renal  failure  (dose  range  50  U/kg  to  300  U/kg) following both i.v. and s.c. administration. The pharmacokinetics of i.v. epoetin delta in patients with CRF  were  similar  to  epoetin  alfa.  Following  i.v.  doses,  volume  of  distribution  approximates  total blood volume and ranges from 0.063 to 0.097 l/kg. The elimination half-life ranges from 4.7 to 13.2 hours in subjects with chronic renal failure and from 2.2 (15U/kg) to 6.3 (100U/kg) in healthy subjects (approximately 50% shorter). Measurable concentrations of epoetin delta are maintained in the serum for at least 24 hours following doses ranging from 50 U/kg to 300 U/kg. Clearance showed a general inverse relationship with dose in healthy individuals but not in patients with CRF. Exposure to epoetin delta increases proportionately in subjects with chronic renal failure following i.v. administration of 50 U/kg to 300 U/kg. No accumulation of epoetin delta was observed after repeated i.v. administration three times weekly in either healthy subjects or patients with CRF. Instead subchronic dosing three times weekly for four weeks resulted in a 30-40% decrease in exposure and half-life for both epoetin delta and epoetin alfa.

Clinical experience with epoetin delta was obtained from two phase II controlled studies, one phase III study with a controlled period (double-blind) and an uncontrolled period (open-label), and one phase III  uncontrolled (open-label) study. A total of 1308 chronic renal failure subjects with anaemia or a history  of  anaemia  were  treated  with  epoetin  delta  and  221  subjects  were  treated  with  the  active comparator,  epoetin  alfa.  There  were  677  subjects  who  received  epoetin  delta  during  controlled studies.  The  treatment  regimens  were  consistent  with  clinical  practice  and  European  Best  Practice Guidelines for the Management of Anaemia in patients with CRF and all patient were monitored for need of iron supplementation. A summary description of these studies is provided below:

Medicinal product no longer authorised Peak serum concentrations for s.c. administered epoetin delta occur between 8 and 36 hours following injection.  The  half-life  of  epoetin  delta  following  s.c.  administration  is  prolonged  compared  to  i.v. administration and  ranges  from  27  to  33 hours  in subjects with chronic renal failure.  The bioavailability of s.c. administered epoetin delta is between 26% (150 U/kg) and 36% (300 U/kg). The pharmacokinetics of single dose and multidose epoetin delta are comparable which is consistent with the lack of observed accumulation following chronic administration. The pharmacokinetic results are consistent with the known pharmacokinetics of erythropoietin and confirm the differences between subcutaneous and intravenous dosing. Interaction studies No formal pharmacokinetic interaction studies have been performed, which may be acceptable given the known pharmacology of erythropoietin and this is referred to in the SPC. Since epoetin delta is a protein, it is not expected to bind to other proteins and metabolic degradation is expected to follow the pathways of endogenous erythropoietin. Special groups Pharmacokinetics  in  children,  elderly  and  in  hepatic  insufficiency  populations  have  not  been established  with  epoetin  delta,  which  has  been  appropriately  reflected  in  the  SPC.  However,  a significant proportion of the efficacy trial population was over 65 years of age. In addition, a subgroup analysis of safety and efficacy for each of 3 populations (non-elderly, &lt; 65 yr, elderly 65-75 yr. and extreme elderly, &gt;75 yr) indicates that clinically relevant pharmacokinetic differences are unlikely. In view  of  the  large  number  of  geriatric  subjects  treated  in  the  clinical  studies  (496/1308),  sufficient information has been generated to allow for a precise assessment of dose, safety and efficacy without an additional study. Clinical efficacy

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Studies providing clinical experience data

| Study Duration                                              |                                                             |                                                             |                                                             |                                                                | No. of subjects                                             | No. of subjects                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Phase)                                                     | Design                                                      | Dialysis type                                               | Route                                                       | Dose(s) (U/kg)                                                 | Epoetin delta                                               | Epoetin alfa                                                |
| Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa         | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      | Anemic subjects not previously exposed to epoetin alfa      |
| A2002 12 weeks (Phase II)                                   | Controlled; R, DB, PG, DR                                   | Haemo                                                       | i.v.                                                        | epoetin delta: 15, 50, 150, 300 [a] epoetin alfa: 50 [a]       | 61                                                          | 14                                                          |
| A2004 12 weeks (Phase II)                                   | Controlled; R, DB, PG, DR                                   | Pre                                                         | s.c.                                                        | epoetin delta: 15, 50, 100, 200 [a] epoetin alfa: 50 [a,b]     | 64                                                          | 16                                                          |
| authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa    | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa | authorised Subjects previously controlled with epoetin alfa |
| A3001 24 weeks (Phase III)                                  | Controlled; R, DB                                           | Haemo                                                       | i.v.                                                        | Same as prestudy epoetin alfa dose, then titrated based on HGB | 552                                                         | 191                                                         |
| weeks 25 to 52 (Phase III)                                  | Uncontrolled; OL                                            | Haemo                                                       | i.v.                                                        | Same dose as week 24, then titrated based on HGB               | 583                                                         | NA                                                          |
| A3002 52 weeks (Phase                                       | Uncontrolled; OL                                            | Haemo                                                       | s.c.                                                        | Same dose as prestudy, then titrated based on HGB              | 340 102                                                     | NA NA                                                       |
| III)                                                        |                                                             | Peritoneal Pre                                              | s.c. s.c.                                                   |                                                                | 36                                                          | NA                                                          |

Medicinal product no longer authorised R = randomised; DB = double-blind; PG = parallel group; DR = dose-response; OL = open-label; haemo = haemodialysis; pre = predialysis; i.v. = intravenous; s.c. = subcutaneous; HGB = haemoglobin; NA = not applicable [a] After achieving HGB level ≥ 11.5 g/dl for two consecutive weeks or ≥ 13 g/dl once, dose was titrated based on HGB. [b] The epoetin alfa subjects used a non-US formulation containing a phosphate buffer. Dose-response studies and main clinical studies Dose response studies Studies A2002 (i.v.) and A2004 (s.c.) were dose-response studies of haemodialysis subjects in A2002, predialysis  subjects  in  A2004  never  previously  treated  with  epoetin  alfa  (base  haemoglobin  below 10g/dL).  The  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  ' Total  Success' defined  as  the  achievement  of  both ' Correction Success' (a haemoglobin level of ≥ 11.5 g/dl for two consecutive weeks or 13 g/dl once) and ' Maintenance Success' (maintenance of haemoglobin levels ≥ 10.5 g/dl after 12 weeks of therapy). In  contrast  to  standard  medical  practice,  this  study  design  did  not  allow  the  subjects'  dose  to  be increased above that to which they were initially randomised. In  both  studies,  there  were  statistically  significant  differences  (p  =  0.0002  in  study  A2002  and  p  = 0.0001  in  study  A2004)  in  the  percentages  of  subjects  with  the  primary  endpoint  ' Total  Success' ( Correction and Maintenance Success ) in the pooled two highest epoetin delta dose groups (150 and 300 IU/kg; 55.6% in study A2002 and 100 and 200 IU/kg; 85.2% in study A2004) compared to the 15 IU/kg group (4.5% in study A2002 and 13% in study A2004). Furthermore, the ' Total Success' rate showed a statistically significant increasing trend in dose-effect (p = 0.0001 using Jonckheere-Terpstra test)  across  the  epoetin  delta  dose  groups.  There  was  no  significant  difference  in  ' Total  Success ' between the epoetin delta and epoetin alfa 50U/kg dose groups in either study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

'Total Success' in dose finding studies - ITT population

| Study   | No. with Total success/No. treated (%)   | No. with Total success/No. treated (%)   | No. with Total success/No. treated (%)   | No. with Total success/No. treated (%)   | No. with Total success/No. treated (%)   |
|---------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
|         | Epoetin delta                            | Epoetin delta                            | Epoetin delta                            | Epoetin delta                            | epoetin alfa                             |
|         | 15 IU/kg                                 | 50 IU/kg                                 | 150 IU/kg                                | 300 IU/kg                                | 50 IU/kg                                 |
| A2002   | 1/22 (4.5%)                              | 3/14 (21.4%)                             | 7/14 (50.0%)                             | 8/13 (61.5%)                             | 4/15 (26.7%)                             |
|         | 15 IU/kg                                 | 50 IU/kg                                 | 100 IU/kg                                | 200 IU/kg                                | 50 IU/kg                                 |
| A2004   | 3/23 (13.0%)                             | 6/15 (40.0%)                             | 1/13 (84.6%)                             | 12/14 (85.7%)                            | 6/15 (40.0%)                             |

| Starting epoetin delta dose Type of dialysis   | Median haemoglobin increase         | Median haemoglobin increase   | Median haematocrit increase   | Median haematocrit increase   |
|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Starting epoetin delta dose Type of dialysis   | g/dl per day                        | g/dl per 4 weeks              | %per day %per                 | 4 weeks                       |
| A2002: 3x weekly i.v. haemodialysis            | A2002: 3x weekly i.v. haemodialysis |                               |                               |                               |
| 15 U/kg                                        | 0.013                               | 0.36                          | 0.03                          | 0.84                          |
| 50 U/kg                                        | 0.031                               | 0.87                          | 0.10                          | 2.80                          |
| 150 U/kg                                       | 0.076                               | 2.13                          | 0.31                          | 8.68                          |
| 300 U/kg                                       | 0.070                               | 1.96                          | 0.29                          | 8.12                          |
| A2004: 2x weekly s.c. predialysis              | A2004: 2x weekly s.c. predialysis   |                               |                               |                               |
| 15 U/kg                                        | 0.017                               | longer 0.48                   | 0.06                          | 1.68                          |
| 50 U/kg                                        | 0.032                               | 0.90                          | 0.11                          | 3.08                          |
| 100 U/kg                                       | 0.072                               | 2.02                          | 0.25                          | 7.00                          |
| 200 U/kg                                       | 0.090                               | no 2.52                       | 0.36                          | 10.08                         |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Response to epoetin delta was consistent across both studies with the rate of increase in haemoglobin showing a statistically significant increasing trend with increasing dose of epoetin delta. Anaemic chronic renal failure subjects not previously treated with epoetin alfa responded to epoetin delta with a median rate of haemoglobin and haematocrit rise as shown below: In  both  studies,  the  rate  of  change  in  haemoglobin  showed  a  statistically  significant  dose-response effect  (p=0.0001)  with  increasing  dose  of  epoetin  delta.  The  rate  of  change  for  haemoglobin  and haematocrit was comparable in the epoetin delta and Epogen 50U/kg dose groups. Long-term efficacy Study  A3001  was  a  controlled  study  of  743  anaemic  chronic  renal  failure  subjects  undergoing haemodialysis previously treated with i.v. epoetin, 552 were randomised to epoetin delta and 191 to epoetin alfa. All patients included had haemoglobin values of 10-12 g/dl on two consecutive weeks before randomisation. The dose of epoetin delta was identical to the dose of epoetin alfa at study entry and could be adjusted every fourth week to maintain the haemoglobin level at 10-12 g/dl. The primary efficacy endpoint for study A3001 was  the  difference  in  average  HGB  levels  between epoetin delta and epoetin alfa after 12, 16, 20 and 24 weeks' treatment. Study A3001 was designed to show that this  difference  was  within  the  clinically  acceptable  predefined  range  of  -1  to  1  g/dl,  i.e. efficacy  of  epoetin  delta  was  to  be  concluded  if  the  90%  confidence  interval  (CI)  was  within  this interval.

Secondary  efficacy  endpoints  included  average  HGB  and  HCT,  percentage  of  HGB  measurements above 10g/dl, percentage of HCT measurements above 30% and average treatment dose after 12, 16, 20 and 24 weeks treatment.

The secondary objective was to assess the long-term safety of epoetin delta.

The efficacy results were nearly identical for the two treatments as shown in the table below:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Long-term efficacy in study A3001

| Variable                            | Unit                                | epoetin delta        | epoetin alfa         |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Primary                             |                                     |                      |                      |
| Haemoglobin                         | g/dl                                | 11.57                | 11.56                |
| Diff. epo delta - epo alfa (90% CI) | Diff. epo delta - epo alfa (90% CI) | 0.01 ( - 0.13; 0.15) | 0.01 ( - 0.13; 0.15) |
| Secondary                           |                                     |                      |                      |
| Haematocrit                         | %                                   | 36.8                 | 36.6                 |
| Average dose[a]                     | U/kg                                | 64                   | 63                   |

<!-- image -->

| Variable            | 1 x weekly (N=101)   | 2 x weekly (N=152)   | 3 x weekly (N=158)   | Total (N=411)   |
|---------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-----------------|
| Average haemoglobin |                      |                      |                      |                 |
| Mean (SD)           | 11.47 (1.13)         | 11.31 (1.10)         | 11.20 (1.09)         | 11.13 (1.11)    |
| Average haematocrit |                      |                      |                      |                 |
| Mean (SD)           | 36.9 (3.5)           | 36.3 (3.7)           | 36.2 (3.8)           | 36.4 (3.7)      |
| Average weekly dose |                      |                      |                      |                 |
| Mean (SD)           | 66.2 (58.3)          | 76.2 (58.3)          | 103.9 (88.0)         | 84.4 (72.8)     |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Average dose required to maintain haemoglobin in the target range of 10 to 12 g/dL when administered i.v. three times weekly over weeks 12 to 24 The percentage of subject's haemoglobin and haematocrit measurements that were above 10g/dl and 30% respectively, for weeks 12, 16, 20 and 24 were, for haemoglobin: 89.0% epoetin delta vs. 90.5% epoetin alfa and for haematocrit: 95.7% epoetin delta vs. 93.9% epoetin alfa). Inadequate responses were retrospectively analysed and defined as having a blood transfusion, having a haemoglobin level of &lt; 8.5 g/dl on at least one occasion, or if a dose of epoetin (alfa or delta) of ≥ 450 IU/kg/week had been required to produce the expected increase in haemoglobin concentration. 27% of the  epoetin  delta  patients  and  23%  of  the  epoetin  alfa  patients  had  a  least  one  criteria  for inadequate response and in 5% of the epoetin delta patients and 6% of the epoetin alfa patients no cause of the inadequate response could be found, but the possibility of anti-erythropoietin antibodies were excluded in all patients apart from two in each group who were not tested. Study  A3001  had  an  open-label,  uncontrolled  continuation  phase.  Epoetin  delta  was  administered three  times  weekly  during  weeks  25  to  52,  after  24  weeks  of  double-blind  treatment  with  either epoetin delta or epoetin alfa, i.e. the subjects on epoetin delta continued their treatment while those on epoetin alfa were switched to epoetin delta. Epoetin delta (approximately 60 U/kg average dose given three times weekly) was effective at maintaining haemoglobin levels within the target range of 10 to 12 g/dl after exposure up to 52 weeks . The mean average haemoglobin after treatment with epoetin delta to week 52 was 11.31 g/dl and was similar to that for epoetin alfa during the first 24 weeks. A3002 was an open-label study in chronic renal failure subjects previously treated with s.c. epoetin alfa, and included a total of 478 subjects: haemodialysis, peritoneal dialysis, or predialysis. Of the 478 treated  subjects  365  (76.4%)  completed  at  least  24  weeks  of  treatment  and  113  (23.6%)  were withdrawn prior  to  completing  24  weeks.  Efficacy  parameters  were  based  on  weekly  evaluation  of haematological parameters (HGB, HCT, RBC count and RET) and included average HGB and HCT, percentage of HGB measurements above 10g/dl, percentage of HCT measurements above 30% as well as dose of epoetin delta after 12, 16, 20 and 24 weeks treatment Epoetin delta was effective at maintaining haemoglobin levels within the target range of 10 to 12 g/dl when administered s.c. once, twice or three times weekly up to 52 weeks as shown in the table below for the modified intent-to-treat population (N = 411):

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The main conclusion is that the results with s.c. administration of epoetin delta in this trial appear to be similar to those for i.v. administration in trial A3001. The median s.c. weekly dose at weeks 12-24 was some 45% of the weekly i.v. dose given.

## Clinical studies in special populations

No trials have been conducted in special populations.

## Clinical safety

Medicinal product no longer authorised Patient exposure In  controlled  and  uncontrolled  studies,  1308  subjects  were  exposed  to  epoetin  delta.  Of  these,  861 were exposed for at least 24 weeks and 146 were exposed for 52 weeks. Epoetin delta was studied in double-blind,  active  controlled  trials  (677  subjects  with  epoetin  delta  and  221with  active  control [epoetin alfa]) in subjects with chronic renal failure receiving varying dose amounts either by i.v. or s.c.  injection . Total  exposure  to  epoetin  delta  was  756  patient-years  (248  controlled  and  508 uncontrolled) and for epoetin alfa was 84 patient-years. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths The adverse event profile in controlled studies was comparable between epoetin delta and epoetin alfa for  all  subjects  and  in  all  subgroups  evaluated  including  demographics  (age,  sex,  race),  duration  of haemodialysis and concurrent illness (hypertension, diabetes) . The two dose response studies (A2002 and A2004) using i.v. doses ranging from 15 to 300 U/kg three times weekly and s.c. doses ranging from 15 to 200 U/kg two times weekly showed no dose related adverse events. Most of the adverse events reported in clinical trials with epoetin delta were related to chronic renal failure, concomitant diseases, or concomitant treatment and were not necessarily attributable to epoetin delta therapy. The following table provides the treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs) reported in 10% or more of subjects receiving epoetin delta during the double-blind phase of active controlled trials in chronic renal failure subjects: Most Frequent (&gt;10%) Treatment Emergent Adverse Events in Controlled Studies

| TEAEs                                 | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   | Subjects with events (%)   |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|
|                                       | epoetin delta (N = 677)    | epoetin delta (N = 677)    | epoetin delta (N = 677)    | epoetin alfa (N = 221)     | epoetin alfa (N = 221)     | epoetin alfa (N = 221)     | epoetin alfa (N = 221)     |
|                                       |                            | All                        | Possibly related           | Possibly related           | All                        | Possibly related           | Possibly related           |
| Subjects with events                  | 626 (92.5%)                |                            | 79                         | (11.7%) 201                | (91.0%)                    | 17                         | (7.7%)                     |
| Hypotension                           | 167                        | (24.7%)                    | 1                          | (0.1%) 54                  | (24.4%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |
| Muscle cramps 143                     |                            | (21.1%)                    | 1                          | (0.1%) 47                  | (21.3%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |
| Medicinal Upper respiratory infection | 143                        | (21.1%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%) 45                  | (20.4%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |
| Headache                              | 138                        | (20.4%)                    | 11                         | (1.6%) 39                  | (17.6%)                    | 2                          | (0.9%)                     |
| Infection                             | 113                        | (16.7%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%) 30                  | (13.6%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |
| Thrombosis                            | 96                         | (14.2%)                    | 15                         | (2.2%) 39                  | (17.6%)                    | 5                          | (2.3%)                     |
| Diarrhea                              | 82                         | (12.1%)                    | 2                          | (0.3%) 31                  | (14.0%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |
| Hypertension                          | 79                         | (11.7%)                    | 22                         | (3.2%) 22                  | (10.0%)                    | 3                          | (1.4%)                     |
| Dizziness                             | 72                         | (10.6%)                    | 0                          | (0.0%) 19                  | (8.6%)                     | 1                          | (0.5%)                     |
| Malaise                               | 69                         | (10.2%)                    | 1                          | (0.1%) 14                  | (6.3%)                     | 0                          | (0.0%)                     |

In both controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies (total exposure of 756 patient-years), the most frequent adverse events per 100 patient-years of exposure were: hypotension (45.4), muscle cramps (38.4), upper respiratory infection (38.2), headache (37.3), infection (32.9), thrombosis (26.3), and hypertension (25.0).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Serious adverse events :

Controlled studies : 205/677 (30.3%) epoetin delta subjects and 59/221 (26.7%) epoetin alfa subjects reported  serious  TEAEs.  The  most  frequent  serious  TEAEs  for  epoetin  delta  vs.  epoetin  alfa  were infections  (3.7%  vs.  2.3%),  sepsis  (3.1%  vs.  1.8%),  'non-specified'  infection  (3.0%  vs.  1.4%)  and thrombosis (2.7% vs. 2.7%). Uncontrolled studies: 376/1061 (35.4%) epoetin delta subjects reported serious  TEAEs.  The  most  frequent  serious  TEAEs  were  thrombosis  (3.5%),  sepsis  (3.3%)  and myocardial infarction (2.9%).

<!-- image -->

:

\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_

| TEAE                                     | Controlled (a)      | Controlled (a)   | Uncontrolled (b)   | Total (c) epoetin delta N=1308                                                     |
|------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------|--------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                          | epoetin delta N=677 | epoetin N=221    | N=1061             | __________________________________________________________________________________ |
| Subjects with cluster or seizure-related | 275 (40.6%)         | 86 (38.9%)       | 416 (39.2%)        | 598 (45%)                                                                          |
| TEAEs                                    |                     |                  | longer             |                                                                                    |
| TEAEs by cluster: Arteriosclerosis:      | 84 (12.4%)          | no 20 (9.0%)     | 153 (14.4%)        | 220 (16.8%)                                                                        |
| Symptomatic IHD                          | 47 (6.9%)           | 8 (3.6%)         | 92 (8.7%)          | 131 (10.0%)                                                                        |
| CVD:                                     | 10 (1.5%)           | 1 (0.5%)         | 28 (2.6%)          | 38 (2.9%)                                                                          |
| CHF:                                     | 25 (3.7%)           | 11 (5.0%)        | 62 (5.8%)          | 82 (6.3%)                                                                          |
| PVD:                                     | 31 (4.6%)           | 13 (5.9%)        | 55 (5.2%)          | 80 (6.1%)                                                                          |
| Venous                                   | product             |                  |                    |                                                                                    |
| Thromboembolism:                         | 4 (0.6%)            | 0 (0%)           | 9 (0.8%)           | 13 (1.0%)                                                                          |
| Hypertension:                            | 80 (11.8%)          | 22 (10.0%)       | 125 (11.8%)        | 190 (14.5%)                                                                        |
| Access-related events:                   | 132 (19.5%)         | 48 (21.7%)       | 186 (17.6%)        | 281 (21.5%)                                                                        |
| Seizure-related events:                  | 4 (0.6%)            | 2 (0.9%)         | 5 (0.5%)           | 8 (0.6%)                                                                           |

\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_\\_

The majority of cluster TEAEs were either access-related (19.5% epoetin delta vs. 21.7% epoetin alfa, mostly clotted dialysis access), or hypertension events (11.8% epoetin delta vs. 10.0% epoetin alfa). Although  90%  of  the  subjects  had  hypertension  at  baseline,  only  approximately  10%  experienced hypertension  cluster  events  in  both  treatment  groups;  4.3%  of  patients  not  having  a  history  of hypertension experienced hypertension TEAEs. Here were also more 'possibly related hypertension' events in the epoetin delta group (3.2%) than in the epoetin alfa group (1.4%) but serial blood pressure measurements  did  not  support  any  difference.  All  cluster  TEAEs  occurred  at  comparable  rates between the 2 treatment groups with the exception of TEAEs in the symptomatic IHD category which appeared  to  be  reported  at  a  higher  frequency  in  the  epoetin delta  treatment  group  (47/677,  6.9%) compared to the epoetin alfa group (8/221, 3.6%).

Medicinal product no longer authorised Cluster events: The overall incidence of TEAEs categorized by cluster, in controlled studies was similar between the epoetin delta (40.6%) and epoetin alfa (38.9%) treatment groups. All cluster or seizure-related TEAEs in controlled and uncontrolled studies IHD = any form of ischaemic heart disease a Studies A2002 and 2004 and double blind phase of A3001 CVD= any form of cerebrovascular disease b Open-label phase of A3001 and study A3002 CHF= any type of cardiac failure c Total= number of TEAEs reported in epoetin delta subjects PVD= peripheral vascular disease from controlled and uncontrolled studies Arteriosclerosis-related events include IHD, CVD and PVD clusters

Arteriosclerosis-IHD, PVD, CVD, CHF: the difference observed between treatments in symptomatic IHD  cluster  TEAEs  was  mainly  due  to  an  increased  frequency  of  angina  pectoris  (33/677,  4.9% epoetin delta vs. 4/221, 1.8% epoetin alfa) and to a lesser extent myocardial infarction (9/677, 1.3% epoetin delta vs. 1/221, 0.5% epoetin alfa). A logistic regression analysis taking baseline risk factors

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

into account showed a trend to a higher frequency with epoetin delta, but the difference between event rates  for  epoetin  delta  and  epoetin  alfa  was  not  statistically  significant  (p=0.0716).  A  time-to-event analysis showed a similar result (p=0.0578). This higher frequency of symptomatic IHD events in the epoetin delta group was not confirmed by respectively higher frequencies of other serious and nonserious vascular events like PVD (4.6% for epoetin delta vs.5.9% for epoetin alfa), CVD (1.5% vs. 0,5%), and CHF (3.7% vs. 5.0%) or venous thrombotic (0.6% vs.0%) TEAE clusters. However, when taking into account arteriosclerotic TEAEs (by combining symptomatic IHD, CVD, and PVD cluster events), there was still a greater percentage events for epoetin delta (12.4% epoetin delta and 9.0% epoetin  alfa).  This  is  probably  not  clinically  relevant  since  the  previous  history  of  IHD  was  high (approximately  40%)  in  both  treatment  groups.  The  previous  history  was  the  most  important contributing  factor  for  the  occurrence  of  symptomatic  IHD,  as  shown  in  the  logistic  regression analysis.  There  was  also  a  lower  use  of  concomitant  'cardioprotective'  drugs  in  the  epoetin  delta group  compared  to  the  epoetin  alfa  group.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  apparent  slight  increase  in ischaemic heart disease among epoetin delta patients compared to epoetin alfa patients, the applicant has made appropriate commitments in order to follow up all cardiovascular events closely during the post-marketing phase.

In controlled clinical trials, 3/677 (0.4%) epoetin delta treated subjects and 1/221 (0.5%) epoetin alfa treated  subjects  reported  serious  systemic  hypersensitivity  reactions,  one  of  which  was  regarded  as possibly related to treatment with epoetin delta (angioedema). However, this case was not considered a  new  safety  signal  because  it  represented  an  isolated  occurrence  with  alternative  explanations.  No antibodies to epoetin delta were detected in any subjects tested in the clinical trials.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Hypertension: The incidence of hypertension adverse events was similar in subjects receiving epoetin delta  (12%)  and  subjects  receiving  epoetin  alfa  (10%)  from  controlled  studies.  Hypertensive encephalopathy and hypertension seizures have each been observed in a single subject with chronic renal  failure  treated  with  epoetin  delta.  The  rate  of  hypertension  adverse  events  in  epoetin  delta subjects from controlled trials (up to 6 months) was 32 cases per 100 patient-years while the rate in epoetin delta-treated subjects from the longer duration uncontrolled trials (&gt; 6 months to 1 year) was 24 cases per 100 patient-years; the lower incidence of hypertension events in uncontrolled trials may suggest that the risk of hypertension does not increase over time. The onset of hypertension adverse events  was  similar  between  epoetin  delta  and  epoetin  alfa  subjects  with  approximately  50-60%  of these cases reported during the first 90 days of therapy. Seizure-related events (convulsions) : In  controlled trials 4/677 (0.6%) subjects treated with epoetin delta experienced convulsions during controlled trials whereas 2/221 (0.9%) subjects receiving epoetin alfa experienced convulsions, with a frequency per 100 patient-years for epoetin delta of 1.6 and for epoetin alfa of 2.4. All convulsions occurred in subjects undergoing haemodialysis who had a history of hypertension; 4 events occurred during or immediately following a dialysis session and 1 event was associated with a hypertensive crisis. In controlled and uncontrolled trials, the convulsion rate for epoetin delta-treated subjects was 1.1 per 100 patient-years. The majority (6 of 8 epoetin delta treated subjects) of these convulsions occurred after the first 3 months of treatment. Four of the 9 subjects (one had convulsion under epoetin alfa and then again after switching to epoetin delta in study A3002) who experienced convulsions also had a history of convulsions. Hypersensitivity reactions :  In  controlled  studies,  the  overall  incidence  of  hypersensitivity  reaction TEAEs  (both  systemic  and  local)  was  similar  between  the  epoetin  delta  (21.6%)  and  epoetin  alfa (18.6%)  groups.  During  uncontrolled  studies,  the  incidences  of  individual  hypersensitivity  reaction TEAEs were similar to the frequencies reported during controlled studies.

Renal  failure  related  TEAEs: In  controlled  studies  involving  predialysis  subjects  (A2004),  renal failure-related TEAEs were reported in 9.4% (6/64) of epoetin delta subjects versus no cases (0/16) in epoetin  alfa  subjects  (Fisher's  exact  test:  p=0.340).  During  the  uncontrolled  studies  involving predialysis  subjects  (A3002),  13.9%  (5/36)  of  subjects  experienced  renal  failure  related  TEAEs.  In two subjects, the investigator as possibly related to study medication assessed the renal failure-related

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TEAEs.  Worsening  of  renal  failure  may  occur  for  many  reasons  in  predialysis  patients.  This complication appeared not to be dose related in study A2004 and some of these subjects recovered despite continued treatment with epoetin delta.

Anti-erythropoietin antibodies: There were no positive on-treatment assessments for antierythropoietin antibody in the 15 healthy subjects (A1001) or 39 CRF subjects (A2003) exposed to epoetin  delta  in  clinical  pharmacology  studies.  Similarly,  there  were  no  positive  on-treatment assessments in the 1235 evaluable subjects exposed to epoetin delta or in the 203 subjects exposed to epoetin during uncontrolled studies. There were no cases of pure red cell aplasia in subjects treated with  epoetin  delta.  The  Company  has  made  appropriate  commitments  to  monitor  the  incidence  of antibodies to epoetin delta and investigate the potential neutralising effect of any anti-'epoetin delta' antibodies detected during the post-authorisation phase.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Malignant and benign tumours: A total  of  3/677  (0.4%)  epoetin  delta  subjects  and  2/221  (0.9%) epoetin  alfa  subjects  from  controlled  studies,  and  11/1061  (1.0%)  epoetin  delta  subjects  from uncontrolled studies reported serious TEAEs that involved cancer. The investigator as possibly related to study medication assessed none of the cancer events. Local  injection  site  reactions: Subcutaneous  injection  of  epoetin  delta  was  well  tolerated.  In controlled Study A2004, no local injection site reactions were reported. In uncontrolled Study A3002, few local s.c. injection site reactions were reported: injection site haemorrhage (11/478 subjects, 2%), injection site pain (7/478, 1%), pruritus and allergic reaction (1/478, 0.2% each). The majority of these events  were  mild  to  moderate  in  intensity;  all  events  were  transient,  and  resolved  while  continuing treatment. Deaths: In  controlled  trials,  the  frequencies  of  deaths  occurring  during  treatment  were  comparable between subjects treated with epoetin delta (12/677, 1.8%) and with epoetin alfa (5/221, 2.3%). The frequency  for  occurrence  of  death  based  on  the  survival  analysis  was  also  comparable  (4.1%  for epoetin  delta  and  4.8  for  epoetin  alfa).  The  overall  frequency  of  death  per  100  patient-years  of exposure to epoetin delta in controlled and uncontrolled studies was 7.0 compared to 6.0 deaths per 100 patient years for epoetin alfa. Adverse  events  resulting  in  clinical  intervention: In  controlled  clinical  trials,  the  incidence  of adverse events resulting in discontinuation of treatment was very small in subjects treated with epoetin delta and epoetin alfa (13/677, 2%; 7/221, 3%, respectively). In uncontrolled trials, the incidence was 1.7%. Adverse events resulting in temporary interruption of treatment occurred in 5/677 subjects (1%) treated with epoetin delta compared to 4/221 subjects (2%) treated with epoetin alfa. The occurrence of adverse events resulting in dose reduction was very low in subjects treated with epoetin delta and with epoetin alfa (5/677, 1%; 1/221, 1%, respectively) . The occurrence of adverse events treated with counteractive  medications  was  high,  as  expected  in  chronic  renal  failure  subjects,  but  similar  in subjects treated with epoetin delta and with epoetin alfa (549/677, 81%; 178/221, 81%, respectively) . Laboratory findings There were modest increases in creatinine, calcium and uric acid, without any statistically significant differences  between  the  two  treatment  groups.  There  was  no  increase  in  phosphorus,  potassium  or platelets. Mean ferritin levels at baseline were above normal ranges in the two treatment groups. Most subjects were receiving iron supplementation as required by the study protocols.

There  was  no  evidence  from  the  vital  signs  or  ECG  data  that  epoetin  delta  had  any  increased  risk compared to epoetin alfa.

## Safety in special populations

Pregnancy and Lactation: No pregnancies are reported and this may reflect the high average age of trial patients and  the impaired  fertility associated with chronic renal failure.  This  has  been appropriately addressed in the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Paediatric  patients: An  open  label,  paediatric  study  is  ongoing  for  epoetin  delta  in  chronic  renal failure and will be submitted post-authorisation.

## Discussion on Clinical aspects

## Discussion on Clinical Efficacy

Erythropoietins prepared from  different sources are thought to be similar in terms of their pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Two  phase  II  studies  have  shown  definitive  evidence  of  a  clear  dose  response  relationship  and  a similar effect at 50 IU/kg between epoetin alfa and epoetin delta when administered by the i.v. or s.c. routes.  Epoetin  delta  was  effective  in  correcting  anaemia  in  predialysis  and  haemodialysis  subjects who were never previously exposed to epoetin alfa. Based on the results from these studies a starting dose of 50 IU/kg is supported. In the pivotal phase III study 26% of the study population had an inadequate response to therapy with both  epoetin  alfa  and  epoetin  delta.  The  withdrawal  rate  mainly  due  to  RBC  transfusion  was approximately 20% in both epoetin delta and epoetin alfa groups. There was obviously considerable overlap between the 'inadequate response' and 'withdrawal groups'. The weekly dose of epoetin delta was comparable in the &lt;65 years, 65 to 75 years and &gt;75 years age groups in studies A3001 and A3002 in either the intravenous or subcutaneous studies. Subgroup  analysis  for  age,  sex,  baseline  pathology,  dialysis  type  in  all  studies  did  not  show unexpected  differences  between  the  treatment  groups  for  either  efficacy  or  safety  in  any  of  the subgroups. The  main  efficacy  trial  showed  near  identical  mean  haemoglobin  responses  in  a  large  number  of patients to near identical mean doses of epoetin alfa (63 IU/kg) and epoetin delta (64 IU/kg) over a six-month  period.  It  was  further  shown  that  epoetin  delta  is  effective  in  maintaining  HGB  values above  11  g/dl  when  given  by  i.v.  administration  3  x  weekly  to  haemodialysis  subjects  who  had previously  received  epoetin  alfa  over  a  period  of  24  weeks.  The  median  i.v.  dose  of  epoetin  delta necessary to maintain HGB levels between 10 and 12 g/dl in haemodialysis subjects was 46.0 IU/kg 3 times weekly during weeks 12 to 24 and 31 IU/kg twice a week following s.c. administration. The total  weekly  dose  given  subcutaneously  appears  just  under  half  of  the  weekly  dose  required intravenously. Efficacy of epoetin delta appears proven, sustained and comparable to epoetin alfa. Discussion on Clinical Safety Overall, epoetin delta seems to be well tolerated by both i.v. or s.c. routes. There were no significantly different adverse events compared to epoetin alfa. The higher incidence of angina as an adverse event with epoetin delta is noted but this may be a chance finding given the high background incidence of ischaemic heart disease in these patients. In order to evaluate the apparent slight increase in ischaemic heart disease among epoetin delta patients compared to epoetin alfa patients, the applicant has made appropriate  commitments  to  follow  up  all  cardiovascular  events  closely  during  the  post-marketing phase.

The absence of antibody formation to epoetin delta is encouraging,  although  limited  as no positive controls were tested. The applicant postulates that the formation of antibodies to existing erythropoietin products may be secondary to non-human glycosylation of the product, a step absent from the humanised production of epoetin delta. The applicant has made appropriate commitments to monitor the incidence of antibodies to epoetin delta and investigate the potential neutralising effect of any anti-'epoetin delta' antibodies detected during the post-authorisation phase.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  the  controlled  study  involving  predialysis  subjects  (A2004),  renal  failure-related  TEAEs  were reported  in  9.4%  (6/64)  of  epoetin  delta  subjects  versus  no  cases  (0/16)  in  epoetin  alfa  subjects. During  the  uncontrolled  studies  involving  predialysis  subjects  (A3002),  13.9%  (5/36)  of  subjects experienced renal failure related TEAEs. In 2 subjects, the investigator as possibly related to study medication assessed the renal failure-related TEAEs. This is unlikely to reflect a difference in the two treatments given the very small numbers and as the incidence of events in the comparison of epoetin delta  with  epoetin  alfa  treatment  were  relatively  similar,  and  there  was  the  inverse  relationship between dose and renal failure-related TEAEs. There were no cases of pure red cell aplasia in subjects treated with epoetin delta.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Clinical  safety  still  relies  in  part  upon  adequate  pharmaceutical  quality  control  and  of  the  known pharmacology  of  erythropoietin.  Overall  the  death  rates  are  comparable  between  epoetin  delta  and epoetin alfa. 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Quality The active substance of Dynepo is epoetin delta, a human recombinant erythropoietin produced in a human  continuous  cell  line  via  the  gene  activation  technology.  The  use  and  benefits  of  a  human oncogenic cell line have adequately discussed. The risks from residual DNA and potential host cell protein have also been addressed satisfactorily. The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance  of  the  product  have  been  investigated  and  are  controlled  in  a  satisfactory  way.  Viral safety  and  batch-to-batch  consistency  has been  documented and the relevant test will be performed according to the agreed specifications. Appropriate quality commitments have been set. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Overall, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies provided adequate evidence in support of the efficacy  and  safety  of  epoetin  delta.  Consistent  effects  associated  with  the  known  pharmacology  of erythropoietin were produced. There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  target  organ  toxicity  associated  with  epoetin  delta  administration. Observed  pathology  can  be  related  to  exaggerated  pharmacological  activity.  Of  some  concern  are  the adverse effects on sperm morphology and motility and the reduced survival and ossification seen in F1 pups. In this case the relationship to epoetin delta pharmacology is less clear. However, as the effects were  not  massive,  there  were  no  effects  on  fertility  and  mating  and  similar  effects  were  seen  with epoetin alfa, it is likely that this finding is of no toxicological significance. Furthermore, these effects were seen at doses far in excess of the clinical dose. Efficacy The pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic results are consistent with the known pharmacology of erythropoietin and confirm the differences between subcutaneous and intravenous dosing. Pharmacokinetics  in  hepatic  failure  and  children  has  not  been  studied  something  which  has  been adequately reflected in the SPC.

Initial studies appear to provide adequate justification of the dose chosen for the main efficacy trials. The main controlled, blinded efficacy trial provides adequate evidence that epoetin delta is effective in maintaining  adequate  levels  of  haemoglobin  and  haematocrit  in  patients  with  chronic  renal  failure. The open label trial gave similar results with subcutaneous dosing. The results from clinical studies thus support the use of epoetin delta in the approved indication 'treatment of anaemia in patients with chronic renal failure. It  may be  used in patients  on  dialysis  and  in  patients  not  on  dialysis.'  The  dose ranging studies showed a clear dose response for both i.v. and s.c. administered epoetin delta and the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

clinical data from the two pivotal clinical studies have shown that the recommended dose is effective and safe .

## Safety

Overall epoetin delta  seems to  have been well tolerated  by either i.v. or s.c. routes. There  were  no significantly different adverse events compared to epoetin alfa. No anti-erythropoietin antibodies were detected. Nevertheless, the applicant has made appropriate commitments to monitor the incidence of antibodies to epoetin delta and investigate the potential neutralising effect of any anti-'epoetin delta' antibodies detected during the post-authorisation phase.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The high background of events in the chronic renal failure population may confuse the identification of treatment related adverse events. Some reassurance is provided by the inverse relationship between renal  failure-related  TEAEs  and  dose  and  by  the  relatively  similar  incidence  of  events  in  the comparison  of  epoetin  delta  with  epoetin  alfa  treatment  but  even  here  the  confidence  intervals  are wide. In  order  to  evaluate  the  apparent  slight  increase  in  ischaemic  heart  disease  among  epoetin  delta patients compared to epoetin alfa patients, the applicant has made appropriate commitments to follow up all cardiovascular events closely during the post-marketing phase. Overall the death rates are comparable between epoetin delta and epoetin alfa. Benefit/risk assessment Based  on  the  CPMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CPMP  considered  that  the benefit/risk profile of Dynepo in the treatment of treatment of anaemia in patients with chronic renal failure  (in  patients  on  dialysis  and  patients  not  under  dialysis)  was  favourable  and  therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.