---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:03:25
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/forcaltonin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: forcaltonin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.99486
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 18:01:21.648803
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Forcaltonin.  This  scientific discussion has been updated until 1 July 1999. For information on changes after this date, please refer to module 8B. 1. Introduction The  active  ingredient  of  Forcaltonin  is  a  recombinant  salmon  calcitonin  (rsCT),  a  32-amino  acid peptide hormone that is structurally identical to chemically synthesised salmon calcitonin. Chemically synthesised salmon calcitonin (ssCT) has been in widespread clinical use for more than 20 years. Due to its high biological potency in man, calcitonin derived from salmon (sCT) is the most widely used therapeutic calcitonin agent for medicinal situations, where calcitonin is indicated. Regarding  pharmaceutical  form  and  sCT  content,  Forcaltonin  is  comparable  to  conventional  sCT preparations. Forcaltonin is presented in single use glass ampoules as two dosage forms, 100 IU in 1 ml and 50 IU in 0.5-ml acetate buffer for subcutaneous, intramuscular or intravenous injection. The approved indications are (dose range): Paget's disease of bone (50 IU x3/week to 100 IU/day), and Hypercalcaemia of malignancy (400 IU to 10 IU/kg q.i.d.). 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Active substance Salmon calcitonin is a single chain 32 amino acid peptide hormones, with a disulfide bridge between the  cysteine  residues  at  sequence  positions  1  and  7.  A  C-terminal  glycine-extended  rsCT  precursor sequence is expressed in E. coli as a fusion protein A major structural feature of salmon calcitonin, which is important for full biological activity, is a prolinamidyl residue at the C-terminus, position 32. Since E. coli does not have the capability for this post-translational C-terminal amidation the glycineextended  precursor  is  amidated  in  vitro  by  an α -amidating  enzyme  ( α -AE),  obtained  by  rDNA technique in CHO-cells. Data demonstrating the genetic stability of the production organisms during the optimised fermentation conditions were satisfactory. Characterisation and authenticity in comparison with ssCT The aim of the characterisation studies of rsCT is to prove authenticity in comparison with synthetic salmon  calcitonin  (ssCT).  Other  important  features  considered  were  the  impurity  profile  and  the degradation behaviour. Since rsCT is a relatively small peptide it has been possible to clarify its structure in detail using a variety of physicochemical methods and to prove its authenticity with respect to ssCT. The different production principle of rsCT and ssCT inevitably leads to a different impurity profile. However the company has used the strategy of removing the impurities, including related peptides, and has performed studies to examine the impurity profile. In  contrast  to  most  other  products  derived  from  rDNA  technology  recombinant  salmon  calcitonin (rsCT) is  a  peptide  with  relatively  few  amino  acids  (32)  in  a  single  chain.  In  addition  CT  tolerates relatively  harsh  conditions  during  purification.  Owing  to  the  small  size  of  the  CT  peptide  the separation of macromolecular impurities should be possible to a greater extent than it is the case with larger proteins derived from rDNA technology. Synthetic calcitonin (ssCT) is covered by the monograph calcitonin (salmon) of the Ph.Eur. As only certain  Ph.Eur  criteria  on  ssCT  are  applicable  the  company  established  a  specific  test  programme dedicated to rsCT. Nevertheless, some of the Ph.Eur. criteria are applied also for rsCT.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised Routine  identification  is  performed  by  a  combination  of  tryptic  mapping  with  comparison  of  the retention times monitored by RP-HPLC and CEX-HPLC. This combination of methods together with the potency evaluation (in vitro assay) constitutes a reliable identity test. Characterisation studies have been performed on in-house standard batches Comparisons were made to the  Second  International  Standard  for  Calcitonin.  Synthetic  sCT  from  other  sources  of  currently marketed products were also included for comparison. Other  comparative  pharmacokinetic  and  pharmacodynamic  studies  have  been  performed  to  support authenticity (see sections 3 and 4). The structure of rsCT has been unequivocally determined. The in vitro and in vivo assay data support the authenticity and full bioactivity of rsCT. Finished product The composition of Forcaltonin is similar to that of currently marketed products containing synthetic salmon calcitonin as active ingredient. The  list  of  specifications  and  routine  tests  is  in  line  with  current  guidelines.  Where  necessary  the company uses the general methods given in the Ph. Eur. The identity and content of the active ingredient are determined chromatographically, using isocratic cation  exchange  HPLC  (CEX-HPLC).    A  positive  result  in  the  in  vivo  potency  assay  is  currently considered as part of the identification. The rat bioassay  according to the Ph. Eur. monograph for Calcitonin (salmon) is performed by the company as a routine procedure. Pharmaceutical development Forcaltonin is presented as a solution for injection in single-dose glass ampoules. An overage of the active ingredient is included. Manufacture and control The bulk active ingredient is manufactured by Unigene and transported to the manufacturing site at which the finished product is produced. The manufacturing process is a conventional one and has been described in sufficient detail. Stability Stability of the active ingredient The batch results obtained so far are satisfactory and show that the active ingredient can be stored at either -20°C or at 2°C - 8°C. . It should be noted that satisfactory results after storage at 2 ° - 8 °C (the conditions quoted in the Ph.Eur. for synthetic calcitonin) confirm equivalency. Stability tests on the finished product Batches of the finished product are currently undergoing stability trials. As  a  consequence  of  the  analysis  of  these  data,  a  shelf-life  of  2  years  at  2  -  8°C  for  the  finished products can be given at present. Evaluation of the viral safety The CHO master cell bank (MCB) containing the expression construct for α -AE, used as a reagent in the  downstream  process,  has  been  closely  examined  for  contamination  with  viral  agents.  Particular attention was paid to the investigation of potential retrovirus contamination of the MCB No evidence of viral contamination has been found. Data supporting the test strategy and the virus validation studies were considered satisfactory. The raw materials of mammalian origin represent defined proteins from bovine sources obtained from suppliers  within  the  United  States  or  from  countries  considered  to  be  BSE/TSE-free,  and  collected from herds free from infectious bovine viruses, or from certified human plasma. Summary and conclusion on chemical and pharmaceutical aspects

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised Authenticity of the produced recombinant salmon calcitonin in regard to synthetic salmon calcitonin was demonstrated. The responses provided by the Applicant to the Consolidated List of Questions are considered to be satisfactory. Certain issues are to be addressed on an ongoing basis as follow-up measures. A  consistent  production  process  for  rsCT  is  used.  The  fermentation  process  has  been  adequately validated. At the beginning of September 1998, the company submitted to all CPMP Members an expanded data set on the α -AE. After analysis of the data set, the company proposes to revise the α -AE release- and in-process control specifications. This proposal has been accepted. As  a  consequence  of  the  satisfactory  revision  of  the  limits  for  the α -AE,  there  are  no  remaining objections  with  regard  to  part  II  of  the  dossier  that  need  to  be  resolved  before  a  marketing authorisation can be given. As indicated above, certain issues are to be resolved on an ongoing basis as follow-up measures. The company has submitted a commitment to resolve these points, together with a proposal for the time frame. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Complete  identity  to  conventional  sCT  and  an  even  higher  degree  of  purity  are  reported  by  the applicant, therefore  with  Forcaltonin  a  limited  amount  of  pharmaco-toxicological  testing  was performed  to  supplement  the  literature  data  provided.  The  results  of  this  supplementary  testing confirmed the acceptability. In pharmaceutical form and sCT content Forcaltonin is identical to conventional sCT preparations. Pharmacodynamics In  rats  rsCT  induced  a  dose  dependent  decrease  of  serum  calcium  comparable  to  both  the  2nd International Standard (2nd IS) and conventional sCT. Also other pharmacodynamic responses were similar between sCT and rsCT, including a similar cAMP increase, identical rates of development and disappearance of hypocalcaemia, the same maximum hypocalcaemic effect and the same area above the intensity curve. The comparable hypocalcaemic activity of sCT and rsCT was also demonstrated in dogs. With  respect  to  general  pharmacodynamic  investigations,  rsCT  and  CT  did  not  exert  any  relevant effects on general performance and behaviour of mice in doses 200 times that of therapeutic use. In dogs,  there  was  neither  electrocardiographic  evidence  of  cardiotoxicity,  nor  evidence  of  adverse effects on blood pressure and heart rate after escalating intravenous doses of rsCT or sCT. Experiences with sCT do not report clinically important drug interactions. No studies of this type were performed with Forcaltonin. Pharmacokinetics Pharmaco- and toxicokinetic aspects of rsCT in comparison with sCT have been studied in rats and dogs  using  a  sensitive  and  specific  radioimmunoassay  (RIA)  in  single  dose  studies.  The  different investigations consistently characterised the pharmacokinetic properties of rsCT as being completely equivalent to established sCT. The substance was rapidly absorbed. Dose-linearity after subcutaneous administration was established. rsCT was rapidly cleared from plasma (elimination half-life ≤ 110 min). Rats and dogs were exposed to large multiples of therapeutic rsCT plasma concentrations particularly after intravenous administration. Toxicology Acute toxicity

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised One  study  used  escalating  intravenous  doses  up  to  67  µg/kg  body  weight  in  dogs.  No  mortality occurred. Clinical symptoms (hypersalivation, emesis) resolved within 24 hours. Chronic toxicity, Reproductive toxicity, Tumorigenic potential No studies were performed due to the identity of rsCT with ssCT and established safety of ssCT from the literature data. Mutagenic potential Sufficient in vitro mutagenicity testing has been conducted. As expected, no relevant indications for mutagenic activity were observed. Local tolerance Studies investigated local tolerance after single intra-arterial, paravenous, intravenous, or intramuscular injection to rabbits or rats, respectively. Altogether, rsCT was well tolerated. If any, it produced  only  slight  and  reversible  irritation,  similar  or  less  than  that  produced  by  the  vehicle  or comparator control. Special toxicity studies - immunogenicity As  observed  with  conventional  sCT,  rsCT  was  not  immunogenic  in  a  short-term  repeated-dose experiment in rats. Circulating antibodies against calcitonin could not be detected. Reproductive toxicology An issue pertaining to calcitonin preparations in general was discussed. On the basis of reproductive toxicology studies in rats and rabbits performed more than 20 years ago, no foetal abnormalities would be anticipated following the administration of Forcaltonin during pregnancy. They showed a reduction in  foetal  weight,  or  possibly  the  development  of  maternal  renal  tubule  dilation  and  hyaline  cast formation, particularly at doses corresponding to approximately 53 times the intended therapeutic dose or higher. The consequences on the use of sCT in pregnancy are discussed in the relevant section. Carcinogenicity A  second  issue pertaining to calcitonin preparations in general was  also discussed. Several investigators  observed  a  higher  incidence  of  pituitary  tumors  in  rats  treated  with  high  doses  of calcitonin for approximately one year. In repeated dose studies in mice and dogs using calcitonins, no indication  of  enhanced  pituitary  proliferation  could  be  found.  This  speaks  in  favour  of  a  speciesspecific  tumour-promoting  effect  of  sCT  only  in  rats.  The  extensive  clinical  experience  with  sCT without any noted increased incidence of pituitary tumours indicates that this tumour-promoting effect does  not  extend  to  man.  Patients  with  MTC  (medullary  thyroid  carcinoma),  who  are  exposed  to extremely high levels of endogenous calcitonin, also show no increased incidence of pituitary lesions. This evidence supports the position that the tumours observed in rats are species-specific and have no clinical relevance. Summary and conclusion on preclinical pharmacology and toxicology In an adjusted pharmacological-toxicological testing programme involving predominantly single dose studies, rsCT did not show any effects, which may prohibit clinical use. The batches of rsCT showed equivalence  to  batches  of  conventional  sCT  concerning  pharmacodynamic  and  pharmacokinetic characteristics as well as tolerance. These data are accepted on the basis that authenticity and purity of rsCT has been proven. Therefore, from a pharmaco-toxicological view, all preclinical pharmacology  and  toxicology  issues are considered to be adequately resolved. 4. Clinical aspects Forcaltonin is intended for the treatment of: Paget´s disease and hypercalcaemia of malignancy. Three double-blind controlled clinical studies (comparator: ssCT) were submitted (U1PC-1, U1PC-2, U1PC-3) with the primary objective to prove superimposable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised responses. The three studies had also the secondary objective to assess and compare the safety and tolerability of Forcaltonin with a marketed synthetic salmon calcitonin. Efficacy and safety of calcitonin, including the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties of exogenously administered calcitonin, are described in the clinical part of the application and further supported by detailed data from relevant published literature on the clinical use of calcitonin. Human pharmacology The submitted clinical studies are well planned and conducted in accordance with the applicants SOPs, USA GCP ant the European Good Clinical Practice for Trials on Medicinal Products and under the Declaration of Helsinki Principles. Pharmacodynamics Study  U1PC-1 (Single centre, Single-Dose, double-blind, randomised, crossover comparative pharmacodinamic study of 100 IU Forcaltonin and 100 IU of a marketed synthetic salmon calcitonin in 36 healthy normal female volunteers). This  study  has  been  designed  to  compare  pharmacodynamics  and  demonstrate  superimposable response to a licensed synthetic salmon calcitonin, as judged by the responses of plasma cAMP and serum calcium. Parenteral  administration  of  sCT  is  followed  by  a  rapid  rise  in  plasma  cAMP  concentration.  The response of plasma cAMP to calcitonin is thought to be a receptor-mediated activation of the adenylate cyclase-cAMP  system  at  skeletal  site;  in  addition  calcitonin  has  an  acute  effect  on  renal  function, provoking increases in cAMP excretion. The  primary  mechanisms  of  the  calcium  lowering  effect  of  calcitonin  have  been  shown  to  be  a decrease in osteoclast mediated bone resorption and the inhibition of tubular reabsorption of calcium resulting in an increased calcium excretion. Healthy female volunteers, aged between 18 and 40 years received a single, subcutaneous 100 IU dose of either Forcaltonin or ssCT. Blood samples were collected for determination of plasma cAMP and total serum calcium. Following a washout period of 7 days, subjects received the alternate test material. All  data  were  analysed  using  an  analysis  of  variance.  All  computations  were  performed  using  the Statistical Analysis System (SAS). After  injection  of  Forcaltonin  or  a  marketed  ssCT  a  substantial  increase  in  cAMP  is  seen  .  No statistically significant differences were found between treatment groups. A  serum  calcium  lowering  effect  was  observed  after  Forcaltonin  or  a  marketed  ssCT  injection.  A statistically  significant  greater  response  was  found  with  Forcaltonin,  but  was  not  judged  clinically relevant. Figure  1:  Mean  Serum  Calcium  Levels  Following  100  IU  Injection  of  Forcaltonin  [rsCT]  or Comparator [ssCT] in Normal Female Volunteers (Study U1PC-1)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Study  U1PC-2  and  Study  U1PC-3: Multi-Dose,  Double-Blind,  Crossover  Study  of  100  IU  of Forcaltonin and 100 IU of a marketed synthetic salmon calcitonin in female osteoporotic subjects (30 patients were enrolled in Study U1PC-2 and 28 patients in Study U1PC-3). One objective of these studies was to compare Forcaltonin and a marketed synthetic salmon calcitonin in  their  response  to  bone  resorption  parameters.  Response  was  measured  as  changes  in  urinary concentration  of  deoxypyridinoline  and  the  C-terminal  type  I  collagen  telopeptide  following  drug administration. Urinary excretion of deoxypyridinoline decreased significantly following exposure to calcitonin and increased to baseline after withdrawal. There was no difference in response between Forcaltonin and ssCT. With respect to urinary excretion of collagen C-terminal peptide, the results showed a marked decrease of  urinary  excretion  at  the  start  of  exposure  with  an  increase  to  baseline  at  the  end  of  the  five  day treatment. There  was  no  statistically  significant  difference  between  the  response  obtained  with  Forcaltonin  or ssCT. The  changes  in  biochemical  markers  of  bone  resorption  induced  by  calcitonin  shown  in  these  two independent trials were consistent with results of published studies. Forcaltonin and ssCT showed both a  rapid  decrease  in  deoxypyridinoline  and  collagen  C-terminal  peptide  levels  .  In  addition,  the  test preparation  and  the  approved  synthetic  salmon  calcitonin  were  almost  identical  in  plasma  cAMP response and in their calcium lowering effect. Thus,  pharmacodynamic equivalence of the recombinant preparation Forcaltonin and ssCT can be confirmed. Figure 2: Mean Urinary Deoxypyridinoline Levels Following 100 IU Injection of Forcaltonin [rsCT] or Comparator [ssCT] in Postmenopausal Osteoporotic Women (studies U1PC-2 and 3)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetics A  primary  objective  of  the  U1PC-1  study  was  to  measure  plasma  salmon  calcitonin  levels.  The pharmacokinetic profiles of Forcaltonin and ssCT are nearly superimposable: there was no difference between Forcaltonin and ssCT as judged by AUC, Cmax or tmax. The 90% confidence intervals for AUC and Cmax were contained within the boundaries required  for  bioequivalence.  The  values  for Tmax were also comparable. The results of the study support the bioequivalence of Forcaltonin and ssCT. Figure 3: Mean Plasma sCT Levels Following 100 IU Injection of Forcaltonin [rsCT] or Comparator [ssCT] in Normal Female Volunteers (study: U1PC-1) Therapeutic indications Evidence  of  the  efficacy  of  ssCT  in  the  approved  indications  has  been  available  for  an  extensive period of time and the evidence of the clinical efficacy of Forcaltonin is derived from the data reported in the scientific literature on synthetic salmon calcitonin. A summary of the literature data in  support  of  the  dosage  regimens  in the  approved  indications,  is presented below: Paget´s Disease Effective doses of sCT in Paget´s disease vary from 50 IU on alternate days to 100 or 200 IU daily The minimum effective dose is 50 IU on alternate days or thrice weekly. More complete responses are seen with 100 IU thrice weekly or daily administration of 50 - 100 IU.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal product no longer authorised The recommended dose is 100 IU per day, which lies within the range in current clinical use in the EU member states. The applicant also mentions that doses of 50 IU thrice weekly have achieved clinical and biochemical improvement and that the dosage of Forcaltonin should be related to the severity of the disease. The thrice-weekly dosage is also in line with the current clinical practice. Duration  of  treatment  varies  from  3  to  18  months,  sometimes  it  is  stated  that  treatment  can  be continued for a longer period if necessary. No recommendation of treatment duration is given, as the applicant outlines that  treatment  may  be monitored  by  measurement  of  suitable  markers  of  bone  resorption  such  as  alkaline  phosphatase  or urinary hydroxyproline or deoxypyridinoline. However, monitoring by deoxypyridinoline appears to be not yet suitable for clinical routine. Therefore the SPC states that treatment duration will depend on the response and clinical indications for treatment. Hypercalcaemia of malignancy The fall in serum calcium following administration of sCT is rapid and occurs within 2 hours. The decrease  in  calcium  is  approximately  0.5  mmol/L.  There  is  also  evidence  that  intravenous  infusion rather than a bolus injection gives a more complete response. The maximum response is observed after approximately  2  days;  the  duration  of  response  persists  for  7-14  days,  and  may  wane  thereafter, perhaps due to a loss of effect on bone. The effect of sCT to decrease renal tubular reabsorption of calcium may persist much longer. The optimal dose of calcitonin to induce serum calcium decrease is unknown. There is no apparent difference  in  efficacy  between  doses  in  the  range  from  100-400  IU  daily.  Most  of  the  clinical experience has been with the higher doses - up to 10 IU/kg body weight every 6 hours, 400 IU 8 hourly , 8 IU/kg 6 hourly. A starting dose of 400 IU every 6 to 8 hours by subcutaneous or intramuscular injection in addition to intravascular volume repletion is recommended. If the response is not satisfactory after one or two days, the dose may be increased to 10 IU/kg body weight every 6 to 8 hours. In severe or emergency cases, intravenous infusion with 10 IU/kg body weight in 500 ml physiologic saline may be administered over a period of at least 6 hours. As a dose of 10 IU/kg body weight every six hours lies outside the range given in most member states the CPMP recommends to modify the dose to 10 IU/kg/day Safety Safety  and  tolerability  of  Forcaltonin  and  ssCT  were  assessed  and  compared  in  the  U1PC-2  and U1PC-3  studies,  already  described  in  the  pharmacodynamics  and  pharmacokinetics  section  of  this report. Safety data of U1PC-1 study are also included. The three  studies  evaluated  tolerability  and  safety  as  secondary  endpoints  by  assessing  the  adverse events including injection site inspection, evaluation of clinical laboratory data, physical exam/vital sign assessments and ECG findings, and the evaluation of orthostatic hypotension effect. Analysis of adverse events included Fisher´s exact test and McNemar´s test. Vital signs and laboratory data were analysed using an analysis of variance. The spectrum of side effects, which occurred in these studies, is not different from the side effects known from published studies. The most frequent side effect reported in publications is nausea followed by facial flushing, local pain at the injection site, diarrhoea, and vomiting. Less frequent side effects are headache, metallic taste in the mouth, urticaria at the site of injection and polyuria. Generalised urticaria and tremor have been reported but are exceptionally rare. In  summary,  there  were  no  relevant  differences  in  side  effect  profile  and  incidences  between Forcaltonin and ssCT.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

5.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Adverse events Neither serious adverse events nor deaths occurred in the studies performed. The  most  common  AEs  were  nausea  ear  flushing,  facial  flushing  and  vomiting.  There  were  no statistically significant differences between groups in the incidence of nausea, which occurred in more than half of the patients, or vomiting (around 30% of the patients). The higher incidence of nausea and vomiting  in  the  U1PC-1  study  was  not  unexpected  in  a  healthy  volunteer  population  receiving  a therapeutic dose of calcitonin for the first time. Other observed AEs were diarrhoea and increased urinary frequency. In study U1PC-2, statistically significant differences between the groups were found for the patients with  facial  flushing  and  increase  in  urinary  frequency  (21.4%  in  the  Fortical  group,  3.6  %  in  the comparator. In study U1PC-3, the percentage of patients with headache was significantly higher in the Forcaltonin group (32.1% against 12.5%). Evaluation of injection sites The  site  of  injection  was  inspected  and  evaluated  for  any  sign  of  erythema,  ecchymosis,  swelling, tenderness  or  persistence  of  pain  and  warmth  following  the  injection  and  at  different  times  postinjection. Very few abnormal findings were observed and no statistically significant treatment group difference was  found.  There  were  no  statistically  significant  differences  between  the  treatment  groups  at  any time-point. Clinical laboratory evaluation Standard clinical laboratory tests were made during the study visits. There were some laboratory parameters (AST, GGTP, total protein, bilirubin and basophil percentage, cholesterol, sodium, creatinine, uric acid, albumin and urine pH) with mean changes from screening values which were statistically significant but since all changes were within the reference range, none of them was clinically relevant. Vital signs and ECG Systolic  blood  pressure,  diastolic  blood  pressure  and  pulse,  each  in  both  the  supine  and  standing position had been monitored. There were no clinically significant differences between groups for vital signs, nor clinically relevant ECG abnormalities were observed. Orthostatic hypotension Few events of orthostatic hypotension occurred(three patients had a total of five orthostatic episodes post-injection:  1  following  Forcaltionin,  4  after  comparator).  None  of  the  episodes  of  orthostatic hypotension was symptomatic. No significant differences between the treatment groups were found. Use in pregnancy There is some experience providing data against a strict withholding of sCT in pregnancy. However, the current SPC labelling with respect to use during pregnancy and lactation is in accordance with the accepted opinion that calcitonin may be used if considered essential. Taking together the results of these three studies, it can be concluded that both drugs were safe and well  tolerated  in  these  studies.  Between  groups  there  were  no  significant  differences  in  the  overall incidence  of  adverse  events,  incidence  by  severity  or  incidence  by  relationship  to  test  drug,  in  the incidence  of  nausea,  vomiting,  injection  site  reaction,  or  categorical  shifts  of  clinical  laboratory findings, except for facial flushing and urinary frequency in the U1PC-2 study and the incidence of headache in the U1PC-3 study. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Forcaltonin  recombinant  salmon  calcitonin  has  been  demonstrated  to  have  the  authentic  molecular, biological and pharmacological properties of chemically synthesized salmon calcitonin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacodynamic properties of Forcaltonin were compared to a marketed synthetic salmon calcitonin in healthy volunteers and patients. Superimposable response of plasma cAMP and serum calcium to a single injection of Forcaltonin or ssCT could be demonstrated in healthy volunteers. The measurement of  two  urinary  indices  of  bone  resorption,  deoxypyridinoline  and  the  C-terminal  type  I  collagen telopeptide  demonstrated  an  almost  identical  response  of  Forcaltonin  and  ssCT  in  two  independent studies. Bioequivalence of Forcaltonin and ssCT was also demonstrated in a single dose study with healthy volunteers. The pharmacokinetic profiles of Forcaltonin and ssCT are nearly superimposable, the 90% confidence interval for AUC  and  Cmax  were  contained  within  the  boundaries  required  for bioequivalence and the values for Tmax were comparable. On the  basis  of  the  demonstrated  authenticity  of  rsCT  with  respect  to  ssCT,  and  the  demonstrated identicality of Forcaltonin and medicinal products containing ssCT, evidence of the clinical efficacy of Forcaltonin  in  the  indications:  Paget's  disease  of  the  bone  and  hypercalcaemia  of  malignancy,  as derived from the literature on synthetic salmon calcitonin, was considered acceptable. Three studies were performed to assess safety and tolerability of Forcaltonin compared to ssCT. The side effect profile of Forcaltonin was not different from that of ssCT. No clinically relevant treatment group differences were found. Based on  the  CPMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CPMP  considered  that  the benefit/risk profile of Forcaltonin was favourable in the treatment of Paget's disease and hypercalcaemia of malignancy.