---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 21:43:42
document_pages: 29
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/hepsera-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: hepsera-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 12.3461223
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 08:10:13.501047
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Hepsera.    For information on changes after approvalplease refer to module 8B

## 1. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

## Composition

Hepsera is presented as an immediate release tablet containing 10 mg of adefovir dipivoxil, as active substance. The other ingredients in this formulation are commonly used in tablets Hepsera is supplied in high-density polyethylene bottle (HDPE), with silica gel desiccant canisters or sachets,  and  polyester  fiber  packing  material.  The  closure  system  consists  of  a  child-resistant polypropylene screw cap lined with an induction activated aluminium foil liner. Active substance Adefovir dipivoxil is an ester prodrug of the nucleotide analogue, adefovir. A structural modification of the parent drug has been carried out in order to increase the lipophilicity and to enhance the oral bioavailability of adefovir. The active  substance  is  a  white  to  off-white  crystalline  powder.    It  is  soluble  in  ethanol,  sparingly soluble in 0.1N HCl and very slightly soluble in water adjusted to pH 7.2 but relatively highly soluble at physiological pH. The active substance does not contain any chiral center and does not exhibit any optical isomerism. In  laboratory  studies  the  anhydrate  crystal  form  has  been  observed  to  convert  gradually  into  a dihydrate crystal form when adefovir dipivoxil was exposed to high humidity conditions (75% R.H., 25ºC) over an approximately one-month period. However, the only crystal form produced during the active  substance  synthesis  and  utilised  in  non-clinical  and  clinical  studies  has  been  the  anhydrous crystal form. Adefovir dipivoxil undergoes also hydrolysis in aqueous solution and to a smaller degree in the solid state after exposure to humidity and heat for extended periods. Adefovir dipivoxil is synthetised from commercially available starting materials. Following crytallisation, the product is dried and milled. Satisfactory specifications and associated methods have been provided for the starting materials, key intermediates, reagents and solvents. The  active  substance  specification  includes  tests  for  appearance,  identity,  clarity  of  solution,  water content, assay, impurity content (HPLC), organic volatile impurities (GC), heavy metals, particle size and additional tests to confirm that the active substance is in the anhydrous form. Impurity limits in specification are justified by toxicology studies. The analytical methods used in routine controls are suitably described and validated. Batch analysis data confirm satisfactory compliance and uniformity with the proposed specification. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

Batches have been studied under long-term conditions (5°C - samples packed in sealed polyethylene bags placed into tightly capped HDPE bottles) for up to 36 months and under accelerated conditions (25°C/60% RH and 30°C/60% RH - samples packed in sealed polyethylene bags placed into tightly capped HPDE bottles or unsealed polyethylene bags placed into open HDPE bottles) for 6 months.

Photostability studies were also performed and showed that the active substance is not light sensitive.

The results obtained support the proposed retest period of 2 years under refrigeration at 2-8°C.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Other ingredients

All the excipients comply with the Ph. Eur. requirements.

The  only  ingredient  from  animal  origin  is  the  lactose  monohydrate  using  milk  and  calf  rennet  of bovine  origin  during  its  preparation.  The  manufacturer  has  provided  confirmation  that  the  milk  is sourced from healthy animals in the same conditions as milk collected for human consumption and that the calf rennet complies with the public statement EMEA/CPMP/571/02.

The  HDPE  bottle  and  the  polypropylene  cap  meet  the  general  Ph.  Eur.  requirements  for  plastic primary packaging material. Confirmation has been given that the silica gel desiccant canisters/sachets and the polyester fiber packing material are suitable for contact with food.

Long term and accelerated stability studies were conducted on six primary stability batches. 36 months data are available for one batch, 24 months for another and 18 months for the four other batches under long  term  conditions  (25ºC/60%  R.H  -  packaging  intended  for  commercialisation).  Studies  under accelerated  conditions  (40ºC/75%  R.H.  -  packaging  intended  for  commercialisation)  have  been performed over a 6-months duration.  Additional long-term stability studies have been conducted at the intermediate condition of 30ºC/70% R.H. for a 18-month period. A photostability study has also been performed.

Product development and finished product The  product  development  was  mainly  based  on  the  active  substance  properties  and  so  aimed  to minimise the exposure of the active substance to moisture. The  tablet  formulation  is  prepared  using  a  conventional  wet  granulation  process  and  subsequent controlled  drying  process  to  reduce  the  water  content  of  the  granules.  The  effect  of  environmental moisture  on  the  drug  product  has  also  been  minimised  by  adding  silica  gel  as  a  desiccant  to  the immediate packaging bottle and also by using a bottle with sufficient wall thickness and an aluminium foil induction seal.All the excipients selected are commonly used in tablet formulations. The function of each excipient and the rationale for its use has been satisfactorily described. The  formulation  used  in  the  clinical  studies  and  the  commercial  formulations  are  similar,  the  only difference being the dimension and the shape of the tablets. Therefore, no bioequivalence study has been performed. A bioequivalence  study  has  been  performed  to  assess  the  effect  of  food  on  the  bioavailability  and pharmacokinetic of the intended commercial formulation. The results demonstrate that the absorption of adefovir dipivoxil is unaffected when taken with food. The  method  of  manufacture  can  be  divided  into  5  operations:  compounding,  granulation/drying, milling, final blending (in two steps: extragranular excipients then lubricant), and compression. Validation data have been provided on six primary stability batches and also on 3 full-scale batches prepared using three different active substance lots sourced from the two suppliers. These validation data together with the results obtained during process and formulation optimisation studies showed the robustness of the formulation and that the identified critical parameters are under control. Based on these results, satisfactory in-process controls have been established. The  product  specification  includes  tests  for  appearance,  identity,  assay,  water  content,  impurity content, content uniformity (Ph. Eur.), dissolution, hardness (Ph. Eur.) and microbial limit (Ph. Eur.). Batch analysis data presented include data for 3 full-scale batches of the finished product manufactured  at  the  intended  manufacturing  site,  comply  with  the  specifications  and  confirm  the robustness and reproducibility of the manufacturing process. Stability of the Product Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The results presented support the proposed shelf life and storage conditions defined in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

## Mechanism of action

Because adefovir is not well absorbed from the intestine, the prodrug was developed as it was shown in vitro that adefovir dipivoxil enters cells more efficiently than the parent compound, and is rapidly converted into adefovir.

Adefovir  is  actively  transported  into  cells  where  it  is  converted  by  adenylate  kinase  to  the  active metabolite adefovir diphosphate through two phosphorylation reactions. Adefovir diphosphate inhibits hepatitis B virus (HBV) polymerase activity by competing with dATP for  incorporation  into  viral  DNA.  Adefovir  diphosphate  lacks  a  3´-hydroxyl  group  and  therefore causes  premature  termination  of  DNA  synthesis  after  incorporation  into  the  DNA  chain.  Adefovir diphosphate  is  a  potent  inhibitor  of  HBV  DNA  polymerase;  with  a  Ki value  (inhibition  constant) equivalent to 0.1 µM. Adefovir diphosphate shows specificity for HBV polymerase with a Ki value 10-700 fold higher than for mammalian DNA polymerases. The half-life of adefovir diphosphate was 16-18 hours in T-lymphocytic MT-4 cells. The half-life of adefovir dipivoxil was 30 hours in quiescent human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and 12 hours in PHA-stimulated PBMCs. In vivo intracellular half-life of adefovir diphosphate in PBMCs was approximately 36 hours after a single subcutaneous dose of 14 C-labeled adefovir to macaques. · In vitro studies Adefovir  demonstrated  antiviral  activity  against  human  HBV,  duck  HBV  (DHBV)  and  woodchuck HBV (WHV) in cells culture models . Concentrations leading to 50 % inhibition of viral replication (IC50) ranged from 0.2 to 1.2 µ M in two different HBV DNA transfected hepatoma cell lines. In  different  cells  types,  the  cytotoxic  concentrations  of  adefovir  ranged  from  80  to  500 µ M, which revealed a low cytoxicity potential. Adefovir  showed  additive  or  synergistic  anti-DHBV  activity  in  combination  with  lamivudine  and penciclovir at several molar ratios. There was no antagonism between these three compounds. Adefovir diphosphate was active against lamivudine and famciclovir resistant HBV polymerases with the  Ki  values  increasing  by  less  than  2.3  fold  compared  with  the  wild  type.  In  addition,  mutations associated  with  hepatitis  B  immunoglobulin  escape  did  not  reduce  sensitivity  to  adefovir  in  cell culture. As other nucleotide analogues, adefovir has a nephrotoxic potential. Adefovir was less inhibitory on the growth of human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (concentration of 50 % cytotoxicity, CC50, 495 µM) than cidofovir (CC50 260 µM) but more than tenofovir, which did not inhibit cell growth at the tested dose (CC50 &gt; 2 mM). This cytotoxicity appeared to be linked to the expression of the human renal organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1) which mediates cellular uptake of these nucleotides thus augmenting the concentration of the compound in cells expressing this transporter. Interference with essential  intracellular  function(s)  rather  than  a  difference  in  renal  transport  is  responsible  for  the differential nephrotoxicity of adefovir, cidofovir and tenofovir. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

Since  nucleoside  analogues  are  associated  with  mitochondrial  toxicity  and  production  of  lactic acidosis, the potential effects of adefovir were evaluated in in vitro cellular models. At concentrations up to 30 µM, adefovir did not inhibit the synthesis of mitochondrial DNA.

## · In vivo studies

In vivo animal studies demonstrated the activity of adefovir in the duck model of HBV replication and the  activity  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  in  the  woodchuck  and  mice  transgenic  models  of  WHV  or  HBV

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

replication. A relapse was seen after cessation of treatment. Although in the duck model adefovir was able to inhibit duck HBV in cells other than hepatocytes, the antiviral activity of adefovir in extrahepatic  cells  has  not  been  studied  in  humans,  but  the  applicant  committed  to  explore  this  potential effect post-authorisation.

Immunodulatory activity was reported when adefovir or adefovir dipivoxil was administered in mice and rats. It was therefore suggested that through these activities both adefovir and adefovir dipivoxil might  indirectly  influence  the  host  immune  response  and  contribute  to  an  improvement  in  liver histology.

· Resistance Adefovir  seems  to  have  a  low  potential  for  resistance  development  due  to  its  close  structural relationship  with  dATP,  which  limits  potential  for  steric  hindrance  as  mechanism  of  resistance.  In addition,  the in  vitro data  suggest  that  the  risk  for  induction  of  multi-drug  resistance  (or  cellular resistance)  due  to  changes  in  host  cellular  functions  would  be  low  in  patients  receiving  adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg daily. General and safety pharmacology programme Adefovir  dipivoxil  had  no  pharmacological  effects  on  general  behaviour  in  mice  at  doses  up  to 100  mg/kg.  Piloerection  was  seen  at  doses  of  30  and  100  mg/kg.  However  this  effect  was  not considered clinically relevant, which was further supported by the lack of such adverse reaction in the clinical  safety  database.  There  was  no  evidence  of  effect  on  the  cardiovascular  and  respiratory functions  in  dogs  receiving  intraduodenal  doses  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  up  to  12  mg/kg.  Adefovir dipivoxil caused decreased urine volume, electrolyte excretion and decreased gastric emptying in rats at doses of 30 mg/kg. Pharmacokinetics The  pharmacokinetics  profiles  of  adefovir  and  adefovir  dipivoxil  have  been  investigated  in  several species (mice, rats and cynomolgus monkeys). Adefovir dipivoxil was administered orally, which is the intended route of administration in humans. Two validated assays were used to determine plasma concentrations of adefovir: HPLC method with humans. fluororescence derivatisation used in early studies including toxicokinetics (limit of quantification 60 ng/ml) and HPLC-mass spectrometry (limit of quantification 5 ng/ml). Absorption and distribution Following  oral  administration,  adefovir  dipivoxil  was  rapidly  absorbed  in  all  three  species  and converted  to  adefovir,  with  Tmax  values  reached  within  0.25  to  1.5  hours  post-dose.  Plasma concentrations declined in a biphasic manner. The oral bioavailability ranged between 34 and 47 % in rats and between 21 and 35 % in monkeys. Repeated doses administration resulted in pharmacokinetics parameters similar to those obtained after single  dose  administration.  The  pharmacokinetics  of  adefovir  seemed  linear.  Cmax  and  AUC  were almost  proportional  to  the  dose  and  there  was  no  sign  of  accumulation.  Adefovir  displayed  similar pharmacokinetics in pregnant and non-pregnant rats. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

Following  oral  administration  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  in  rats  and  monkeys,  adefovir  distributed extensively with the highest amounts found in gastrointestinal tissues, liver and kidney.

The protein binding of adefovir was not evaluated in animals but was found to be very low in human plasma and serum (less &lt; 4 %).

## Metabolism and elimination

The biological stability of adefovir dipivoxil was studied in vitro in  plasma and tissue homogenates from  rats  and  humans.  It  was  rapidly  converted  to  the  intermediate  adefovir-monoester  and  then

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

adefovir  through  cleavage  of  the  phosphoester  linkages  by  non-specific  esterases.  The  half-life  of conversion of adefovir dipivoxil to adefovir monopivoxil was 50 min in rat intestinal wash and 3 min in  human plasma, indicating that the prodrug would be sufficiently stable in the intestines to allow time for oral absorption. The half-life of the monoester itself was not determined but is presumed to be relatively short.

No other metabolites than adefovir have been detected in radiolabelling studies in rats and monkeys. Adefovir did not inhibit P450 enzymes up to the highest tested concentration of 300 µM. Adefovir dipivoxil  inhibited  CYP3A4  activity  at  a  concentration  of  19  and  83  µM  using  midazolam  and testosterone as substrates, respectively. As it is rapidly degraded to adefovir, this slight inhibition of CYP3A4 can be considered without clinical relevance. The other P450 enzymes were not inhibited by adefovir dipivoxil.

Nephrotoxicity  was  the  dose-limiting  toxicity  in  rats  and  monkeys  and  the  no  observable  adverse effect levels (NOAEL) in these species were respectively 2 mg/kg (extrapolated to be 1.5 times the human exposure for 10 mg dose) and 1 mg/kg (exposure less than human exposure for 10 mg dose). The  incidence  and  severity  of  renal  tubular  nephropathy  were  related  to  dose  and  duration  of treatment.  Nephrotoxicity  was  characterised  by  renal  tubular  nephropathy  with  elevation  of  urea, creatinine, glucosuria, and proteinuria. Kidney weights were also augmented. Histology revealed renal tubular  karyomegaly,  tubular  dilatation  and  individual  tubular  epithelial  cell  necrosis.  Tubular karyomegaly  was  considered  as  a  morphological  change  without  any  consequences.  As  already mentioned  in  the  pharmacodynamic  part  of  this  document, in  vitro experiments  suggested  that  the hOAT1, which transports adefovir, could play a role in adefovir nephrotoxicity. In view of the low safety  margins  with  regard  to  renal  toxicity,  appropriate  monitoring  measures  of  renal  function  of

After intravenous administration of adefovir, it was mainly excreted as unchanged in the urine of all animal species tested (85 % in rats and 75 % in monkeys excreted as unchanged). Toxicology Toxicological studies have been studied in mice, rats, guinea pigs, woodchucks, rabbits and monkeys, where adefovir dipivoxil was administered orally as per the proposed therapeutic route of administration.  In  addition  the  toxicology  of  adefovir  was  evaluated  in  mice,  rabbits  and  monkeys using intravenous, subcutaneous or intramuscular route of administration. Definitive toxicology and toxicokinetics studies were conducted in accordance to Good Laboratory Practices. Single dose toxicity Adefovir  and  adefovir  dipivoxil  showed  a  low  acute  toxicity.  After  a  single  dose  of  adefovir administered intravenously or subcutaneously, the minimum lethal doses were &gt; 500 mg/kg in mice, 500 mg/kg in rats and 150 mg/kg in monkeys. Clinical signs were mainly a decreased activity in mice and rats. There was no death after oral administration of adefovir dipivoxil up to 225 mg/kg in rats or monkeys. The no observable effect level (NOEL) was 75 mg/kg in both species. Repeated dose toxicity The  toxicity  of  adefovir  was  evaluated  in  rats  and  monkeys,  which  received  intravenous  or subcutaneous  administrations  for  up  to  4  weeks.  The  primary  target  organs  were  the  kidney,  bone marrow and the skin. Dermal reactions characterised by hair loss, exfoliation and scabbing of the fore and  hid  limbs  and/or  ventral  thoracic  area  and  microscopically  by  epidermal  hyperkeratosis  and/or suppurative  inflammation  were  observed  in  monkeys  following  intravenous  (25  mg/kg/day)  and subcutaneous administration (20 mg/kg/day). Although these effects were only seen after parenteral administration and the safety margin was large, the mechanism behind these lesions at a non injection site is unknown. The toxicity of adefovir dipivoxil administered orally was evaluated in mice (up to 13 weeks), in rats (up  to  26  weeks)  and  cynomolgus  monkeys  (up  to  52  weeks).  The  target  organs  were  the  kidney, gastrointestinal tract, liver, lymphoid and haematopoietic system. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients treated have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics as further discussed in the clinical part of this document.

Dose-related hyperplastic, degenerative and inflammatory changes of the gastric epithelium were seen in  monkeys ( ≥ 8  mg/kg/day  in  the  4-week  study).  In  the  13-week  study  in  this  species,  changes  in faecal consistency and vomitus were seen especially in the 25 mg/kg/day group. There was no such changes  in  the  longer-term  studies  (52-week  with  doses  up  to  5  mg/kg  equivalent  to  the  human exposure), which suggested that this effect is probably linked to local irritation, and therefore did not raise any concern for the clinical use of adefovir dipivoxil.

Liver  changes  such  as  hepatocellular  karyo/cytomegaly  and  individual  cell  necrosis  were  only observed in mice with doses of 10 mg/kg/day adefovir dipivoxil and above. In the monkeys studies, liver  transaminases  were  increased  2-3  fold  at  doses  of  5  to  25  mg/kg/day,  which  correspond  to  a systemic exposure  approximately  3  to  27  times the human  exposure.  The  increase  in  liver transaminases without histological changes was reversed after treatment cessation. On the background of these data and human clinical data demonstrating decreases in serum transaminases with adefovir dipivoxil treatment, effects on the liver do not appear to be a concern for its clinical use. In  the  13-week  study  in  mice,  bone  marrow  toxicity  was  noted  at  10-100  mg/kg/day  (systemic exposures 11 to 76 times human exposure). In the intravenous and subcutaneous studies, lymphoid depletion of the spleen, thymus and lymph nodes and hypocellularity of the bone marrow were seen in rats  with  doses ≥ 20  mg/kg/day and monkeys with doses ≥ 20  mg/kg/day (at  250  times  the  human exposure). This toxicity at high doses is expected for nucleotide analogues. As the safety margins are large, there is no reason for concern in humans. Dose  dependent  increases  in  serum  total  creatinine  phosphokinase  activities  were  observed  in monkeys  administered  adefovir  dipivoxil  at  doses ≥ 5  mg/kg/day  for  4,  13  or  52  weeks.  These increases were readily reversible following a recovery period. In addition animals were not lethargic and histology of skeletal muscle was negative. Based on these data and in vitro data, which revealed that adefovir dipivoxil only has a low potential for mitochondrial toxicity, there was no evidence for mitochondrial toxicity, which was confirmed in clinical studies. In the subchronic and chronic toxicity studies in monkeys, free and total serum carnitine were reduced in  a  dose  and  duration  dependent  manner  with  no  apparent  clinical  or  histological  related  toxicity. Carnitine levels slightly increased during the recovery period. Reproduction toxicity Adefovir dipivoxil did not affect the fertility and general reproduction performance of the male and female rats at doses up to 30 mg/kg. In rats, adefovir given intravenously resulted in embryotoxicity (increased number of resorption and the  percentage of resorbed conceptuses per litter), increased incidence of foetal malformations (e.g. anasarca, depressed eye bulge, umbilical hernia, and kinked tail) and other common variations (e.g. supernumerary ribs) but only at doses resulting in maternal toxicity (20 mg/kg/day). Medicinal Product no longer authorised

When  adefovir  dipivoxil  was  administered  orally  at  a  dosage  up  to  35  mg/kg  in  rats,  neither embryotoxic  nor  teratogenic  effects  were  observed.  NOEL  for  teratogenicity  was  above  35  mg/kg, providing a systemic exposure of approximately 23 times that achieved in humans  at the recommended clinical dose. The maternal and foetal NOAEL was 10 mg/kg. In rabbit, no effect was seen on embryo-foetal development and the NOEL for maternal and foetal toxicity was 20 mg/kg/day, providing a systemic exposure of approximately 40 times that achieved in humans  at the recommended clinical dose.

Developmental toxicity was noted in the pre- and post-natal development study in rats (reduction of F1 pup weights at weaning and an increase in F1 pup deaths) but only with doses of adefovir dipivoxil resulting in maternal toxicity (40 mg/kg dose).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In all studies, adverse effects were only seen at very high doses and clear NOELs were determined with maternal systemic exposures many times higher than the human clinical exposure. It is expected that the foetal exposure obtained in these studies would also be very high. Adefovir dipivoxil should therefore not be used during pregnancy unless the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the foetus as mentioned in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

## Genotoxicity

In vitro , adefovir was negative in the bacterial mutation assay using single doses up to 5000 µg/plate with/without metabolic activation. Adefovir was however positive in the chromosome aberration assay in human peripheral blood lymphocytes with dose-related elevations in the frequency of chromosomal aberrations seen at 25 and 50 µ g/ml without metabolic activation.

Adefovir dipivoxil was positive in the mouse lymphoma assay (mutation frequencies were increased at 12.5  and  25 µ g/ml  with  or  without  metabolic  activation)  but  negative  in  the in  vivo mouse micronucleus assay using doses up to 2000 mg/kg. The profile of adefovir and adefovir dipivoxil is similar to nucleoside analogues in that it induces chromosomal aberrations (but not point mutations) in vitro but is not genetoxic in vivo . Carcinogenicity The carcinogenic potential of adefovir dipivoxil was evaluated in mice using doses up to 10 mg/kg and rats using doses up to 5 mg/kg by oral gavage using standard protocols. No carcinogenic effects of adefovir dipivoxil have been evidenced. Animals were exposed to the highest possible dose despite the absence  of  body  weight  gain  reduction  and  the  low  multiple  of  human  exposure  obtained  at  these doses  (10  mg/kg  corresponding  to  approximately  8  times  the  human  exposure  and  5  mg/kg corresponding to approximately 4 times the human exposure). Local tolerance Adefovir  dipivoxil  was  a  moderate  skin  and  eye  irritant  in  rabbits  but  did  not  provoke  dermal sensitisation in guinea-pigs. Impurities There was no unexpected toxicity when adefovir was enriched with impurities and/or organic volatile impurities. Pivalic acid Pivalic acid is a product of the in vivo metabolism of adefovir dipivoxil to adefovir, which is renally excreted after being conjugated with serum free carnitine.  As mentioned above the carnitine depletion observed in monkeys is of no apparent consequences. Formaldehyde Formaldehyde  is  released  during  hydrolysis  of  the  pivaloyloxymethyl  promoiety  but  the  estimated daily exposure to formaldehyde at the clinical therapeutic dose of adefovir dipivoxil does not raise any concern. Environmental risk assessment Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The  assessment  of  the  environmental  risk  did  not  suggest  any  significant  risk  to  the  environment related to the use of adefovir dipivoxil.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Clinical aspects

The  clinical  development  programme  for  adefovir  dipivoxil  enrolled  a  wide  range  of  patients  to support the use of adefovir dipivoxil in adult patients with chronic hepatitis B.  The programme, which includes more than 1,000 patients, consists of:

- 5 pharmacokinetics studies
- 3 Phase II studies to evaluate the anti-HBV activity of adefovir dipivoxil and to define the dose as well as an extension phase study
- 2  pivotal  placebo-controlled  clinical  studies  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  (HBeAg positive and HBeAg negative, respectively) and compensated liver disease

As observed in animals, preliminary data obtained in a subgroup of patients from study 437 showed that  adefovir  exerts  also  an  immunomodulatory  effect  via  interferon  gamma.  The  enhanced  HBV specific T-cell reactivity to HBV was more observed in adefovir-treated patients compared to placebo.

· 1  open-label  study  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  failing  lamivudine  therapy  who  have received a liver transplantation or who are waiting for a transplantation. · 3 supportive  studies  in patients with  lamivudine-resistant  chronic  hepatitis B  infection, including studies in patients with compensated/decompensated liver disease, and in patients co-infected with HIV. Adefovir dipivoxil was originally developed for the treatment of HIV infection using higher doses (60 mg and 120 mg daily) but the programme was discontinued since the limited benefit of the compound did not outweigh its significant nephrotoxicity reported with higher doses. Pertinent safety data from the HIV programme have however been submitted in this current application. All the studies were conducted in accordance with the agreed international ethical principles and Good Clinical Practices. Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Mechanism of action As  already  mentioned  in  section  3.3  of  this  document  (Part  III:  pharmaco-toxicological  aspects) adefovir dipivoxil undergoes a rapid enzymatic hydrolysis by non-specific esterases yielding adefovir (10 mg adefovir dipivoxil is equivalent to 5.448 mg adefovir). The site of hydrolysis has not been fully identified, but is supposed to take place both in the gut lumen and throughout the absorptive pathway. Adefovir is then rapidly converted through two phosphorylation reactions in the hepatocyte cytosol to the  active  intracellular  metabolite  adefovir  diphosphate  which  is  a  potent  competitive  inhibitor  of HBV polymerase and acts as a chain terminator of HBV DNA replication. Adefovir dipivoxil showed potent in vitro and in vivo anti-HBV activity. Hepatitis B  virus covalently closed circular (ccc) DNA  is  a  critical intracellular replicative intermediate  that  appears  responsible  for  viral  persistence  during  chronic  infection  and  antiviral therapy.  Preliminary  data  originated  from  one  phase  3  study  (437)  showed  that  adefovir  dipivoxil decreased the intracellular pool of ccc DNA by 86% after 48 weeks of therapy. However it has to be further evaluated whether the cccDNA determination could be an indicator of sustained response and could  help  in  defining  treatment  duration.  The  applicant  committed  to  provide  further  data  postauthorisation to address this issue. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

## Dynamic studies

Three studies were conducted in patients with chronic hepatitis B to confirm the in  vitro anti-HBV activity and to identify the recommended dose for clinical use. Adefovir is converted intracellularly by adenylate kinases to the active metabolite adefovir diphosphate, which exhibits an intracellular half-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

life of 12 to 36 hours in lymphocytes supporting the once daily dose regimen. An overview of these studies is presented in table 1.

| Table 1 Phase I/II pharmacodynamic/dose ranging studies   | Table 1 Phase I/II pharmacodynamic/dose ranging studies       | Table 1 Phase I/II pharmacodynamic/dose ranging studies                                                        | Table 1 Phase I/II pharmacodynamic/dose ranging studies   | Table 1 Phase I/II pharmacodynamic/dose ranging studies                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                                                     | General Design                                                | Patient Population                                                                                             | Pts analysed                                              | Dose/ Duration                                                                                                                  |
| 404                                                       | Double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, dose escalation | Chronic hepatitis B, elevated ALT, HBeAg positive.                                                             | Initial: 20 Maintenance: 15                               | Initial: ADV 125 mg, 250 and 500 mg for 4 weeks or placebo (dose escalation stopped) Maintenance: ADV 60 or 120 mg for 24 weeks |
| 412 (initial)                                             | Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose escalation | Chronic hepatitis B, elevated ALT. Cohort 1: HBeAg positive Cohort 2: HBeAg negative (presumed precore mutant) | Cohort 1 53 Cohort 2 10                                   | ADV 5, 30 and 60 mg or placebo for 12 weeks ADV 30 mg or placebo for 12 weeks authorised                                        |
| 413 (initial)                                             | Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose escalation | Chronic HBV infection, normal ALT (< 1.2 x ULN), HBeAg positive                                                | 14                                                        | ADV 30 mg for 12 weeks (dose escalation stopped)                                                                                |

In  study  412,  treatment  with  30  and  60  mg  resulted  in  similar  degrees  of  suppression  of  viral  load whereas the effect of 5 mg daily was less pronounced although still significant compared to placebo. The  median  serum  HBV  DNA  change  from  baseline  at  week  12  was  -0.02 log10  copies/ml  in  the placebo group, compared with -1.82 log10 copies/ml in the 5 mg group, -3.78 log10 copies/ml in the 30 mg group, and -3.34 log10 copies/ml in the 60 mg group (p&lt; 0.001).

In  addition  to  these  three  studies,  a  52-week  extension  phase  using  a  daily  dose  of  30 mg  adefovir dipivoxil was planned for HBeAg positive patients after completion of their participation to the initial phase  of  either  study  412  or  413  and  after  completing  a  24-week  off-treatment  follow-up  period. Similarly  HBeAg  negative  chronic  hepatitis  B  patients  could  be  enrolled  in  the  extension  phase  to maintain  suppression  of  HBV  replication.  While  participating  in  this  extension  phase  all  patients enrolled had their daily dose of adefovir dipivoxil reduced to 10 mg as a consequence of emergence of mild reversible nephrotoxicity associated with the use of doses above 30 mg daily for more than 20 weeks. At that time the majority of patients enrolled had been treated for 30 weeks. Endpoints In all these studies, the primary efficacy endpoint was change in serum log10 HBV DNA concentration from  baseline.  Secondary  efficacy  endpoints  included  the  rate  of  conversion  of  HBV  serological markers  (studies  412  and  413)  and  change  in  serum  ALT  from  baseline  (study  413).  The  safety endpoints  were  frequency  and  severity  of  adverse  reactions,  change  in  laboratory  values  and  vital signs as well as need for dose modification and treatment discontinuations. Results All the oral doses of adefovir dipivoxil tested (5, 30, 60 and 125 mg daily) were associated with a rapid (within one week) reduction in serum HBV DNA levels compared to placebo. This effect was sustained  during  initial  treatment  periods  for  up  to  12  weeks,  but  HBV  DNA  levels  returned  to baseline when treatment was discontinued. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

A similar antiviral response was seen in the HBeAg negative cohort. At week 12, the median serum HBV DNA change from baseline  was  -3.59 log10  copies/ml  in  the  adefovir  dipivoxil  30 mg  group (n=8)  compared  with  -0.28 log10  copies/ml  in  the  placebo  group  (p = 0.037)  (n=2).  A  plateau dose/effect was therefore evidenced, with the 30 mg and 60 mg doses being similar in potency.

In  the  52  weeks  extension  study,  treatment  with  adefovir  dipivoxil  was  associated  with  a  sustained suppression of serum HBV DNA concentrations similar to those observed during short-term treatment. The median time weighted average change from baseline in HBV  DNA  (n  = 38) was - 3.40 log10 copies/ml at week 24, -3.45 log10 copies/ml at week 48 and - 3.40 log10 copies/ml up to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

week  76  (p  &lt;  0.001  for  all  time  points  compared  to  baseline).  Serum  HBV  DNA  concentrations became  undetectable  in  22  of  38 patients  (58  %)  by  week 48  and  in  24  of  38 patients  (63  %)  by week 96  (Amplicor  assay  with  lower  limit  of  quantification  &lt;  400  copies/ml).  Seroconversion occurred in 6 of the 28 patients (21 %) who were anti-HBe negative at baseline of the extension phase (disappearance of HBeAg and emergence of anti-HBe with sustained suppression of HBV DNA). The number of patients with normalization of ALT concentrations increased over the course of treatment from 4 of 39 patients (10 %) at baseline to 19 of 30 patients (63 %) at week 48.

The results of these studies were considered for the dose selection as further discussed in the section 'dose ranging studies' below.

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetic profile of adefovir following oral administration of 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil has been determined in the following 5 studies: - Study 412: Single and multiple pharmacokinetics in patients with chronic hepatitis B - Study 473: Pharmacokinetics in non-HBV volunteers with renal impairment - Study 474: Pharmacokinetics in non-HBV volunteers with hepatic impairment - Study 475: Drug interaction in normal volunteers - Study 476: Food interaction in normal volunteers In addition, the applicant submitted supportive pharmacokinetics data generated from the previously conducted clinical programme in HIV-infected patients. This refers mainly to data from studies using higher doses  of intravenous  adefovir (1.0 or 3.0 mg/kg/day)  for  the  estimation of the oral bioavailability and data from a 60 mg oral dose of adefovir dipivoxil for the estimation of the dose proportionality. The tablets used in the studies and the ones intended for marketing differed only slightly in shape and therefore were considered identical. The analytical methods used for the assay of adefovir in serum, plasma and urine have been adequately validated. Absorption and distribution Adefovir dipivoxil is rapidly absorbed. Following oral administration of single dose of 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil  in  fasted  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  B  (target  population)  adefovir  rapidly  reached maximum concentrations (Cmax) at median time of 1.75 hours (0.58 h - 4h). Median Cmax and AUC0-∞ values were  16.70 ng/ml  (9.66 -30.56 ng/ml) and 204.40 ng.h/ml (109.75 - 356.05 ng.h/ml) respectively.  In  non-HBV  subjects  comparable  results  were  obtained,  with  time  to  reach  maximum plasma adefovir concentrations occurring approximately 0.76 to 1.25 hours post-dose. Data from the previous HIV clinical programme suggested an apparent dose proportionality over the dose range of 10 mg and 60 mg. The  absolute  oral  bioavailability  was  estimated  at  59  %,  however  this  value  should  be  taken  with caution  as  it  has  been  calculated  using  historical  intravenous  data  generated  from  studies  in  HIVinfected patients where higher doses of adefovir were used. Pharmacokinetics  parameters  were  not  affected  by  concomitant  intake  of  a  high-fat  meal.  The prolonged Tmax (approximately 2 hours delay) was considered without clinical relevance in chronic dosing and is caused by delayed gastric emptying. Adefovir dipivoxil can therefore be taken with or without food as recommended in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The distribution of adefovir has not been studied in humans, but preclinical data showed that adefovir distributed to most tissues with highest concentrations found in intestinal tissues, kidney and liver. The volume of distribution at steady state (Vss) following intravenous administration of adefovir of 1 and 3 mg/kg/day in HIV infected patients was 392 ± 75 ml/kg and 352 ± 9 ml/kg respectively. In vitro binding to plasma protein was very low (&lt; 4 %) over a concentration range of 0.1 to 25 mg/ml.

The pharmacokinetics profile of adefovir was similar after multiple administrations.

The  inter  and  intra  variability  has  not  been  specifically  evaluated,  however  individual  data  from various studies seem to indicate that the inter variability is moderate (approximately 30 %).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Metabolism and elimination

Apart from the enzymatic hydrolysis of adefovir dipivoxil to adefovir during the absorption, no other metabolic  pathways  have  been  identified  in  humans.  Adefovir  is  not  a  substrate  of  the  cytochrome P450.

Adefovir is excreted renally as unchanged. After a single oral dose of 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil urinary recovery of adefovir over 24 hours was 41.9 % in chronic HBV-patients. The median renal clearance (Clrenal)  of  adefovir  was  163.67  ml/min/kg  (range:  36.66-231.89),  which  is  greater  than  glomerular filtration rate. This indicates a substantial contribution of tubular secretion to the excretion of adefovir in humans and preclinical studies showed that a human organic anion transporter (hOAT1) played an essential role in the active secretion.

| Renal Function Group                   | Un-impaired   | Mild            | Moderate        | Severe           |
|----------------------------------------|---------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|
| Baseline Creatinine Clearance (ml/min) | > 80 (n = 7)  | 50 - 80 (n = 8) | 30 - 49 (n = 7) | 10 - 29 (n = 10) |
| C max (ng/ml)                          | 17.8 ± 3.2    | 22.4 ± 4.0      | 28.5 ± 8.6      | 51.6 ± 10.3      |
| AUC - ∞ (ng.hr/ml)                     | 201 ± 40.8    | 266 ± 55.7      | 455 ± 176       | 1240 ± 629       |
| CL/F (ml/min)                          | 469 ± 99.0    | 356 ± 85.6      | 237 ± 118       | 91.7 ± 513       |
| CL renal (ml/min)                      | 231 ± 48.9    | 148 ± 39.3      | 83.9 ± 27.5     | 37.0 ± 18.4      |

Based on these data, dose interval modification are proposed based on extrapolation of limited data in patients with end stage renal disease (ESRD) and may not be optimal.  The safety and effectiveness of these  dosing  interval  adjustment  guidelines  have  not  been  clinically  evaluated.    Therefore,  clinical response to treatment and renal function should be closely monitored in these patients as mentioned in the Summary of Product Characteristics. There are no data in subjects with creatinine clearance below 10 ml/min and patients with end stage renal disease not managed with haemodialysis and therefore the use  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  in  such  patients  should  be  closely  monitored  as  recommended  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics.

Plasma concentration declined in a bi-exponential manner with a median terminal elimination half-life of 7.22 hours (range 4.72-10.70) after single dose and 7.14 hours (range 4.22 - 17.43) after multiple doses. Special populations The  pharmacokinetic  of  adefovir  was  not  influenced  by  gender,  race  (but  data  mainly  obtained  in Caucasians), weight, age or HBV infection status. The pharmacokinetic profile of adefovir has not been evaluated in children nor in patients older than 65 years of age. The use of adefovir dipivoxil cannot be recommended in these patients as mentioned in the Summary of Product Characteristics. A single oral dose pharmacokinetic study showed greater AUC and T1/2 values in non-HBV infected patients  with  moderate  or  severe  hepatic  dysfunction  defined  by  Child-Pugh-Turcotte  classification compared  to  subjects  with  normal  hepatic  impairment  but  these  differences  were  not  statistically significant.  No  dose  adjustment  is  therefore  recommended  in  these  patients  as  mentioned  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics. The  influence  of  renal  function  on  adefovir  pharmacokinetic  was  evaluated  in  a  single  dose  study (10 mg) in non-HBV infected patients with different degree of renal impairment including end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis.  The following results were obtained: In haemodialysed subjects, high flux haemodialysis was shown to efficiently removed adefovir. The median fraction of the administered dose removed over 4 hour was approximately 35 %. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The  applicant  committed  to  conduct  a  clinical  study  to  further  gather  dosing  guidelines  for  renal impairment in patients with chronic hepatitis B and varying degree of chronic renal impairment, the results of which will be submitted post-authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Interaction studies

Since adefovir is not metabolised by CYP450 and did not inhibit in vitro CYP450, the likelihood of interactions with medicinal products metabolised using these isoenzymes is therefore very limited. No pharmacokinetics interaction was observed when adefovir was co-administered with lamivudine, acetaminophen,  and  trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole,  substances  undergoing  tubular  secretion.  By contrast,  increases  in  adefovir  Cmax  (33%)  and  AUC  (23%)  were  noted  in  combination  with ibuprofen, but these increases were not considered to be clinically relevant. In the absence of data with compounds known to affect renal function, including nephrotoxic substances (e.g. aminoglycosides, cyclosporin)  a  warning  has  been  included  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  to  closely monitor patients in case of co-administration. In addition the applicant committed to conduct further interaction studies, the results of which will be submitted post-authorisation.

Supportive data generated in the previous HIV development programme using doses 6 and more than 12  fold  the  dose  proposed  for  the  treatment  of  hepatitis  B  did  not  reveal  any  clinically  relevant interactions  with  a  range  of  protease  inhibitors,  nucleoside  reverse  transcriptase  inhibitors  and  nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Clinical efficacy The efficacy of the 10 mg daily dose of adefovir dipivoxil was assessed in 2 main placebo-controlled studies in treatment-naïve and treatment experienced chronic hepatitis B patients without lamivudineresistant HBV: -study 437 performed in HBeAg positive patients -study 438 performed in pre-core mutant HBeAg negative HBV patients In addition, the efficacy of adefovir dipivoxil has been evaluated in chronic hepatitis B patients with lamivudine-resistant HBV: -a main open label study in patients who have received a liver transplantation or are wait-listed for transplantation (study 435) -an  active  controlled  study  of  the  combination  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  and  lamivudine  versus adefovir  dipivoxil  or  lamivudine  alone  in  patients  with  compensated  (HBeAg  positive)  liver disease (study 461). -An open label study in HIV co-infected patients  with  compensated liver disease (study 460i ) where adefovir dipivoxil was added to lamivudine. -An open-label study evaluating the addition of adefovir dipivoxil to lamivudine in patients with decompensated liver disease (Stratum B) and a comparative study evaluating the combination of adefovir  dipivoxil  added  to  lamivudine  or  lamivudine  alone  (Stratum  A)  in  patients  with compensated liver disease (study 465). An overview of the studies is displayed in table 2: Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2

| Study                                                                                                                                            | Type of Study                                                                                                     | Treat. arms                                                      | Duration                                                                                                         | Noof Patients reported Enrolled (ITT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Primary efficacy criterion                                                                                                                                              | Study Design                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 437 Year 1 completed Blinded year 2 discontinued open-label phase pts enrolled into studies 480/481 or 437 long- term safety and efficacy (LTSE) | HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B ALT > 1.2 - 10 x ULN HBV DNA : >10 6 copies/ml                                 | year1: *ADV 10 mg *ADV 30 mg *Placebo year 2: ADV 10 mg          | 96 weeks + 24 weeks follow-up Year 1 only (72 weeks reported)                                                    | Year 1: *ADV 30 mg = 173 (173) *ADV 10 mg= 172 (171) *Placebo = 170 (167) Total 515 Year 2: 459 re-randomised. 435 received : 1 correct assignment *138 placebo Æ ADV10 + 85 ADV10 Æ ADV10 *70 ADV10 Æ placebo + 142 ADV30 Æ placebo authorised                                                                                    | Histology at 48 weeks : Improvement defined as > 2 point reduction in the necroinflammatory component of the Knodel HAI score with no concomitant worsening in fibrosis | Randomised, double-blind, multicentre, placebo- controlled Further randomisation of placebo and ADV 10 mg arms to daily administration of 250 mg L-carnitine or placebo. All 30 mg patients received 250 mg L-carnitine |
| 438 Year 1 completed Year 2 on-going On completion, pts enrolled into 480 or 438 LTSE                                                            | HBeAg negative (presumed precore mutant) chronic hepatitis B, HBV DNA+ ALT >1.5-15 x ULN HBV DNA : 10 5 copies/ml | *ADV 10 mg *Placebo                                              | 96 weeks treatment (72 weeks reported)                                                                           | Year 1 : Total 185 (184) *ADV 10 mg = 123 (123) *Placebo=62 (61) *year 2 (n=180): *60 placebo Æ ADV10; 80 ADV10 Æ ADV10; *40 ADV10 Æ placebo longer                                                                                                                                                                                | Histology at 48 weeks: Improvement defined as > 2 point reduction in the necroinflammatory component of the Knodel HAI score with no concomitant worsening in fibrosis  | Randomised, double-blind, multicentre, placebo- controlled                                                                                                                                                              |
| 435 On-going                                                                                                                                     | Chronic hepatitis B, pre (cohorts B /post (cohorts A) orthotopic liver transplantation ( OLT) /YMDD mutants       | ADV 10mg                                                         | 48 weeks median treatment 56 weeks for post-tansplantation median treatment 19 weeks for patients pre-transplant | Cohort A =196; Cohort B = 128 Cohort 1: Patients with adequate renal, hepatic, and haematologic function and no prior adefovir use. Cohort 2: Patients previously enrolled in compassionate use study 451i in which they received open-label adefovir. Cohort 3: Patients with renal, hepatic, and/or haematologic dysfunction. no | DAVG24 (cohorts 1A and 3A only)                                                                                                                                         | Open-label, multicentre                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| 461                                                                                                                                              | HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B/ compensated liver disease/ YMDD mutants ALT >1.2 ULN HBV DNA >10 6 copies/ml  | ADV 10 mg Lamivudine (LAM) 100 mg ADV10 + LAM 100 in combination | 48 weeks Planned. (48 weeks data reported) Product                                                               | ADV10 : 20 LAM 100mg : 20 ADV10 + LAM100 : 19 Total:n=58 (59 enrolled)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | DAVG16                                                                                                                                                                  | Randomised, double-blind, multicentre, active- controlled                                                                                                                                                               |
| 460i                                                                                                                                             | Chronic hepatitis B patients co- infected with HIV / YMDD mutants                                                 | ADV 10 mg (in addition to ongoing LAM (150 mg bid)               | 2 years (72 weeks reported)                                                                                      | N=35                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Serum HBV DNA and normalisation ALT                                                                                                                                     | Open-label, single centre, safety study                                                                                                                                                                                 |

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|   Study | Type of Study                                                                                                                                     | Treat. arms                                                                                                                                           | Duration                                                     | Noof Patients reported Enrolled (ITT)                                              | Primary efficacy criterion   | Study Design                                                                             |
|---------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     465 | Chronic hepatitis B/ YMDD mutants Stratum A : HBeAg positive and compensated liver disease Stratum B : HBeAg positive or negative / decompensated | Stratum A: ADV 10 mg in addition to ongoing LAM 100 mg Placebo in addition to ongoing LAM100 mg Stratum B ADV 10 mg and LAM 100 mg (both open- label) | 52 weeks planned + open 52-week extension (52-week reported) | N=141 Stratum B : N=40 (39 only reported as efficacy population) (Stratum A, N=95) | HBV DNA response.            | Stratum A: randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled Stratum B: randomised open-label |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The lack of active comparator in the 2 main studies is justified by the fact that lamivudine was not an approved therapy for the treatment  of chronic hepatitis  B  when  study 437  was  initiated.  Moreover, even if lamivudine had become available when study 438 started, the activity of lamivudine is limited in the targeted pre-core mutant population and it was of particular interest to compare the performance of adefovir in HBeAg positive and negative patients by using the same study design. In addition, in view of the targeted population, interferon alpha was not considered as an optimal comparator.

## Dose response studies and main clinical studies

## Dose ranging studies

- -serum  positive  HBV  DNA  at  screening  (Roche  Amplicor  PCR  assay,  lower  limit  of quantification 400 copies/ml) : &gt; 10 6 copies/ml for study 437 and &gt; 10 5 copies/ml for study 438 -ALT values 1.2 to 10 times the upper limit of the normal range (ULN) (study 437) or 1.5 to 15 ULN (study 438) on at least 2 measurements with 1-month interval, and within 6 months prior to randomisation.

As  already  presented,  the  results  from  the  dynamic  studies  showed  that  the  antiviral  efficacy  as assessed by the decrease of HBV DNA reached a plateau at 30 mg daily dose. Results from study 412 clearly indicated the need to select a dose between 5 mg and 30 mg in order to optimise the therapeutic effectiveness without increasing the risk of nephrotoxicity. The efficacy of adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg was  demonstrated  in  the  dynamic  studies  although  no  patients  received  this  dose  without  previous treatment with a higher dose. Adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg was chosen as a lower dose to evaluate based on mathematical modelling of viral kinetic data collected in study 412, which showed that the efficacy of the 30 mg daily dose was slightly superior to 10 mg, although the difference is small. Based on these  data,  both  30 mg  and  10 mg  were  chosen  to  be  investigated  in  the  first  main  study  437.  The efficacy  of  10  mg  dose  was  confirmed  in  the  main  studies,  although  in  study  437  the  30  mg  dose provided higher efficacy, evidenced most in terms of viral load reduction (results further presented in the  main  studies  section).  Safety  analysis  showed  nevertheless  that  the  30  mg  daily  dose  was associated  with  mild  nephrotoxicity,  which  was  reversible  upon  discontinuation,  whereas  adefovir dipivoxil was not nephrotoxic at the 10 mg daily dose. These data, the anticipated long-term treatment and efficacy/safety data from the main clinical studies support the recommendation of the 10 mg daily dose. Main studies Studies 437 and 438 1. Description of the studies These  studies  were  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  multicentre  comparing  adefovir dipivoxil  versus  placebo  in  patients  with  HBeAg  positive  (study  437)  and  HBeAg  negative  liver compensated HBV infection (study 438) with evidence of HBV replication. Both studies  had  the  same  design  to  facilitate  comparison  of  data  and  differed  only  with  regard  to inclusion criteria: documented positive HBeAg for study 437 and documented negative HBeAg and positive HBeAb for study 438. The other main inclusion criteria were for both studies: -documented  chronic  hepatitis  B  (positive  serum  HBsAg  present  for  6  months  prior  to randomisation) Medicinal Product no longer authorised

- -no co-infection (HIV, HCV and HDV seronegative)

The primary objective of both studies was to compare the efficacy of a 48-week treatment course with adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg versus placebo in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B with compensated liver disease (year 1). The re-assignment of dose groups at the beginning of year 2 allowed all patients to receive at least 1 year of active treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The secondary objectives included:

- Comparison  between  48  week  efficacy  of  the  10  and  the  30  mg  doses  (year  1,  study  437) and 96 week efficacy (year 1 and 2 treatment with adefovir dipivoxil)
- Assessment of 96-week safety (year 1 and 2 treatment with adefovir dipivoxil).
- Assessment of the need for L-carnitine supplementation (as reductions in serum carnitine levels were observed in the HIV programme using higher doses of adefovir dipivoxil).
- Effect of treatment withdrawal (year 1 treatment with adefovir dipivoxil, year 2 placebo)

## 2. Primary endpoints/assays

<!-- image -->

The  primary  endpoint  in  both  studies  was  the  percentage  of  responders  with  liver  histological improvement at week 48, as defined by a reduction from baseline of 2 points or more in the Knodell necro-inflammatory score, with no concurrent worsening of the Knodell fibrosis score. The same independent specialist, blinded both with regard to the treatment and the time when biopsy was performed, evaluated the baseline and week-48 biopsies. The secondary efficacy endpoints covered a wide range of responses to treatment and included: -further measurements of the histological response -criteria for evaluating the virological (e.g decrease in serum HBV DNA) -criteria for evaluating the biochemical response (e.g ALT normalisation) -measurement of serological response (e.g HBeAg seroconversion defined by loss of HBeAg and concomitant acquisition of anti-HBeAb in study 437 only). 3. Statistical analysis Planned sample sizes were calculated on the expected difference in response rates between adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg and placebo arms, based on the primary endpoint, with a 90 % power and using a Fisher exact test at a two-sided α = 0.05 level of significance. For both studies the primary population for analysis was the intent-to-treat (ITT) with missing data = failure. The primary efficacy analysis was a comparison between the adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg and placebo  groups  (unstratified  version  of  the  Cochran-Mantel-Haentszel  test).  For  the  analysis  of  the secondary parameters based on change from baseline, comparisons between adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg and  placebo  were  based  on  the  Wilcoxon  rank  sum  test.  For  endpoints  based  on  proportions, comparisons on placebo were based on Cochran-Mantel-Haentszel test. RESULTS 4. Study populations/accountability of patients The  demographic  and  baseline  disease  characteristics  of  patients  from  studies  437  and  438  (ITT population) are displayed in table 3. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Table 3: Main baseline characteristics / studies 437 and 438 (ITT)   | Table 3: Main baseline characteristics / studies 437 and 438 (ITT)   | Table 3: Main baseline characteristics / studies 437 and 438 (ITT)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Characteristic                                                       | Study 437 (N = 511)                                                  | Study 438 (N = 184)                                                  |
| HBV Type                                                             |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| HBeAg+                                                               | 500                                                                  | 0                                                                    |
| HBeAg - (presumed precore mutant)                                    | 11 (but HBeAg+ screening)                                            | at 184                                                               |
| Age (years)                                                          |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 35 ± 11.3                                                            | 46 ± 10.0                                                            |
| Median                                                               | 33                                                                   | 46                                                                   |
| Gender                                                               |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Male, n (%)                                                          | 378 (74%)                                                            | 152 (83%)                                                            |
| Female, n (%)                                                        | 133 (26%)                                                            | 32 (17%)                                                             |
| Race                                                                 |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Caucasian, n (%)                                                     | 184 (36%)                                                            | 122 (66%)                                                            |
| Black, n (%)                                                         | 16 (3%)                                                              | 6 (3%)                                                               |
| Asian, n (%)                                                         | 304 (59%)                                                            | 56 (30%)                                                             |
| Other                                                                | 7 (1%)                                                               | 0 (0%)                                                               |
| Knodell HAI Scores                                                   |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Total                                                                |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 9.40 ± 3.37                                                          | 9.38 ± 3.33                                                          |
| Median                                                               | 10                                                                   | 10                                                                   |
| Necro-Inflammatory                                                   |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 7.67 ± 2.82                                                          | 7.52 ± 2.74                                                          |
| Median                                                               | 8                                                                    | 7                                                                    |
| Fibrosis                                                             |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 1.72 ± 1.09                                                          | 1.86 ± 1.16                                                          |
| Median                                                               | 1                                                                    | 1                                                                    |
| Cirrhosis                                                            | 32 (6%)                                                              | 20 (11%) longer                                                      |
| HBV DNA (log 10 copies/ml)                                           |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 8.20 ± 0.88                                                          | 6.93 ± 0.89                                                          |
| Median                                                               | 8.36                                                                 | 7.08                                                                 |
| Q1, Q3                                                               | 7.61, 8.82                                                           | 6.33, 7.55                                                           |
| ALT (IU/L)                                                           | no                                                                   |                                                                      |
| Mean ± SD                                                            | 133.77 ± 129.00                                                      | 145.59 ± 151.54                                                      |
| Median                                                               | 94                                                                   | 98                                                                   |
| Q1, Q3                                                               | 65, 158                                                              | 69, 165                                                              |
| > ULN                                                                | 501 (98%)                                                            | 175 (95%)                                                            |
| Prior HBV treatments                                                 |                                                                      |                                                                      |
| Interferon-alfa                                                      | 123 ( 24%)                                                           | 76 ( 41%)                                                            |
| Lamivudine                                                           | 10 (2%)                                                              | 14 (8%)                                                              |

<!-- image -->

The percentage of treatment discontinuation before week 48 was low in both studies: 8 % in study 437 (8 % in the placebo group versus 7 % in adefovir 10 mg group and 8 % in adefovir 30 mg group) and 2 % in study 438 (2 % in both groups). The main reasons for discontinuation pertained to occurrence of adverse events (2 % in study 437 and 1 % in study 438) and withdrew consent (3 % in study 437 and 1 % in study 438).

In both studies, treatment arms were well balanced with regard to demographic data and other baseline characteristics. Overall,  patients  enrolled  had  active  viral  replication  (HBV  DNA ≥ 100,000  copies/ml),  moderate elevated ALT (median around 2.3 in each group and each study), and the majority had some levels of fibrosis (F1 through F4 in the Knodell scoring system). Only a minority of patients (171/608, 28 %) in these studies had bridging fibrosis at baseline and only 9 of 494 (2 %) patients in study 437 and 1 of 168 (&lt;1 %) patients in study 438 had a Knodell fibrosis score of 0. Discontinuation Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Efficacy results

The primary analyses of the study endpoint was performed after 48 weeks of the study and the results are presented in table 4:

| Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   | Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   | Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   | Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   | Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   | Table 4: Primary criterion analysis of studies 437/438 (ITT / 48-week missing/unassessable biopsies = failure)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                  | Study                                                                                                            | Study                                                                                                            | Study                                                                                                            | Study 438                                                                                                        | Study 438                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                  | Placebo (N=167)                                                                                                  | ADV 10 mg (N=171)                                                                                                | ADV 30 mg (N=173)                                                                                                | Placebo (N=61)                                                                                                   | ADV 10 mg (N=123)                                                                                                |
| n (with baseline biopsy)                                                                                         | 161 (100%)                                                                                                       | 168 (100%)                                                                                                       | 165 (100%)                                                                                                       | 57 (100%)                                                                                                        | 121 (100%)                                                                                                       |
| Histological improvement, n (%) ( Ω necro-infl : 2 with no worsening of fibrosis)                                | 41 (25%)                                                                                                         | 89 (53%)                                                                                                         | 98 (59%)                                                                                                         | 19 (33%)                                                                                                         | 77 (64%)                                                                                                         |
| No improvement, n (%) (one or both items missing)                                                                | 105 (65%)                                                                                                        | 61 (36%)                                                                                                         | 47 (28%)                                                                                                         | 36 (63%)                                                                                                         | 35 (29%)                                                                                                         |
| 48-week missing biopsy, n (%)                                                                                    | 14 (9%)                                                                                                          | 16 (10%)                                                                                                         | 16 (10%)                                                                                                         | 2 (4%)                                                                                                           | 3 (2%)                                                                                                           |
| 48-week-unassessable biopsy, n (%)                                                                               | 1 (<1%)                                                                                                          | 2 (1%)                                                                                                           | 4 (2%)                                                                                                           | 0                                                                                                                | 3 (2%)                                                                                                           |
| Treatment difference, %(95% CI)*                                                                                 |                                                                                                                  | 27.5% (17.4%, 37.6%)                                                                                             | 33.9% (23.9%, 44.0%)                                                                                             |                                                                                                                  | 30.3% (15.4%-45.2%) authorised                                                                                   |
| p-value**                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                  | <0.001                                                                                                           | <0.001                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                  | <0.001                                                                                                           |
| Improvement rate                                                                                                 | 24.5%(41/167 )                                                                                                   | 52% (89/171)                                                                                                     | 56.6% (98/173)                                                                                                   | 31% (19/57)                                                                                                      | 63% (77/121)                                                                                                     |

<!-- image -->

( Ω necro-infl : 2 with no worsening of fibrosis) No improvement, n (%) (one or both items missing) 48-week missing biopsy, n (%) 48-week-unassessable biopsy, n (%) Treatment difference, % (95% CI)* p-value** Improvement rate *  Treatment differences  and 95 % confidence intervals for the difference in the proportion of patients  with improvement relative to placebo ** From general association Cochran-Mantel-Haentszel test As  highlighted  in  table  4,  treatment  with  adefovir  dipivoxil  resulted  in  significant  histological improvement, when compared to placebo, both in HBeAg positive and HBeAg negative patients. The 48-week efficacy results on the secondary endpoints are presented in table 5. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438                        | Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438   | Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438   | Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438   | Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438   | Table 5: 48-week secondary efficacy results of studies 437/438   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                       | Study 437                                                        | Study 437                                                        | Study 437                                                        | Study 438                                                        | Study 438                                                        |
| Efficacy Variable at Week 48                                                          | Placebo (N=167)                                                  | ADV 10 mg (N=171)                                                | ADV 30 mg (N=173)                                                | Placebo (N=167)                                                  | ADV 10 mg (N=171)                                                |
| Liver Histology (Knodell Scores), ITT                                                 |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| Median change from baseline:                                                          |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| - total HAI score - p-value                                                           | 0                                                                | -3 <0.001                                                        | -4 <0.001                                                        | 1                                                                | -4 <0.001                                                        |
| - necro-inflammatory score - p-value                                                  | 0                                                                | -2 <0.001                                                        | -3 <0.001                                                        | 0                                                                | -3 <0.001                                                        |
| - fibrosis score - p-value                                                            | 0                                                                | 0 0.061                                                          | 0 0.001                                                          | 0                                                                | 0 0.005                                                          |
| Blinded Ranked Assessment                                                             |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| - n (%) necro-inflammatory improvement - n (%) necro-inflammatory worsening - p-value | 59 (41%) 49 (34%)                                                | 107 (71%) 20 (13%) <0.001                                        | 112 (77%) 15 (10%) <0.001                                        | 23 (42%) 28 (51%)                                                | 90 (80%) 3 (3%) <0.001 authorised                                |
| - n (%) with fibrosis improvement - n (%) with fibrosis worsening - p-value           | 35 (24%) 38 (26%)                                                | 62 (41%) 21 (14%) <0.001                                         | 78 (54%) 14 (10%) <0.001                                         | 14 (25%) 21 (38%)                                                | 54 (48%) 5 (4%) <0.001                                           |
| HBV DNA                                                                               |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| Serum HBV DNA < 400 copies/ml, n (%) p-value                                          | 0%                                                               | 36 (21%) <0.001                                                  | 67 (39%) <0.001                                                  | 0                                                                | 63 (51%) <0.001                                                  |
| Median change (log 10 copies/ml) p-value                                              | -0.55                                                            | -3.52 <0.001                                                     | -4.76 <0.001                                                     | -1.35                                                            | -3.91 <0.001                                                     |
| ALT                                                                                   |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| Normalised,% p-value                                                                  | 26 (16%)                                                         | 81 (48%) <0.001                                                  | 93 (55%) <0.001                                                  | 17 (29%)                                                         | 84 (72%) <0.001                                                  |
| Median change (IU/l) p-value                                                          | -17                                                              | -51 <0.001                                                       | -54 <0.001                                                       | -38                                                              | -55                                                              |
| %of patients with HBeAg seroconversion p-value                                        | 9 (6%)                                                           | 20 (12%) <0.05 longer                                            | 23 (14%) 0.011                                                   | NA                                                               | NA                                                               |
| %of patients with HBeAg loss only p-value                                             | 11%                                                              | 24% 0.0013 no                                                    | 27% 0.0002                                                       | NA                                                               | NA                                                               |

The results showed the slightly higher level of efficacy of the 30 mg dose over the 10 mg dose on those parameters, although no statistical comparisons were performed. However, as further discussed in the clinical safety section of this report the 30 mg dose, in contrast to the 10 mg dose, led to the emergence of mild nephrotoxicity. The 10 mg dose was thus chosen as the recommended dose for further studies.

* : p-value ADV10 mg versus placebo. These  results  show  consistency  across  all  tested  variables  and  confirm  the  efficacy  of  adefovir dipivoxil  10  mg  on  histological  (inflammation  +  fibrosis),  viral  and  biochemical  responses  both  in HBeAg  positive  and  negative  patients.  The  antiviral  efficacy  was  dose  and  time  dependent.  For instance  in  study  437,  the  median  change  at  24  week  from  baseline  was  -2.85  log10  copies/ml compared  to  -  3.52  log10  at  week  48.  Efficacy  appears  even  higher,  in  terms  of  histological improvement and of ALT and viral load reduction, in HBeAg negative patients, in whom interferon alpha or lamivudine therapy provided poor results. It has to be underlined that an improvement in fibrosis, which was not expected due to the relatively short time point for assessing histological effects, was observed in 41 % of patients in the adefovir 10 mg group and 54 % in the adefovir 30 mg group versus 24 % in the placebo group. A significantly greater percentage of HBeAg positive patients achieved seroconversion in the adefovir groups compared to placebo, for both doses, even if this was not expected, given the relatively short time  point  when  referring  to  the  mechanism  of  action  of  'virostatic'  drugs.  There  was  no  HBsAg seroconversion at week 48. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

## Long term efficacy

During the second 48-week period, patients in both studies were re-randomised:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- ➧ patients from the placebo (and adefovir dipivoxil 30 mg for study 437) arms re-randomised to adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg
- ➧ patients from adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg arm re-randomised to either to placebo or to adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg.

However, study medication was misallocated during year 2 of study 437 in 91 % of re-randomised patients. The blinded phase of the study was therefore terminated and patients could end the follow-up period or receive adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg on an open-label basis.

The applicant submitted supplementary results up to 72 weeks for both studies (table 6).

<!-- image -->

Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438 Median copies/ml) HBV DNA &lt; 400 copies/ml ALT normalisation HBeAg loss HBeAg seroconversion a Kaplan-Meier estimates These  data  confirmed  the  virological,  biochemical  and  serological  efficacy  demonstrated  in  the 48-week period and show additional benefit from extended treatment duration. At week 72, 23 % of patients' assessable patients (n = 66) versus 14 % at week 48 experienced HBeAg seroconversion. The  applicant  committed  to  submit  final  results  of  study  438  (96  weeks)  as  part  of  the  follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation. Ancillary analyses Although, some 40 - 50 % of the patients failed to respond after 48 weeks of treatment, pooled data from studies 437 and 438 did not identify any predictors of non-response. Baseline characteristics did not seem to have an impact on the response since statistically significant response  rates  were  observed  in  all  sub-groups  of  patients  even  if  higher  rates  for  histological improvement  was  observed  in  patients  with  elevated  baseline  Knodell  score  (&gt;  10),  elevated  ALT levels (2 x ULN) and relatively low HBV DNA levels (&lt; 7.6 log10 copies/ml). Overall 66 % of patients with higher baseline Knodell score (10-14) experienced histological improvement compared to 2 % with lower baseline Knodell score (2-4). An analysis showed also those patients with lower baseline ALT levels,  higher  baseline  HBV  DNA  levels  and  lower  Knodell  necro-inflammatory  scores  took longer time to achieve a treatment response. These 3 factors also pertain to the prognostic factors for response to interferon or lamivudine therapy. Comparable  efficacy  to  the  overall  population  was  demonstrated  in  both  the  HBeAg  positive  and negative patients with cirrhosis at baseline, but the number of patients with cirrhosis at baseline was low (19 in the placebo and 26 in adefovir 10 mg, pooled data from studies 437 and 438). Medicinal Product no longer authorised

| Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438   | Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438   | Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438   | Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438   | Table 6: Week 48 and 72 Efficacy Data for Studies 437 and 438   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                 | 437 (HBeAg positive) (n=                                        | 437 (HBeAg positive) (n=                                        | 438 (HBeAg negative) (n=183)                                    | 438 (HBeAg negative) (n=183)                                    |
|                                                                 | Week 48                                                         | Week 72                                                         | Week 48                                                         | Week 72                                                         |
| Median Change HBV DNA (log copies/ml)                           | -3.5                                                            | 288) -3.8                                                       | -3.9                                                            | -4.2 authorised                                                 |
| HBV DNA < 400 copies/ml a                                       | 26%                                                             | 46%                                                             | 66%                                                             | 80%                                                             |
| ALT normalisation a                                             | 67%                                                             | 75%                                                             | 76%                                                             | 81%                                                             |
| HBeAg loss a                                                    | 23%                                                             | 44%                                                             | NA                                                              | NA                                                              |
| HBeAg seroconversion a                                          | 14%                                                             | 23%                                                             | NA                                                              | NA                                                              |

Limited  data  suggest  that  there  is  no  relationship  between  ethnic  origin  or  baseline  genotype  and treatment response.

The  applicant  committed  to  further  investigates  predictors  of  response/non-response  and  optimum treatment  duration  in future clinical studies,  the  results  of  which  would  be  submitted  postauthorisation. In the meantime, the following recommendations for treatment discontinuation may be considered and have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -In HBeAg  positive patients, treatment should be administered at least until  HBeAg seroconversion (HBeAg and HBV DNA loss with HBeAb detection on 2 consecutive samples at least 3 months apart) or until HBsAg seroconversion or in case of evidence of loss of efficacy.
- -In  HBeAg negative (pre-core mutant) patients, treatment should be administered at least until HBsAg seroconversion or in case of evidence of loss of efficacy.
- -In  patients  with  decompensated  liver  disease,  considering  the  potential  risks  associated  with treatment discontinuation in these patients, treatment cessation is not recommended.

## Study 435

| Table 7: Efficacy in Pre- and Post- Liver Transplantation Patients at Week 48 study 435   | Table 7: Efficacy in Pre- and Post- Liver Transplantation Patients at Week 48 study 435   | Table 7: Efficacy in Pre- and Post- Liver Transplantation Patients at Week 48 study 435   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Efficacy Parameter                                                                        | Pre-liver transplantation (Cohort B) (n=128) longer                                       | Post-liver transplantation (Cohort A) (n=196)                                             |
| Mean change from baseline serum HBV DNA (log 10 copies/ml) primary endpoint               | -3.8 ± 1.4                                                                                | -4.3 ± 1.6                                                                                |
| Stable or improved Child-Pugh-Turcotte score                                              | 92%*                                                                                      | 96%                                                                                       |
| Normalisation** of: no                                                                    | Normalisation** of: no                                                                    | Normalisation** of: no                                                                    |
| - ALT                                                                                     | 76%                                                                                       | 49%                                                                                       |
| - Albumin                                                                                 | 81%                                                                                       | 76%                                                                                       |
| - Bilirubin                                                                               | 50%                                                                                       | 75%                                                                                       |
| - Prothrombin time                                                                        | 83%                                                                                       | 20%                                                                                       |

Long-term data with a median of 56 weeks and up to 129 weeks confirmed the antiviral and clinical benefit of adefovir dipivoxil in pre and post-liver transplantation patients resistant to lamivudine who are at high risk for morbidity and mortality.

This  open-label  study  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  adefovir  10 mg  once  daily  in  chronic  hepatitis  B patients  with  clinical  evidence  of  lamivudine-resistant  HBV,  compensated  or  decompensated  liver disease and pre- or post liver transplantation. Patients  were  enrolled  into  one  of  3  study  cohorts  based  on  renal,  hepatic,  and  haematological functions and whether they had previously received adefovir through a compassionate use programme (study 451i). Each of the 3 cohorts contained patients who had previously received a liver transplant (cohort A) and patients who were wait-listed to receive a transplant (cohort B). This  study  is  still  ongoing  but  results  have  been  submitted  for  196  patients  from  cohort  A  (posttransplantation  (median  treatment  duration  56.1  weeks)  )  and  128 patients  from  cohort  B  (pretransplant (median treatment duration 18.7 weeks)). Results at 48 weeks are presented in table 7: Table 7: Efficacy in Pre- and Post- Liver Transplantation Patients at Week 48 study 435 Efficacy Parameter Mean change from baseline serum HBV DNA (log10 copies/ml) primary endpoint Stable or improved Child-Pugh-Turcotte score Normalisation** of: -ALT -Albumin -Bilirubin -Prothrombin time * 24 week data ** Patients with abnormal values at baseline The early statistically significant decrease in viral load (-2.1 log10 copies/ml at week 4 for cohorts 1A and 3A, -4.4 and -3.9 at week 8 for the same cohorts, respectively) was confirmed, along with the improvement in liver function as assessed by the Child-Pugh-Turcotte score. Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival in patients with lamivudine-resistant HBV by week 48 were 93 % and 84 % in patients post-liver transplantation and wait-listed for transplantation, respectively. These 1-year survival rates in study 435 are similar to or better than survival rates reported in the literature in pre-  and  post-liver  transplantation  patients  with  HBV  treated  with  HBIg  or  lamivudine  in  patients without resistant  HBV mutations and are significantly better than survival rates in  patients with  no treatment.  In  a  recent  retrospective  study  of  166  chronic  hepatitis  B  patients  pre-  and  post-liver transplantation, Kaplan-Meier estimates of HBV recurrence-free survival rates at 1 year were 75 % in patients treated with lamivudine, 60 % in patients treated with HBIg alone, 94 % in patients treated with lamivudine and HBIg in combination and 45 % in patients with no treatment. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

## Supportive studies

Results  from  3  supportive  studies  conducted  in  lamivudine-resistant  chronic  hepatitis  B  infected patients  were  provided  (studies  461,  460i  and  465)  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  in  terms  of  virological response of adefovir dipivoxil either used in substitution or in intensification to lamivudine therapy.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Resistance  to  lamivudine  was  defined  as  failure  to  lamivudine  therapy,  as  evidenced  by  genotypic characterisation of YMDD variants. Further information on the design of these studies is displayed in table 2.

## Efficacy results

## Study 461:

This randomised, double blind, active-controlled study aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg with or without lamivudine in patients with compensated liver disease and lamivudine-resistant HBV.  Results up to 48 weeks on 58 patients were provided and are displayed below.

| Study 461: Serum HBV DNA DAVG at Weeks 16 and 48   | Study 461: Serum HBV DNA DAVG at Weeks 16 and 48   | Study 461: Serum HBV DNA DAVG at Weeks 16 and 48   | Study 461: Serum HBV DNA DAVG at Weeks 16 and 48   |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| HBV DNA (log 10 copies/ml)                         | LAM(n=19)                                          | LAM+ADV * (n=20)                                   | ADV * (n=19)                                       |
| Median DAVG 16 (range)                             | -0.07 (-1.13 to 0.33)                              | -2.45 (-3.58 to -1.11)                             | -2.46 (-5.09 to -1.70)                             |
| Median DAVG 48 (range)                             | 0.05 (-1.12 to 0.35)                               | -2.93 (-4.74 to -2.17)                             | -3.06 (-5.07 to -1.67)                             |

Study 461: Serum HBV DNA DAVG at Weeks 16 and 48 HBV DNA (log10 copies/ml) Median DAVG16 (range) Median DAVG48 (range) * P &lt; 0.001 (Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test) compared to lamivudine Based  on  these  results,  adefovir  alone  or  in  combination  with  lamivudine  resulted  in  a  significant reduction  in  median  serum  HBV  DNA  levels  from  baseline  but  the  clinical  significance  of  these changes is unknown. No additional benefit is expected when adding adefovir to lamivudine therapy versus  substituting,  but  this  finding  derives  from  a  limited  sample  size  and  cannot  lead  to  reliable conclusions. Study 460i This  open-label,  investigator-initiated  (single  centre)  pilot  study  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg once daily in addition to lamivudine therapy in 35 patients with lamivudine-resistant chronic  hepatitis  B  co-infected  with  HIV.  The  mean  baseline  HBV  DNA  concentration  was  8.64log10 copies/ml. Median time on lamivudine at randomisation was 42.3 months (9-81 months). At the time of reporting, the median time on adefovir dipivoxil was 72 weeks (68-72 weeks). The addition of adefovir dipivoxil resulted in a significant reductions in serum HBV DNA throughout the course of treatment. The mean change from baseline was -3.40 log10 copies/ml at week 24, -4.07 log10 copies/ml at week 48 and -4.77 log10 copies/ml at week 72. ALT normalisation at week 72 occurred in 25 % of patients. Study 465: Preliminary 52 -week data have been provided for 46 patients of Stratum B, i.e patients with HBeAg positive or negative with decompensated liver disease who received in an open label manner adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg in addition to lamivudine. Consistent antiviral response was seen across all patients, with a median reduction in HBV DNA of 4.6-log10 copies/ml after 52 weeks of treatment. Improvement in liver function was also seen after one year of treatment. Resistance sub-studies Medicinal Product no longer authorised

Resistance sub-studies  were performed  in the frame  of the  main  studies  437  (wild type  virus),  438 (presumed  pre-core  mutant)  and  in  study  435  (pre  and  post  liver  transplant  patients  resistant  to lamivudine)  and  on  study  460i  (lamivudine  resistant  HIV  co-infected).  The  methodology  used  was robust. It consisted of the genotypic analysis of emergence of mutations in HBV reverse transcriptase domain accompanied by in vitro phenotypic analysis of the impact of conserved site mutations on the adefovir susceptibilityand were correlated to serum HBV DNA.  No adefovir resistant HBV polmerase mutations were identified in these studies after 48 weeks of adefovir dipivoxil therapy. The risk of selection of HIV strains resistant to adefovir with possible cross-resistance to other antiviral medicinal

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

products is low but cannot be excluded. The applicant committed to continue prospective surveillance programme for the emergence of resistance.

## Clinical studies in special populations

Considering  the  need  for  therapeutic  options  in  children  and  the  attractive  resistance  profile  of  the drug,  the  Applicant  committed  to  investigate  pharmacokinetics,  efficacy  and  safety  of  adefovir  in paediatric patients.

## Clinical safety

The most frequently related adverse events (&gt; 3 %) reported during the first 48 weeks were as follows (table 9):

The safety database derived from the following studies: ¾ Randomised,  placebo-controlled  studies  437  and  438  in  wild-type  and  presumed  pre-core mutant infected patients with compensated disease ¾ Four studies of adefovir 10 mg in patients with resistance to lamivudine (YMDD mutated virus) ¾ Data from phase I/II pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic programme (studies 404, 412 and 413) in which patients received doses ranging from 5 to 125 mg adefovir ¾ An additional safety study 451i in patients with pre/post orthotopic liver transplant In additional adefovir dipivoxil was previously evaluated over 10,000 HIV-infected patients at doses ranging from 60 to 500 mg. As already mentioned because of the dose limiting nephrotoxicity which developed  with  doses  6  to  12  fold  the  recommended  dose  in  the  treatment  of  hepatitis  B,  the development was interrupted. Patient exposure Overall out of 522 patients including in studies 437 and 438, 294 received adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg during 48 weeks and 228 received placebo. With extended therapy, 492 of these 522 patients were treated with 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil for up to 109 weeks, with a median duration of 49 weeks. In lamivudine resistant patients, the overall estimated exposure to adefovir treatment is 523 for more than 48 weeks, 316 for more than 72 weeks and 79 for more that 96 weeks. The safety assessment described below focuses mainly on the first 48 weeks of the main randomised, double blind, and placebo-controlled studies 437 and 438. As already mentioned, discontinuation due adverse events in these studies was very limited. Most  of  studies  in  lamivudine-resistant  patients  were  open  and  conducted  in  severely  impaired patients, which render the interpretation of the results difficult. Adverse events and serious adverse event/deaths During the first 48 weeks of pivotal studies, 82 % of patients from the 10 mg arm experienced at least one adverse event compared to 85 % in the placebo and 95 % in the 30 mg arms. The number of patients with related adverse events was 50 % in the placebo group compared to 45 % in adefovir 10 mg group. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   | Table 9: Comparative incidences vs placebo of most frequent related AE ( ≥ 1%)/ADV10 mg/combined studies 437 + 438   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Adverse Event                                                                                                        | Placebo (0-48 weeks) (N=228)                                                                                         | Placebo (0-48 weeks) (N=228)                                                                                         | ADV 10 mg (0-48 weeks) (N=294)                                                                                       | ADV 10 mg (0-48 weeks) (N=294)                                                                                       | All ADV 10 mg (0-96 weeks) (N=492)                                                                                   | All ADV 10 mg (0-96 weeks) (N=492)                                                                                   |
| Adverse Event                                                                                                        | n                                                                                                                    | (%)                                                                                                                  | n                                                                                                                    | (%)                                                                                                                  | N                                                                                                                    | (%)                                                                                                                  |
| No of Patients with Related AEs                                                                                      | 115                                                                                                                  | (50%)                                                                                                                | 132                                                                                                                  | (45%)                                                                                                                | 175                                                                                                                  | (36%)                                                                                                                |
| Asthenia                                                                                                             | 33                                                                                                                   | (14%)                                                                                                                | 39                                                                                                                   | (13%)                                                                                                                | 49                                                                                                                   | (10%)                                                                                                                |
| Headache                                                                                                             | 23                                                                                                                   | (10%)                                                                                                                | 27                                                                                                                   | (9%)                                                                                                                 | 38                                                                                                                   | (8%)                                                                                                                 |
| Abdominal pain                                                                                                       | 24                                                                                                                   | (11%)                                                                                                                | 27                                                                                                                   | (9%)                                                                                                                 | 37                                                                                                                   | (8%)                                                                                                                 |
| Nausea                                                                                                               | 19                                                                                                                   | (8%)                                                                                                                 | 16                                                                                                                   | (5%)                                                                                                                 | 21                                                                                                                   | (4%)                                                                                                                 |
| Flatulence                                                                                                           | 9                                                                                                                    | 4%                                                                                                                   | 11                                                                                                                   | 4%                                                                                                                   | 11                                                                                                                   | 2%                                                                                                                   |
| Diarrhoea                                                                                                            | 8                                                                                                                    | 4%                                                                                                                   | 8                                                                                                                    | 3%                                                                                                                   | 9                                                                                                                    | 2%                                                                                                                   |
| Dyspepsia                                                                                                            | 5                                                                                                                    | 2%                                                                                                                   | 9                                                                                                                    | 3%                                                                                                                   | 9                                                                                                                    | 2%                                                                                                                   |

ALT  elevations  post  treatment  withdrawal  were  observed  in  both  studies  437  and  438,  especially during year 2 in the group of patients having switched from adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg (36 elevations &gt; 10 ULN) or adefovir dipivoxil 30 mg to placebo. Peak values generally occurred from 4 to 12 weeks post treatment discontinuation. Preliminary data in patients with decompensated hepatitis (studies 435 and  465)  did  not  evidence  any  risk  of  fulminant  hepatitis  in  these  patients  following  treatment withdrawal although follow-up data are limited. As a precautionary measure, a warning that careful monitoring of patients following treatment discontinuation is therefore included in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

The incidence of adverse events was comparable in patients with HBeAg positive and negative. Results were similar in phase I/II studies and in studies conducted in lamivudine resistant patients. Safety data from study 437 showed that 30 mg dose of adefovir dipivoxil exhibited a less favourable tolerance profile when compared to the 10 mg daily dose, with a higher incidence of adverse events (95 % versus 87 %), particularly decreases in phosphataemia (6 % versus 1 %). Serious adverse events and deaths In studies 437 and 438, 13 patients (4 %) in the adefovir 10 mg group experienced a serious adverse event compared to 12 patients (5 %) in the placebo. There was no single event type which occurred in more than one patient except chest pain which occurred in 2 patients in the adefovir group. There were no deaths reported in studies 437 and 438 at the cut-off dates, however 3 deaths have been reported afterwards (1 sepsis and liver failure in a patient receiving 30 mg adefovir, 1 cardiac failure in  patient  receiving  adefovir  10  mg  and  1  mycosis  septicaemia  due to immunosuppresant treatment after liver transplantation in patient receiving adefovir 10 mg). The deaths were considered probably related to the underlying disease. In  study  435,  serious  adverse  events  and  deaths  reported  in  pre-liver  and  post-liver  transplantation were not unexpected in term of incidence or nature given the extreme severe patients population with end-stage  disease  and  given  the  underlying  disease  or  complications.  The  serious  adverse  events related to adefovir accounted for 5 % in cohort A and 4 % in cohort B. Laboratory findings During the first 48-week phase of studies 437 and 438, ALT and AST elevations were reported in 1 % and &lt; 1 % in the adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg group versus 5 % and 4 % in the placebo group. Elevations were almost equally distributed among grading sub-classes (grade 1 to 4). Although liver was a target organ in toxicology studies, ALT elevation of &gt; 5 ULN, &gt; 10 ULN and &gt; 20 ULN occurred more often in the placebo group (24 % versus 14 %, 14 % versus 6 % and 3 % versus &lt; 1%, respectively), and were not accompanied by changes in liver function parameters, which is strongly in favour of viral clearance and not hepatic toxicity related to adefovir dipivoxil. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Other  laboratory  abnormalities,  including  hypophosphataemia  occurred  in  less  than  1%  patients  in each treatment group, with the exception of haematuria (6 % in adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg versus 8 % placebo).

## Renal tolerance

The key safety concern was renal toxicity as evidenced by impairment of both glomerular filtration (increase  in  creatinine  levels  and  decrease  in  phosphataemia)  and  tubular  secretion  (increase  in proteinuria and glycosuria), during the development in HIV patients and by nephrotoxicity reported with other nucleotide analogues. It has been characterised using preclinical data in several species. It is primarily  manifested  by  the  onset  of  gradual  increases  in  serum  creatinine  and  decreases  in  serum phosphorus with a delayed onset generally after 20 weeks or more of therapy. The changes can be accompanied by changes in serum bicarbonate, glycosuria, and proteinuria.  In HIV infected patients, the  risk  for  development  and  maximum  severity  of  renal  abnormalities  was  significantly  less  in patients treated with adefovir dipivoxil at the dose of 60 mg than at the dose of 120 mg once daily. The  incidence  appears  to  be  dose  dependent  while  the  time  of  onset  appears  to  be  similar  and independent of dosage.

Dose-related reduction in serum carnitine levels was observed in the preclinical studies in monkeys and in clinical studies in HIV-infected patients when adefovir was used at high doses. In study 437, the placebo and adefovir 10 mg arms were further randomised to 250 mg- L-carnitine daily or placebo carnitine.  There  was  no  evidence  of  carnitine  loss  and  therefore  L-carnitine  supplementation  is  not necessary.

During  the  first  48-week  course  of  placebo-controlled  trials,  there  was  no  evidence  of  adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg daily dose-induced renal insufficiency as assessed by comparative changes in serum creatinine  and  phosphorus  levels  and  by  comparative  grade  distribution  of  abnormalities  versus placebo. There was no evidence of adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg daily dose-induced proximal tubulopathy, as assessed by comparative levels of glycosuria, proteinuria, hypouricaemia and hypokalaemia, and by comparative grade distribution of abnormalities versus placebo. By contrast study 437 showed a nephrotoxicity in the 30 mg adefovir dipivoxil arm, with a higher incidence versus placebo of: ➜ increases in serum creatinine by 5 mg/l (21% in adefovir dipivoxil 30 mg arm versus 1% in 10 mg arm versus 0 % in placebo), ➜ decreases  in  serum  phosphorus  down  to  &gt;  20  mg/ml  (16%  in  adefovir  dipivoxil  30  mg  arm versus 3% in 10 mg arm versus 4 % in placebo), ➜ grade 1 creatinine elevation  (10% in adefovir dipivoxil 30  mg  arm  versus  1% in  10  mg  arm versus 0% in placebo) ➜ grades  1  and  2  proteinuria  (35%  in  adefovir  dipivoxil  30  mg  arm  versus  20%  in  10  mg  arm versus 17 % placebo). With the extended treatment, increased in serum creatinine &gt; 0.5 mg/dl from baseline was reported in 2 patients out of 492 (&lt;1 %) treated with 10 mg adefovir dipovoxil. Both increases resolved, in one case with continuation of treatment and in one case following discontinuation of treatment. At  the  proposed  dose  of  10  mg  once  daily,  nephrotoxicity  does  not  appear  to  be  a  major  problem, however  as  a  precautionary  measure  a  warning  has  been  included  in  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics  to  exercise  caution  in  patients  with  creatinine  clearance  below  50  ml/min  and  in patients receiving medicinal products that may affect renal function. In addition it is recommended to frequently  monitor  renal  function  in  patients  with  normal  renal  function.  In  addition  the  applicant committed to further monitor during the post-marketing surveillance. Carnitine loss Medicinal Product no longer authorised

## Mitochondrial toxicity

There  was  no  evidence  of  mitochondrial  toxicity  (neuropathy,  cardiomyopathy,  pancreatitis,  lactic acidosis), as assessed by elevations in lactic acid, CPK or amylase. Since adefovir belongs to a class

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

close to the nucleoside analogues for which mitochodrial toxicity has been reported, adequate warning is  included  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  including  guidance  on  how  to  differentiate increase  ALT  levels  due  to  efficacy  and  those  due  to  lactic  acidosis.  In  addition  the  applicant committed to further monitor during the post-marketing surveillance.

## Safety in special populations

Safety evaluation was performed in a number of subgroups of patients treated with adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg once daily and placebo during the first 48 weeks double blind treatment period of studies 437 and  438.  There  was  no  noteworthy  interaction  between  age,  race,  gender,  ALT  levels  and  Knodell score and the incidence or seriousness of adverse events between treatment groups.

The safety of adefovir dipivoxil in children has not been established but the applicant committed to perform clinical studies in this population. Apart from the exclusion/precaution related to hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic drugs, no clinical relevant drug interactions have been identified in clinical studies. 4. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The active substance has been well characterised and documented. The pharmaceutical form selected is adequate taking into account the properties and stability of the active substance. The excipients are commonly  used  in  this  kind  of  formulation  and  the  packaging  material  is  well  documented.  The manufacturing process for finished product batches is consistent and reproducible. Stability tests under ICH conditions indicate that the product is stable for the proposed shelf life. The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a  satisfactory way. At the time of the CPMP opinion there were some outstanding minor quality issues which had no impact on the  benefit/risk  profile.  The  applicant  committed  to  provide  the  necessary  information  as  follow-up measures within an agreed timeframe, and to submit variations if required following the evaluation of this additional information. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Adefovir dipivoxil presented an antiviral activity both in vitro and in vivo compatible with a potential clinical  use  for  the  treatment  of  HBV  infection.  In  safety  pharmacology  studies,  adefovir  dipivoxil caused a decrease in urine volume and electrolyte excretion and a decrease in gastric emptying in rats. No pharmacological effects were seen on the central nervous system in rats or cardiovascular system in dogs. The  pharmacokinetic  profile  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  has  been  adequately  characterised  in  several species.  Following  oral  administration,  adefovir  dipivoxil  is  rapidly  metabolised  via  non-specific esterases to adefovir via the monoester. No other metabolites have been observed in vitro or in vivo and adefovir does not inhibit CYP450 system. Adefovir was excreted unchanged via renal route in all animal species tested. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The  toxicological  profile  of  adefovir  and  adefovir  dipivoxil  was  assessed  in  several  species  in  a complete battery of tests. The principal target organs of toxicity were the kidney, gastrointestinal tract, liver,  and  lymphoid tissues (including bone marrow). Nephrotoxicity, characterised by renal tubular nephropathy in all species evaluated, was the primary dose-limiting toxicity in the rats or monkeys. Liver and lymphoid tissues were the most sensitive target organs in mice. The dermal lesions at non injection sites observed in monkeys will be further investigated by the applicant as part of follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Adefovir dipivoxil had no effects on male or female fertility, or reproductive performance in rats and was  neither embryotoxic  nor  teratogenic in pregnant rabbits.  The  administration of adefovir intravenously in pregnant rats resulted in embryotoxicity, increased incidence of foetal malformations and common variations, but only at maternally toxic doses. Adefovir dipivoxil should therefore only been used in pregnant women if the potential benefit justifies the risk for the foetus.

In in vitro genetic toxicity studies, adefovir was negative in the bacterial mutation assay and positive in the chromosome aberration assay in human peripheral blood lymphocytes. Adefovir dipivoxil was positive  in  the  mouse  lymphoma  assay  and  negative  in  the in  vivo mouse  micronucleus  assay. Adefovir  dipivoxil  was  not  carcinogenic  in  the  mouse  or  rat  studies.  The  profile  of  adefovir  and adefovir dipivoxil in genetic toxicity and carcinogenicity is therefore similar to nucleoside analogues in that it induces chromosomal aberrations (but not point mutations) in vitro but is not genetoxic or carcinogenic in in vivo models.

The  clinical  benefit  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  is  mainly  based  on  the  results  of  two  main  randomised, double-blind,  placebo-controlled  studies  in  non  lamivudine-resistant  HBeAg  positive  and  negative HBV infected patients, the majority of these patients had fibrosis at baseline. Data up to 48 weeks showed  that  adefovir  dipivoxil  induced  a  statistically  significant  improvement  in  liver  histology,  a suitable  primary  endpoint  allowing  direct  assessment  of  both  responses  to  treatment  and  disease structural progression. In HBeAg positive patients, a highly statistically significant (p&lt;0.001) 2 points improvement in the Knodell necro-inflammatory score, with no concurrent worsening of fibrosis, was observed in 53% of patients in the adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg arm versus 25% in the placebo group. The corresponding results in HBeAg negative patients were 64% in adefovir dipivoxil arm versus 33% in the placebo arm. Histological improvement was seen regardless of baseline demographic and hepatitis

Clinical efficacy The pharmacokinetics profile of adefovir dipivoxil was adequately defined in healthy volunteers and patients  with  HBV  infection.  After  oral administration,  adefovir  dipivoxil  undergoes  a  rapid hydrolysis yielding adefovir during and following absorption process in the gastrointestinal tract. Oral bioavailability  of  10  mg  adefovir  dipivoxil  is  estimated  at  59  %  and  is  unaffected  by  food,  which supports  the  use  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  either  with  or  without  food.  Of  interest  the  metabolism  of adefovir  dipivoxil  did  not  interfere  with  the  CYP450  system,  which  limits  the  potential  for pharmacokinetic  interactions.  No  relevant  interaction  was  shown  with  antiretroviral  medicinal products.  Adefovir  is  eliminated  unchanged  by  the  kidneys  via  tubular  secretion.  Substances undergoing  tubular secretion such as lamivudine did not alter the pharmacokinetics profile. Preclinical  studies  showed  that  the  human  renal  organic  anion  transporter  1  (hOAT1)  presumably played an essential role in the active tubular secretion. No interaction studies  have  been  performed with  substances  known  to  share  the  transporter  and  therefore  a  warning  has  been  included  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics. In addition the applicant committed to provide post-authorisation results  of  further  interaction  studies,  including  nephrotoxic  substances.  Based  on  limited  data  dose interval adjustments are recommended in patients with moderate and severe renal impairment and in patients with en stage renal disease requiring haemodialysis as reflected in the Summary of Product Characteristics. As these recommendations may not be optimal the applicant committed to complete dosing guidance by providing post-authorisation further data in HBV infected patients affected with various  degree  of  renal  impairment.  No  dosage  modifications  are  required  in  patients  with  hepatic impairment. The pharmacokinetic profile of adefovir dipivoxil has not yet been evaluated in children. Adefovir diphosphate exhibits a long intracellular half-life (12 to 36 hours in lymphocytes) justifying once daily dosage regimen. Adefovir dipivoxil was shown to be effective in phase II studies. In these studies, the dose of 10 mg once daily provided an acceptable level of efficacy and did not induce any nephrotoxicity compared to the 30 mg dose and therefore was selected as the dose in the main clinical studies. The choice of the dose was further substantiated by a dose-modelling curve. The results of the main studies confirm that this dose exhibits an adequate benefit/risk ratio. However, since the 30 mg exhibited  a  higher  response  especially  in  term  of  reduction  in  serum  HBV  DNA  (approximately  1 log10copies/ml),  the  applicant  committed  to  further  investigate,  as  a  post  approval  commitment, whether an intermediate dose (20 mg) could provide a better efficacy profile than the recommended 10 mg dose with an acceptable safety profile. In addition other pharmacodynamic outstanding issues were identified which will be resolved as follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

B characteristics, including prior interferon-alpha therapy. Assessment of the change in fibrosis after 48 weeks  treatment  using  the  Knodell  fibrosis  scores  confirmed  that  patients  treated  with  adefovir dipivoxil  10 mg  had  more  regression  and  less  progression  of  fibrosis  than  patients  treated  with placebo. In addition, for both studies 48-week data showed a statistically significant decrease in viral load (3.52 and 3.91 log10 copies/ml in the adefovir dipivoxil arms versus 0.55 and 1.35 log10 copies/ml in placebo arm) and increased proportion of patients with normalisation of ALT (48 and 72 % in the adefovir dipivoxil arm versus 16 and 29 % in placebo arm). In the study in HBeAg positive patients, HBeAg seroconversion (12 %) and HBeAg loss (24 %) was observed significantly more frequently in patients  receiving  10 mg  adefovir  dipivoxil  than  in  patients  receiving  placebo  (6 %  and  11 %, respectively) after 48 weeks of treatment. Baseline characteristics did not seem to have an impact on the response since statistically significant response rates were observed in all sub-groups of patients even  if  higher  rates  for  histological  improvement  was  observed  in  patients  with  elevated  baseline Knodell score (&gt; 10), elevated ALT levels (2 x ULN) and relatively low HBV DNA levels (&lt; 7.6 log10 copies/ml).

The  genotypic  and  phenotypic  data  derived  from  the  clinical  studies  did  not  show  any  mutation induced  resistance  associated  with  the  use  of  adefovir  dipivoxil  but  the  applicant  committed  to continue the ongoing prospective surveillance programme for the emergence of resistance.

72 weeks efficacy data (open label follow-up) confirm the virological, biochemical, and serological efficacy demonstrated by 48-week data and show additional benefit from extended treatment duration, in particular 23 % patients of the 288 evaluable patients of study 437 (n = 66) versus 14 % at week 48 experienced HBeAg seroconversion. In addition the clinical benefit of adefovir dipivoxil was shown in lamivudine resistant HBV infected patients: -In a clinical study in 324 chronic hepatitis B patients with lamivudine-resistant HBV (pre-liver transplantation (n=128) and post-liver transplantation (n=196)), treatment with 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil  resulted  in  a  median  reduction  in  serum  HBV  DNA  of  4.1  and  4.3-log10 copies/ml respectively, at week 48. -In a double blind, comparative study patients with compensated liver disease and lamivudine-resistant HBV (n=58), 48 weeks of treatment with adefovir dipivoxil 10 mg alone or in combination with lamivudine resulted in a similar significant decrease in median serum HBV DNA levels from baseline (4.04 log10 copies/ml and 3.59 log10 copies/ml, respectively). -In  40  HBeAg  positive  or  HBeAg  negative  patients  with  lamivudine-resistant  HBV  and decompensated  liver  disease  receiving  treatment  with  100 mg  lamivudine,  addition  of  10 mg adefovir  dipivoxil  treatment  for  52 weeks  resulted  in  a  median  reduction  in  HBV  DNA  of 4.6 log10 copies/ml.  Improvement in liver function was also seen after one year of therapy. -In an open-label investigator study in 35 chronic hepatitis B patients with lamivudine-resistant HBV and co-infected with HIV, treatment with 10 mg adefovir dipivoxil resulted in reduction in serum HBV DNA levels throughout the course of treatment up to 72 weeks (median reduction in HBV DNA from baseline at 72 weeks of 4.77 log10 copies/ml).  Further data in HBV-HIV coinfected patients will be provided. Clinical  outstanding  issues  were  identified  which  will  be  resolved  as  follow-up  measures  to  be fulfilled  post-authorisation  such  as  long  term  efficacy  data,  long  term  data  on  the  rate  of  sustained response, the efficacy of combination therapy and the optimal use of adefovir dipivoxil in lamivudine resistant patients either as on add-on therapy to lamivudine or as substitution. In addition the optimal treatment duration and the predictors for response/non response will be further investigated. Medicinal Product no longer authorised

The clinical  benefit  in  children  and  adolescents  is  currently  unknown  but  the  applicant  presented  a paediatric programme, the results of which will be submitted post-authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Safety

Overall adefovir dipivoxil at the dose of 10 mg once daily was well tolerated in over 1,000 patients treated  up  to  109  weeks.  The  undesirable  effects  reported  related  mainly  to  headache,  asthenia  and gastro-intestinal effects. The safety profile was similar in all different types of HBV infected patients evaluated  in  the  clinical  studies  (HBeAg  positive,  negative,  resistant  to  lamivudine  and  HIV  coinfected).  From  the  previous  clinical  development  in  HIV  nephrotoxicity  and  carnitine  loss  were identified as potential toxicities with adefovir dipivoxil but in the clinical studies, at the dose of 10 mg there  was  no  evidence  for  these  toxicities.  Close  monitoring  of  patients  is  however  recommended. Although liver was identified in the toxicological studies as a target organ, there was no evidence for liver  toxicity  in  the  clinical  studies.  As  adefovir  dipivoxil  belongs  to  a  class  close  to  nucleoside analogues  for  which  mitochondrial  toxicity  has  been  reported,  a  warning  has  been  included  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics.  The applicant committed to provide long term safety data, with particular focus on mitochondrial toxicity and renal toxicity.

•

Benefit/risk assessment The clinical development is comprehensive with the assessment of the efficacy and safety of adefovir dipivoxil in several sub-populations of patients which chronic hepatitis B such as treatment naïve and lamivudine resistant HBV infected patients, including patients identified as difficult to treat (i.e. precore mutant, transplanted patients, decompensated and HIV co-infected patients). Overall the efficacy was  consistent  whatever  the  type  of  response  (histological,  virological  biochemical,  serological  or clinical)  the  disease  subtype  (HBeAg  positive,  negative  compensated  or  not)  and  the  virus  subtype (wild type or YMDD mutants associated with lamivudine resistance). The  population  included  in  studies  437  and  438  had  evidence  of  active  viral  replication  (e.g  HBV DNA ≥ 100,000 copies/ml) and elevated serum ALT (e.g ≥ 1.2 ULN) and the superiority of adefovir dipivoxil versus placebo was demonstrated regardless of baseline characteristic. However in view of the remaining questions on long term data, particularly with respect to sustained response, the risk of delayed  emergence of  resistance,  and  the  duration  of  treatment,  the  CPMP  was  of  the  opinion  that treatment with adefovir dipivoxil should be restricted to patients strictly requiring to be treated without delay, the goal of therapy being to hasten progression from stage 2, where fibrosis develops to stage 3 (HBeAg seroconversion). In  addition  although  results  are  very  encouraging  in  lamivudine  resistant  patients,  they  need  to  be completed to further substantiate the efficacy of adefovir dipivoxil in these patients in order to make recommendations  on  the  optimal  therapeutic  management  (adefovir  to  be  used  in  substitution  or intensification of lamivudine therapy). Recommendation Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Hepsera in the treatment of patients with chronic hepatitis B at the dose of 10 mg daily was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation in the following indication: ' Treatment of chronic hepatitis B in adults with: compensated liver disease with evidence of active viral replication, persistently elevated serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels and histological evidence of active liver inflammation and fibrosis Medicinal Product no longer authorised

- decompensated liver disease.'