---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:53:54
document_pages: 33
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/hexavac-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: hexavac-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.4867143
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-14 15:43:02.809937
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Hexavac. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 October 2002. For information on changes after 1 October 2002 please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Hexavac is a new formulated liquid formulation of a combination of existing vaccines, consisting of: diphtheria vaccine, tetanus vaccine, acellular pertussis vaccine, recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen vaccine, inactivated poliomyelitis vaccine  and  H aemophilus influenzae type b polysaccharide conjugated to tetanus toxoid vaccine. Administration of all these components in a single injection is a major step towards increased compliance with vaccination programs and control of infectious diseases, wide  childhood  vaccination  coverage  against  six  infectious  diseases,  as  well  as  a  better  control  of vaccination costs. The  diphtheria,  tetanus  and  whole-cell  pertussis  (DTP)  vaccine  was  the  first  combined  vaccine containing pertussis and has been used for more than 50 years. DTP has been routinely administered mixed together with inactivated poliomyelitis virus vaccine (IPV) for more than 30 years in several countries.  The  reactogenicity  profile  of  whole-cell  pertussis  vaccines  led  vaccine  manufacturers  to develop purified, well-characterised acellular pertussis vaccines (aP). The administration of protein-conjugated Hib vaccines in infancy was shown to reduce dramatically the incidence of invasive Hib diseases and to diminish the oropharyngeal carriage of Hib. The same conjugated  PRP-vaccine  (Act-Hib)  was  also  combined  with  DTaP  or  DTaP-IPV,  and  these  new combination vaccines were recently licensed and are routinely used in a number of European countries. The need for the control and prevention of hepatitis B (HB) infection has been recognised worldwide as a major public health goal. In 1992, the WHO assembly endorsed universal vaccination of infants against HB. Routine infant immunisation with HB vaccine is now recommended by various developed countries with low or intermediate endemicity, to effectively reduce the HB incidence by interrupting transmission before potential exposure. Economic evaluations have indicated that universal vaccination,  even  in  low-endemicity  countries,  would  be  cost  effective.  Combination  vaccines containing a HB component could accelerate integration of this vaccine into existing infant vaccination programmes even if in countries of high HB prevalence there is still need for a monovalent HB vaccine to be administered at birth. HB vaccine has already been successfully combined with DTP, DTaP or OMPC conjugated PRP (PRP-OMPC, Pedvax HIB) vaccines. In  recent  years,  diphtheria  toxoid,  tetanus  toxoid,  trivalent  poliomyelitis  concentrate, Haemophilus influenzae type  b  polysaccharide,  and  pertussis  component  (PTxd/FHA)  have  been  licensed  and marketed  in  several  European  countries  (TETAVAX,  D.T.  VAX,  TETRACT-Hib,  PENTACT-Hib, TETRAVAC,  PENTAVAC).  The  Merck  recombinant  hepatitis  B  vaccine  has  been  licensed  and marketed  as  a  monovalent  vaccine  (HB  VAX,  RECOMBIVAX)  or  as  a  combined  vaccine (PRIMAVAX, PROCOMVAX). The pharmaceutical form of this vaccine is a suspension for injection by the intramuscular (IM) route. It  contains  aluminium  as  an  adjuvant.  The  final  product  is  preservative-free  and  presented  in  a  prefilled glass syringe. Medicinal product no longer authorised

This combined vaccine is indicated for active immunisation against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B caused by all known subtypes of viruses, poliomyelitis and invasive infections caused by Haemophilus influenzae type b.

- -for primary vaccination in infants (from 2 to 12 months of age)
- -for booster vaccination in toddlers (from 12 to 18 months of age)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

provided the toddler has received a full primary vaccination course of each of the antigens contained in Hexavac  regardless  of  whether  they  were  administered  as  monovalent  or  combination  vaccines produced by Aventis Pasteur MSD.

## 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

## Composition

Hexavac is a new formulation of 6 antigens combined in a single suspension for injection. It contains as active ingredients:

| Purified diphtheria toxoid, adsorbed Purified tetanus toxoid, adsorbed Purified pertussis toxoid, adsorbed Purified pertussis filamentous haemagglutinin Recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen Inactivated poliomyelitis virus: type 1 type 2 type 3   | ≥ 20 IU (30 Lf) ≥ 40 IU (10 Lf) 25 µ g 25 µ g 5.0 µ g 40 D units 8 D units 32 D units authorised   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| adsorbed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                    |
| Haemophilus influenzae polysaccharide type b                                                                                                                                                                                                             | 12 µ g                                                                                             |

<!-- image -->

The addition of Haemophilus influenzae type b polysaccharide into the same container together with the other components and particularly the presence of aluminium hydroxide gave rise to the need to increase  the  content  of  PRP-T  by  20%  (ie  12  µg/dose).  In  fact,  as  stated  by  the  manufacturer,  it  is important to obtain a low adsorption of PRP-T and a high adsorption of HBsAg.

Purified diphtheria toxoid, adsorbed ≥ 20 IU (30 Lf) Purified tetanus toxoid, adsorbed ≥ 40 IU (10 Lf) Purified pertussis toxoid, adsorbed 25 µ g Purified pertussis filamentous haemagglutinin adsorbed 25 µ g Recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen Inactivated poliomyelitis virus: type 1 40 D units type 2 type 3 Haemophilus influenzae polysaccharide type b conjugated to tetanus toxoid (24 µ g) The  antigen  content  for  Hib  is  higher  than  in  previous  vaccines  of  the  same  manufacturer  without affecting  the  ADR  profile  comparable  to  Hexavac.  Similar  amounts  of  antigen  are  used  in  other vaccines which have an ADR profile comparable to Hexavac. The manufacturer has shown in clinical studies that the Hexavac acellular pertussis components PT and  FHA  confer  sufficient  efficacy  comparable  to  the  efficacy  of  other  vaccines  from  the  same manufacturer licensed already in Europe. The product is contained in a 1 ml type 1 glass syringe with a stopper in contact with the suspension composed of a chlorobromobutyl elastomer. The syringe is supplied with or without a stainless steel needle. Active substances Diphtheria (PDT) and tetanus (PTT) toxoids are prepared from the respective toxins by formaldehyde detoxification  followed  by  purification.  The  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  is  produced  by culture  of  a  recombinant  strain  of Saccharomices  cerevisiae. The  poliomyelitis  vaccine  (IPV)  is obtained from the propagation of polio viruses, types 1, 2 and 3, on Vero cells, purified and inactivated by  formaldehyde.  The  acellular  pertussis  components  (PT  and  FHA)  are  extracted  from Bordetella pertussis cultures  and  separately  purified.  PT  is  detoxified  with  glutaraldehyde  to  create  the  toxoid (PTxd). The purified polysaccharide (polyribosyl ribitol phosphate [ PRP ] ) of Haemophilus influenzae type b is conjugated to tetanus protein. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Other ingredients

Hexavac also contains:

- Aluminium hydroxide (expressed as Al +++ )
- Buffer solution

disodium phosphate dihydrate,

0.306 mg up to 0.5 ml

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

potassium dihydrogen phosphate, sodium carbonate anhydrous, sodium hydrogen carbonate, trometamol, sucrose, medium 199 Hanks without phenol red, water for injection

(- 2.5 M sodium hydroxide or 10% acetic acid up to pH 6.80 to 7.20)

An aluminium content specification range 0.20-0.40 mg/dose was considered to be acceptable.

The selected formulation resulted in a partial adsorption for diphtheria toxoid and for tetanus toxoid in contrast to a complete adsorption of each of these antigens in other vaccines.

The preparation of PDT is based on a seed lot system. A highly toxigenic strain of Corynebacterium diphtheriae was used as primary seed lot (PSL). Several working seed lots (WSL) were obtained from this  PSL  in  the  form  of  lyophilised  ampoules.  At  the  end  of  the  fermentation,  the  toxin-containing supernatant  is  clarified,  concentrated,  sterile  filtered,  detoxified  in  the  presence  of  formalin,  and purified  by  ammonium  sulphate  precipitation.  This  purified  and  concentrated  toxoid  preparation constitutes the bulk lot. The procedure and the relevant quality controls are described in the dossier. The antigenic purity for three batches of diphtheria toxoid is shown to meet the Eur. Ph. requirements.

All  tests  on  other  ingredients  used  as  starting  materials,  such  as  aluminium  hydroxide,  sodium chloride, sodium carbonate, etc. are performed according to the European Pharmacopoeia. Product development and finished product · Method of preparation The preparation of the final bulk (blending), the filling into syringes  and the packaging are carried out at Aventis Pasteur in Marcy l'Etoile (France). The finished product manufactured at Marcy l'Etoile is stored in a cold room at + 5° + C 3°C. The final bulk product (FBP) consists in blending all the 6 active ingredients with the excipient. The sequence of ingredient-excipient addition, the sterilization phases, and in process controls carried out during blending are detailed. As  Hexavac  contains  aluminium  hydroxide  gel,  the  FBP  cannot  be  sterile  filtered.  The  FBP manufacturing  process  is  carried  out  aseptically  according  to  the  Eur. Ph.  Requirement.  All  the components used for the FBP manufacture are sterile and are checked for sterility when produced. All  the  packaging  materials,  syringes,  needles,  caps  and  stoppers  are  sterilised  by  steam  in  an autoclave. Filling is performed in a room with a controlled temperature (20°C), the Final Bulk Product is kept in a cold store (4°C) with stirring throughout the operation; after filling, the plunger stopper is inserted in each syringe. The syringes are then placed in a cold store. The active ingredients are manufactured by Aventis Pasteur (in Marcy l'Etoile) except for the HBsAg component,  which  is  prepared  by  Merck  and  Co  (in  the  US).  The  manufacturing  process  has  been presented in detail. Filling and secondary packaging operations with the relative in-process controls are also described. All operations are stated to be carried out according to Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). · Production and control of starting materials Diphtheria toxoid: Medicinal product no longer authorised

Tetanus toxoid:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The preparation of PTT is based on seed lot system. The origin and the preparation of the primary seed lots and working seed are described in the dossier. A lyophilised strain of Clostridium tetani was used as the PSL. Several WSLs were obtained from this PSL in the form of lyophilised ampoules. Controls on  primary  and  working  seed  lots  fulfil  the  criteria  of  purity,  identity  and  stability.  The  culture methods comply with the relevant Ph. Eur. monograph (452). At the end of the fermentation, the toxin is clarified, concentrated, detoxified in the presence of formalin and purified by ammonium sulphate (AS) precipitation.

## Haemophilus influenzae type b polysaccharide conjugated to tetanus protein (PRP-T):

The  polysaccharide  (PRP)  is  extracted  from  cultures  of Haemophilus  influenzae type  b,  it  is  then purified and transformed into a derived polysaccharide PRP-AH by bonding with adipic dihydrazide acid (AH) after cyanogen bromide activation. The  tetanus  protein  is  extracted  and  purified  from Clostridium  tetani ,  the  same  strain  used  for  the preparation of the tetanus toxoid. The  derived  polysaccharide  PRP-AH  is  conjugated  to  the  concentrated  tetanus  protein.  After  the conjugation  process,  the  product  is  purified.  The  product  obtained  is  referred  to  as Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate concentrated bulk (PRP-T). The production  and  purification  steps,  as  well  as  all  the  routine  control  tests  are  the  same  as  those carried out for the preparation of Act-Hib vaccine. Pertussis components: Hexavac contains two purified Bordetella pertussis antigens (PT and FHA). These antigens have been licensed and marketed in several countries in combination with other antigens. The two pertussis components, PTxd (25 µ g) and FHA (25 µ g), are purified separately and adsorbed on aluminium hydroxide. PT is detoxified by glutaraldehyde.FHA is native. The immunogenicity tests  of  pertussis  antigens  performed  on  independent  final  lots  are  satisfactory and show that the manufacturing processes are consistent and reproducible. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): The  yeast Saccharomyces  cerevisiae ,  strain  2150-2-3,  used  as  host  for  the  recombinant  HBsAg expression vector, was obtained from the collection of Leland Hartwell (University of Washington). Cell bank system A single cell clone was isolated following transformation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain 2150.2.3 with the plasmid PHBS56-GAP347/33 and used to prepare the master seed 13229-210. Another lot of Master Seed was prepared, from the same Pre-Master Seed. DNA sequencing of the plus and minus strands of the plasmid from the newly prepared Master Seed was completed and the sequence was verified to be correct. Restriction analysis on the new Master Seed was performed and found to be satisfactory. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Production of the HBsAg active ingredient (bulk alum product)

The production site was Merck Manufacturing Division, Merck &amp; Co. Inc., West Point, PA, USA. The fermentation process yields approximately 600-800 L of final culture.

The manufacturing process includes: fermentation, purification phase I (extraction of HBsAg, removal of detergent, aerosil purification), purification phase II (chromatography in Butyl-Agarose, Triton X 100  removal),  removal  of  yeast  proteins,  denaturation  (formaldehyde  3mM  at  36°C  for  60h),  coprecipitation with aluminium hydroxide for the formulation of Bulk Alum Product.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The production takes place in a pilot unit and a general map including the different functional areas, the facilities and equipment together with cleaning and sterilisation procedures, the conditions of use and reuse of columns including loading conditions, yields, regeneration and storage between runs and life time of each column are described.

## Validation of the process.

Five manufacturing lots of pure product were used for the biochemical and biophysical characterisation of the 24kDa protein (HBsAg). Analyses were performed on Purified Form III (PFIII) before and after filtration.

Primary structure was characterised by N-terminal and C-terminal sequencing of the S protein. It was performed  in  order  to  verify  the  accuracy  of  the  translation  and  to  ensure  that  no  chemical modifications  occur  during  downstream  processing.  The  sequence  was  verified  to  be  correct. Aminoacid analysis was performed by prediction and by mass spectrometry. Lipid  analysis  was  performed  by  colorimetric  assay,  HPLC,  enzymatic  method  and  thin  layer chromatography. Carbohydrate content was determined by HPAEC  and DNA  content by hybridisation. Biophysical characterisation shows that there are no significant differences in the secondary structure of the HBsAg protein among the five PFIII lots, as determined by CD and FTIR spectroscopy. The mean particle diameter, as determined from the TEM micrographs, is in the range of 18-22 nm. The apparent densities of the particles, measured by CsCl density gradient sedimentation, are nearly the same for all lots. The validation of the process is considered to be satisfactory. Validation of relevant methods The validation included the Master Seed batch analysis and the Stock Seed batch analysis. Validation of the analytical methods; Replica Plating assay and Quantification of Less Than Full Length HBsAg polypeptides  and  control  procedures  have  been  provided.  The  other  tests  are  described  and  are  in compliance with Eur. Ph. monograph on hepatitis B vaccines (rDNA). In  vivo mouse  potency  and in  vitro relative  potency  assays  are  applied  for  testing  the  Bulk  Alum Product. The mouse potency assay was validated for the thiomersal-containing formulation of hepatitis B vaccine Bulk Alum Product. Although the hepatitis B bulk intermediate for Hexavac is thiomersalfree, no significant difference in the reaction system of the assay should occur because the vaccine is the direct sample for the animal body (mouse), whereas the direct sample for the EIA is the animal serum. The potency is expressed as the ED50 (effective dose where 50% of the mice tested exhibit an immune response) which is determined based on the number of mice responders at different doses. The test has a specification of ED50 ≤ 1.5 mcg. In order to be 95% confident that the true potency does not exceed this specification, an alert limit of ED50 ≤ 1.0 mcg has been established. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The in vitro relative potency assay (IVRP) is used to measure the relative amount of HBsAg in alumadsorbed samples through parallel comparison to an H-B-VAX-II reference standard. Reproducibility and linearity have been evaluated and reference standards were prepared calibrated for µ g/ml antigen content (16.16 µ g/ml).

The  IVRP  of  the  HBsAg  Bulk  Alum  Product  (BAP)  of  Hexavac  batches  used  in  the  clinical  trial program  ranged  between  0.95  and  1.41.  The  applicant  has  committed  to  implement  a  new  IVRP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

specification for the BAP which will be at least 1.0. Thus, in future Hexavac batches the IVRP of the HBsAg active ingredient will correspond to the clinical trial batches.

A linear relationship between the MP Assay and the IVRP Assay that supports the interchangeability of the two procedures has been established.

## Inactivated polio vaccine

The three poliovirus strains are produced as monovalent pools and subsequently mixed: the production process is documented for both in detail.

Primary &amp; Working Virus Seed Lots The preparation of the vaccine is based on a «Seed Lot System». The viral strains originate from the Rijks Institute, NL, and are the well known wild strains Mahoney (type 1), MEF1 (type 2) and Saukett (type3) grown in primary cultures of E. patas kidney cells. The WVSLs in current use (three for type 1, two for type 2 and three for type 3) are all VERO passaged, from which the subsequent monovalent bulk lots are derived. Monovalent Bulk Lots and their inactivation Ampoules of VERO cells, taken from the WCB, are thawed and amplified. The  subsequent  steps  of  the  virus  harvest  are  concentration  by  ultrafiltration  and  purification  by passage in three chromatography columns. After  purification  and  filtration,  inactivation  by  formalin  is  started.  At  the  end  of  the  process  the suspension is filtered and kept at 5°C ± 3°C up to the end of the due controls. Concentrated trivalent bulk The concentrated trivalent is manufactured under laminar flow. The filtered  concentrated  trivalent  is  stored  at  5°C ± 3°C before blending with the other antigens of Hexavac. Impurities Impurities  routinely  determined  are:  DNA,  protein,  residual  bovine  serum  albumin,  antibiotics  and DEAE beads. Validation studies have shown that the purification process is capable of removing these impurities to an acceptable level. · Control tests on intermediate product The  quality  tests  are  carried  out  on  the  intermediate  product  «Final  Bulk  Product».  The  release specifications are reported from data specific to five pilot FBP and five industrial batches. Diphtheria toxoid Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  requirement  to  set  the  LFL  to  &gt;20  IU/dose  is  based  on  data  of  clinical  batches  and  takes  into account the high variability of the potency testing.

## Tetanus toxoid

The  potency  test  has  been  performed  according  to  the  Ph.  Eur.  for  the  monovalent  vaccine.  As reference, a monovalent product calibrated with the WHO reference (Reference toxoid ETIM-2, 300 IU/ml) was used. The limit &gt; 40 IU/ml selected is that of the Eur. Ph. .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The specific toxicity test is carried out according to the Ph. Eur. technique on 5 guinea pigs each of which receive an injection of 5 human doses (2.5 ml).

## Non adsorbed PRP-T

The release specification of \" ≥ 8 µ g PRP/dose\" lower limit for the final product is acceptable.

However, it should be mentioned that the amount of tetanus toxoid-conjugated PRP is not covered by this specification. HbsAg

<!-- image -->

| Tests                                       | Ph. Eur.   | Release specifications Whitish and cloudy suspension ≥ 0.5 ml for each of the 5 syringes 0.20 - 0.40 mg/dose For information Conform to Eur. Ph. Conform to Eur. Ph Positive Positive   |
|---------------------------------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Appearance                                  | /          |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Determination of extractable volume product | 2.9.17     | tested                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Aluminum content                            | 2.5.13     |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Endotoxin content                           | 2.6.14     |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Bacterial and fungal sterility              | 2.6.1      |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Pyrogen test (1/100)                        | 2.6.8      |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Diphtheria identification                   | 2.7.1      |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Tetanus identification                      | 2.7.1      |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Haemophilus identification                  | 2.7.1      | Positive                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Pertussis identification                    |            |                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| - FHA                                       | 2.7.1      | Positive                                                                                                                                                                                |
| - Pertussis toxoid                          | 2.7.1      | Positive                                                                                                                                                                                |
| HBsAg identification                        | 2.7.1      | Positive                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Polio virus identification (D Antigen)      | /          | Positive                                                                                                                                                                                |

Quality Control Tests and specifications are in accordance with European Pharmacopeia requirements. Inactivated polio vaccine The immunogenicity test in chicken (potency in vivo) has been performed in a different way from the specific Ph.Eur. monograph. However, the assay has been validated through statistical analysis of the data. The results from five consecutive pilot sized batches have been provided. In all cases consistency in the results of IPV potency in vivo is achieved. · Control tests on the finished product For practical reasons, many control tests are carried out on the Final Bulk Product so that only the identification of the different active ingredients and sterility are performed on the finished product. The vaccine is filled in single-dose syringes Specifications and control tests for the finished product are reported in the following table: The finished product shows good consistency in 5 production lots examined. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Viral safety

## HbsAg

No biological products, from human or animal origin are used in the production / purification process of recombinant HBsAg.

Inactivated polio vaccine

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The WVSLs have been properly checked. The inactivation process of the polioviruses is validated and appears to be safe. The PCBs and the WCBs have been appropriately checked as described according to WHO and Ph Eur Requirements. For each new production, a sample of the cell cultures deriving from the WCB undergoes the appropriate controls.

- Animal-derived materials

The controls comply with the «CPMP BSE - Guideline CPMP/BWP/877/96«.

## Stability of the Product

<!-- image -->

· Stability of the active substances/intermediate product Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids The stability of the two toxoids was studied at the following stages: Crude diphtheria toxoid; At +5°C ± 3°C, there was no change for periods of 8 to 33 weeks. The study conducted for 6 months at 5°C ± 3°C demonstrates the stability of the product. Crude tetanus toxoid; The study conducted for 20 weeks at +5°C ± 3°C demonstrates the stability of the product. Purified diphtheria and tetanus toxoids; the mixture of the purified tetanus and diphtheria toxoids can be stored for 36 months at + 5°C ± 3°C. Pertussis components The  stability  studies  have  been  carried  out  on  Hexavac  vaccine  in  final  containers  intended  for licensing, in final bulk product, in native and adsorbed purified antigens. Native purified PT: 48 months at 5°C Native purified FHA: 48 months at 5°C Adsorbed purified PT: 48 months at 5°C Adsorbed purified FHA: 48 months at 5°C Haemophilus polysaccharide; PRP-T (concentrated  bulk): Based  on  the  data  provided  a  36  months  period  of  stability  (-35°C)  is acceptable for the PRP-T. PRP: Based on the data provided a 36 months period of stability (-20°C) is acceptable for the PRP. PRP-AH: Based  on  the  data  provided  a  24  months  period  of  stability  (-35°C)  is  acceptable  for  the PRP-AH. Tetanus protein : Medicinal product no longer authorised

A 12 month stability period has been accepted.

Concentrated tetanus protein :

Based on the data provided a 24 months period of stability (+5°C ± 3°C) is considered to be acceptable for the concentrated tetanus protein.

HbsAg

Yeast cell paste; may be stored at 70°C for up to two years.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Clarified aerosil product; may be stored at 2-8°C for up to two weeks.

Sterile filtered product ; may be stored for up to one year at 2-8°C.

Final aqueous product; may be stored for up to one month at 2-8°C.

Bulk alum product; may be stored at 2-8°C for up to three years.

The  applicant  commits  to  only  use  HBsAg  active  ingredient  with  a  cumulative  holding  period  not exceeding 3 years (not considering the 2 years storage period at -70 o C of the washed yeast cell paste). In the exceptional case bulk alum product (BAP) older than 24 months (a holding period of 36 months is  approved  for  the  monovalent Hepatitis B vaccine produced by the applicant) is used as an active ingredient in Hexavac, the applicant intends to set up a specific stability testing program to provide supportive data justifying the use of BAP older than 24 months. Inactivated polio vaccine Monovalent product The shelf-life of 36 months is considered to be acceptable. Concentrated trivalent product 30 months at 5°C ± 3°C. · Stability of FBP Based on the data provided the shelf life 6 months (4-8 °C) for the final bulk product is considered to be acceptable. Ongoing study, currently 9 months at 5°C + 3 °C. · Stability of finished product The approved shelf-life for the finished product is 24 months stored at +5 °C + 3 °C. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics · In vivo studies Immunogenicity (or potency) in mice Medicinal product no longer authorised

Immunogenicity  (capacity  for  producing  a  specific  immune  response)  or  potency  (capacity  for triggering an immune protection to a challenge) has been quantified for each antigen on the various Hexavac lots produced. For each valence, the response was evaluated against a standard reference and compared  with  the  response  obtained  from  monovalent  vaccine  lots  or  from  other  marketed combination vaccines.

With respect to diphtheria, tetanus, polio and Haemophilus type b valences, the results obtained from 7 Hexavac lots were compiled and compared with the results obtained under the same conditions from 10 lots of various marketed vaccine preparations containing one or more of these valences. For each of the 4 valences (polio valence being analysed for 3 types : 1, 2 and 3) all the Hexavac lots passed the Pharmacopoeia tests and the statistical comparison with the results from the other vaccines revealed no significant decrease in response in any of the cases studied.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

With respect to the pertussis valence, Hexavac contains two acellular antigens (PT+ FHA = acP). The antigenicity of acP was evaluated in the mouse by comparing, the antibody response to PT and FHA obtained in Hexavac, with that obtained in parallel under the same experimental conditions with the corresponding acP lots injected alone. The results obtained for the 6 Hexavac lots compared with those for the 6 corresponding acP lots showed a comparable response for the FHA and PT components.

The absence of interference from other valences on the antigenicity of the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was evaluated through a lot by lot comparison in the mouse, as described above for the acP valence and the antibody response obtained with Hexavac was compared with the corresponding HBs response in the mouse administered alone and under the same experimental conditions. A study of 8 lots of Hexavac and corresponding HBsAg lots concluded that the other valences in Hexavac did not interfere with HBsAg immunogenicity.

· Immunogenicity in rhesus monkeys The antibody  response  to  the Haemophilus type  b  valences  (PRP-T),  Hepatitis  b  (HBs),  Diphtheria (D), Tetanus (T) and pertussis (PT and FHA) obtained with Hexavac was compared with that obtained with 3 other monovalent or combined vaccines: ACT Hib (PRP-T) - Recombivax (Hbs) -DTaP-IPV combined vaccine. In a vaccine scheme consisting of 3 intramuscular injections (0-4-8 weeks) carried out on 2 groups of 8 animals each (one group receiving Hexavac and the other 3 vaccines simultaneously at separate sites), blood samples were taken to evaluate the antibody response to the five valences mentioned. On week 10, the peak antibody responses obtained for the hepatitis B, diphtheria and pertussis toxoid valences  with  the  three  separate  vaccines  were  statistically  significantly  higher  than  that  of  the hexavalent  combination  thus  showing  evidence  for  interference  in  the  peak  response  to  HB,  D  and pertussis toxoid when the responses to Hexavac were compared with the control group. These apparent differences  in  potency  are  unlikely  to  translate  into  clinically  meaningful  differences  since  (a)  the response to each component of the vaccine is &gt; 100-fold higher than the pre-immune titers, and (b) the difference in responses to Hexavac and the control arm became indistinguishable over time. By study week  48-51,  there  was  no  significant  difference  in  the  antibody  response  to  any  component  of  the vaccine between monkeys injected with Hexavac vs. separate site injection of Hib + HB + DTaP-IPV. Due  to  a  shortage  of  sera,  serology  was  not  performed  to  detect  antibodies  against  poliomyelitis antigens. Boostering was not carried out within this monkey study. · General and safety pharmacology programme Potential  secondary  pharmacodynamic  effects  were  investigated  by  the  daily  observation  of  the animals  during  the  repeated  dose  study.  No  abnormal  reactions  were  observed.  Considering  the background information from the marketed vaccine with the same antigens, these animal data and the lack of animals models specifically designed to assess secondary pharmacodynamic effects of vaccine, no  additional  investigations  were  thought  to  be  necessary  to  assess  secondary  pharmacodynamic effects. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacokinetics

The mechanisms of action triggering humoral and cellular immunogenicity are complex and essentially qualitative. The duration of the vaccine effect far outlasts the presence of antigenic fractions even if adsorbed, and depends upon the immunocompetent cells of the receiver, not on antigen persistence. An exact knowledge of the distribution and degradation of the antigens in the composition of Hexavac was not considered to be useful since the listed antigens are well known and widely used in vaccinology.

Toxicology

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Single dose toxicity:

Hexavac  safety  was  evaluated  in  the  mouse  by  subcutaneous  route  to  mimic  the  human  route  of exposure (injected dose: 40 human dose/kg) and in the rat by intraperitoneal route to obtain a rapid bio-availability (injected dose: 12.5 human dose/kg). Both studies were performed according to Good Laboratory Practices. The doses tested are relatively high considering that one human dose for a 6 kg infant is equivalent to 0.17 human dose/kg of human body weight.

No  signs  of  toxicity  were  noted  in  both  species  through  clinical  observation  and  gross  necropsy examination.  The  local  reactions  observed  in  the  mouse  at  the  subcutaneous  injection  site  were  as expected for an adjuvanted vaccine.

The lack of a single dose toxicity study in rodents by intramuscular route is compensated by the rabbit local tolerance study performed by intramuscular route. The intraperitoneal route in the rat was used as a \"worst case scenario\". · Repeat dose toxicity: The absence of toxicity was evaluated after repeated administrations in the rat according to a treatment schedule mimicking a human vaccination scheme (i.e. 3 injections at monthly intervals). The fourth dose performed six months to one year after the third dose in the human vaccination scheme was not included in this toxicology study design. However, it is considered that the second and the third injections were sufficient to boost the immune response and to reveal potential adverse reactions. The  subcutaneous  route  was  considered  equivalent  in  terms  of  bioavailability  to  the  intramuscular clinical  route  and  a  dose  level  of  5  human  doses  per  kg  was  tested  (human  dose  level:  0.17  human dose/kg  of  human  body  weight).  A  control  group  only  received  «aluminium»  adjuvant,  while  a reference group received, in an identical manner, a pentavalent adjuvanted vaccine lot which is already marketed  (differs  from  Hexavac  by  the  presence  of  cellular  (whole  cell) pertussis valence  and  the absence of HBs valence). All  clinical  observations  followed  by  gross  and  histopathologic  examinations  and  blood  assays (haematological and biochemical) at completion of treatment revealed changes attributed to the vaccine properties of the reference and tested vaccines. None of these findings had a toxicological significance. Based on the design of this repeated dose toxicology study, no immuno-toxicological findings such as autoimmune reactions were observed. It is noted that this animal study revealed no kidney or vascular lesions justifying further examinations or indicating potential immune complex deposition. No hypersensitivity reactions were noted after the second or the third administrations. However the protocol used can be considered to be unable to detect this kind of reaction. Each dose may contain residual but undetectable traces of antibiotic, namely neomycin, streptomycin and  polymyxin  B  which  in  principle  could  be  responsible  for  hypersensitivity  reactions.  However contact sensitisation rather than anaphylaxis have been reported for these antibiotics. · Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity: Medicinal product no longer authorised

Bearing  in  mind  the  nature  of  the  Hexavac  active  constituents,  namely  the  various  antigens, mutagenicity and carcinogenicity were not carried out.

All  manufacturing  residual  products  and  excipients  are  well  known and  no  other  contaminants  with potential mutagenicity are present in the formulation.

## · Reproduction Toxicity:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No macroscopic or microscopic lesions were observed on testes and ovaries examined in the vaccine treated animals from the repeated dose toxicology study suggesting that there was no effect of Hexavac on reproductive organs and thus no impairment of fertility.

This  vaccine  is  only  intended  for  paediatric  use,  therefore  the  risk  of  embryo/fœtal  toxicity  is  not considered to be relevant.

## · Local Tolerance:

A preclinical local tolerance study of the Hexavac preparation was carried out in the rabbit using the intramuscular administration which is the one used for humans. The study consisted of administration of one human dose of vaccine to a group of 8 animals and, at a different site, one equivalent dose of aluminium  adjuvant,  with  subsequent  sacrifice  of  groups  of  two  animals  2,  4,  7  and  14  days  after injection for macroscopic and histopathologic examination of the injection sites. The  results  showed  the  local  minor  and  reversible  inflammatory  reactions  generally  found  with adjuvanted vaccines. · Other toxicity studies Abnormal toxicity  testing  was  performed  for  the  first  pilot  and  industrial  lots,  showing  no  signs  of toxicity. According to Ph.Eur. requirements the test was not maintained as a routine batch release test. Specific toxicity tests for tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis are applied on the final bulk product on a routine basis (batch release). All batches passed these tests. Irreversibility testing of tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis toxoids are routinely performed on bulks of diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis toxoids. In addition, irreversibility tests were carried out on 5 expired batches of Hexavac (after 36 months), after exposure to elevated temperatures. No diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis toxins have been detected. Five batches of Hexavac vaccines have been tested satisfactorily for pyrogens according to the third edition of the Ph. Eur. (2.6.8.). · Environmental risk assessment This hexavalent vaccine contains no Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) that would warrant an environmental risk assessment as defined in Directive 90/220/EEC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (98/C 139/01). In addition, no attenuated live microorganisms are used in this vaccine; therefore the risk associated with reverse mutations to wild type micro-organisms is not applicable. Vaccination is performed in a medical environment, which reduces the risk of potential misuse of this vaccine. There are no ingredients, which could be responsible of an ecological concern. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the nine clinical trials initiated by the applicant (one Phase I, one Phase II study and 7 Phase III studies), 3,905 infants received the investigational vaccine Hexavac as a three-dose primary series and 4,467 children were boosted with Hexavac, regardless of the vaccine used for primary immunisation. Two different vaccination schedules currently used in European countries for primary immunisation were  investigated.  Infants  were  vaccinated  at  2,  3,  4  or  2,  4,  6  months  of  age.  The  3-5-12  month immunisation regimen relevant for European Nordic countries and Italy is currently under investigation  in  Sweden.  Six  of  the  nine  clinical  trials  were  performed  in  France.  All  nine  were conducted according to current European requirements and all conformed to Good Clinical Practice. The development plan of Hexavac included the following studies:

Phase I/ II: Choice of formulation:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Study 1: A phase I study investigating the safety profile of a single injection of two different formulations of hexavalent vaccine (single or dual chamber) in healthy 14 - 18 month children, previously  immunised  with  against  diphtheria,  tetanus,  pertussis  and  poliomyelitis  in  the  first year of life
- Study 2: A multicentre phase II study which assessed the immunogenicity and safety profile of two formulations (single and dual chamber) administered in infants at 2, 3 and 4 months of age followed by a booster dose given between 12 and 14 months of age

## Phase III primary series studies

The pilot study was conducted in France in 1995 to assess the safety and reactogenicity profile of two presentations (single or dual chamber) of the hexavalent vaccine, administered as a single booster dose to 58 children between 14 and 18 months of age. The children had been previously immunised in the first  year  of  life  with  PENTACOQ,  a  vaccine  widely  used  in  France.  Half  of  the  subjects  (n=30) received the liquid hexavalent combined vaccine Hexavac (0.5 ml volume) and the others (n=28) were given the dual-chamber hexavalent vaccine (1 ml total volume).

· Study  3:  A  pivotal  study  which  compared  immunogenicity  and  safety  of  Hexavac  to  that  of PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II vaccines administered at two separate sites in infants at 2, 4 and 6 months of age. · Study 4: Two different vaccination schedules at 2, 3 and 4 months of age and 2, 4, and 6 months of age were investigated. · Study  5:  A  consistency  lot  study  of  immunogenicity  induced  by  three  consistency  lots  of Hexavac were studied · Study  6:  A  large  scale  safety  study  was  undertaken  assessing  the  safety  profile  of  Hexavac administered as a three-dose primary series at 2-4-6 months of age Phase III booster vaccination studies · Studies 2, 3, 4 and 6: Four studies were conducted in children who received primary series with Hexavac to assess the immunogenicity and safety of a fourth dose of Hexavac given during the second year of life · Study  7:  One  study  assessed  safety  and  immunogenicity  of  a  booster  dose  of  Hexavac  in children primed with PENTAVAC plus H-B-VAX II · Studies 8 and 9: Two studies evaluated the booster response of Hexavac in children primed with PENTACOQ and with 0 to 3 doses of a licensed HB vaccine. Clinical pharmacology · Pharmacodynamics Phase I Study 1 Medicinal product no longer authorised

At this stage that both formulations were well tolerated and suitable for further clinical development. Phase II

## Study 2, Choice of formulation

A randomised, multicentre, open study was conducted in French infants in 1995-1996 to assess the immunogenicity  and  safety  of  two  presentations  (single  or  dual-chamber)  of  hexavalent  vaccine  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

select one for further clinical development. The vaccines were administered as a primary series to 312 infants at 2, 3, 4 months of whom 294 infants also received a booster injection at 12-14 months of age.

The data from this Phase II trial showed that for both formulations, the performance of the hexavalent vaccine,  in  terms  of  achieving  predefined  reference  seroconversion  or  seroprotection  rates,  was  not inferior  to  that  expected,  except  for  the  anti-PRP  seroprotection  rate  ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml)  achieved  after administration  of  the  Hexavac  formulation.  Thus,  apart  from  the  anti-PRP  response  obtained  after administration of the Hexavac presentation, the two hexavalent formulations elicited adequate immune responses to all components.

The immune responses to PT, FHA, D, T and poliovirus components were of the same magnitude for both  formulations,  with  the  exception  of  anti-HBs  and  anti-PRP  antibody  responses.  Anti-HBs antibodies GMT values and seroprotection rates were lower in the dual-chamber recipients. One month after the booster dose, 96.9 to 100% of children achieved protective levels of antibodies to HBs, PRP, D, T, poliovirus components, and a substantial increase in GMT values was shown for all components. PT and FHA antibody responses were similar for both formulations and comparable to those previously reported. After the booster dose, the GMT values for anti-HBs antibodies were higher in the Hexavac group than the dual-chamber group (1458 vs 530 mIU/ml), but the seroprotection rates were of the same magnitude for the two formulations (&gt; 97%). The frequency of local and systemic reactions appeared to be somewhat lower after administration of the liquid presentation and this formulation was obviously much easier to use therefore, it was decided to adopt the liquid Hexavac vaccine for further clinical development. Phase III Study 5: Immunogenicity of three consistency lots A  randomised  and  double-blind  study,  designed  to  assess  the  equivalency  of  immunogenicity  of  3 consistency  vaccine  lots  (S  3127  -  S  3128  -  S  3170)  of  Hexavac,  was  conducted  in  1,028  Chilean children who received the vaccine at 2, 4, 6 months of age. An equivalence testing approach was used and the two sided 90 % confidence intervals of the difference of the response rates between each pair of  vaccine  lots  and  for  each  antigen  were  calculated  with  the  predefined  maximum  acceptable difference δ of 10 %. The secondary objectives were to compare the seroprotection and seroconversion rates to each antigen and for each vaccine lot with an historical reference (derived from immunogenicity results observed with PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II in the same population). Lots S3127 and S3128 were also used in study 4 and study 3 respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  three  consistency  lots  of  Hexavac  were  shown  to  be  statistically  equivalent  in  terms  of seroprotection or seroconversion rates and in terms of GMTs achieved one month after the third dose, for  all  antigenic  components.  The  absolute  value  of  the  bounds  of  the  90%  CI  of  the  observed differences  in  seroconversion  or  seroprotection  rates  between  the  vaccine  lots  was  less  than  2%  for anti-D, T, and poliovirus type 1, 2, 3, antibodies, less than 4% for anti-PRP and HBs antibodies, and less than 7% for anti-PT and FHA antibodies. Homogeneity of the three vaccine lots was assessed by the rejection of the null hypothesis of a 2-fold ratio of GMTs between any two lots. The ratios of GMT values  between  any  two  lots,  ranged  between  0.85  for  anti-FHA  antibodies  and  1.39  for  anti-HBs antibodies. For all vaccine components, the three lots of the vaccine induced an antibody response that met the pre-defined requirements.

## Clinical efficacy

Main studies (phase III, therapeutic confirmatory trials)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Seven Phase III studies were conducted between 1996 and 1998 involving 3,748 infants who received Hexavac as a three-dose primary series between the age of two and six months (studies 3 to 6), and 4,286 toddlers given a booster dose of Hexavac during the second year of life (studies 3, 4 and 6 to 9). Among  the  3,905  infants  who  received  at  least  one  dose  of  Hexavac,  3,788  (97%)  received  the complete three-dose primary regimen. Of these, 1,993 infants received the complete 3-dose primary series  and  had  a  blood  sampling  one  month after the third dose. Of these 1,993 infants, 1,654 were included in the PP analysis of immunogenicity of the primary series.

## Description of the studies

Study 3: Pivotal immunogenicity study of Hexavac and of PENTAVAC (pentavalent DTaP-IPV-Hib) and  H-B-VAX-II  (recombinant  monovalent  hepatitis  B)  administered  concurrently  at  two  different sites The potential interference of the hexavalent liquid combination on the immunogenicity of the different antigen components, i.e. the PENTAVAC, and H-B-VAX II vaccine was evaluated in a multicentre, randomised study conducted in France. A total of 848 infants received at least one of the three doses given  at  2,  4  and  6  months  of  age  of  either  the  investigational  vaccine  or  PENTAVAC  and  H-BVAX II given concurrently intramuscularly but at two different sites (in the two thighs). For  PRP and HBs components, according to the statistical hypotheses, the observed seroconversion rate of Hexavac was non-inferior to that of PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II; 93.7% of children achieved a seroprotective response at the threshold of 0.15 µ g/ml. However, the 95% CI of the seroprotection rates did not include zero, suggesting the vaccine performances might not be similar. The immune responses to all other components in terms of seroconversion or seroprotection rates and GMTs were similar between the two groups. For PT, a 19-26% reduction in GMT value was observed depending on the titration method (CHO or EIA). In contrast, for FHA, GMT values were higher with the  investigational  vaccine  (19%  increase).  No  effect  was  observed  on  the  percentage  of  children achieving a four-fold rise in titres of antibodies to PT and FHA. Furthermore, the immune response to both  pertussis  antigenic  components  was  within  the  range  reported  after  primary  vaccination  with DTaP in the Senegal efficacy trial and with PENTAVAC in different clinical studies. Study 4: Comparison of two immunisation schedules: 2, 3, 4 vs 2, 4, 6 months A multicentre, open, randomised comparative study with two groups was conducted in France in order to assess the safety and immunogenicity of Hexavac given at two different immunisation schedules, 2, 4,  6  months  and  2,  3,  4  months  of  age,  respectively.  The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  ascertain whether the investigational combined vaccine (DTaP-IPV-PRP ∼ T-HBs) is more immunogenic when administered at 2, 4, 6 months of age than at 2, 3, 4 months of age. Five hundred and sixteen healthy infants were enrolled in the trial, 258 infants per group. Primary objective was the comparison of the percentage of children showing a PRP antibody titre ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml  one  month  after  the  third  dose  vaccinated  at  2,  4,  6  months  or  2,  3,  4  months  of  age.  As secondary objectives the immunogenicity of each antigen against referenced percentages one month after the primary series was studied. A reference seroconversion/ seroprotection rate for each vaccine component  was  derived  from  the  database  developed  from  the  current  tetravalent  and  monovalent vaccines.  For  each  component  it  was  decided  to  assess  whether  the  seroconversion/  seroprotection percentage was smaller than the expected reference rate. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  percentage  of  infants  with  a  anti-PRP  antibody  titre ≥ 1 µ g/ml  one  months  post-dose  3  was significant higher with the 2-4-6 month immunisation schedule than with the 2-3-4 schedule (62.5 % vs. 73.5 %, p= 0.0165).

When  compared  with  the  expected  seroconversion/  seroprotection  rates,  defined  according  to  the historical references for serum titres correlated with seroprotection, all the vaccine antigens except for PRP  satisfied  the  pre-established  requirements,  based  on  the  predefined δ ,  in  both  groups  and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

according  to  the  per  protocol  analysis.  For  the  ITT-analysis,  only  the  group  with  the  accelerated vaccination schedule failed to comply with the predefined criteria.

The seroconversion or seroprotection rates to all other components were within a clinically acceptable range for the two immunisation regimens and comparable to those seen with the historical control.

One  month  after  primary  immunisation  the  GMT  values  for  antibodies  to  all  antigens  with  the exception of those for pertussis antibodies measured by EIA, appeared to be higher when Hexavac was given using the extended immunisation regimen. However, these differences are clinically not relevant. Taking into account the pre-booster titres both vaccination schedules are comparable.

As a secondary objective, in a subset of 118 infants, immunogenicity analysis of the PRP response was performed. After the primary series, 95.5 % of infants of whom immunogenicity data were available were  seroprotected  at  the  0.15 µ g/ml  level  and  69.6  5  at  the  1.0 µ g/ml  level.  One  month  after  the booster, all children were seroprotected at the 0.15 µ g/ml level and 95.4 % had titres ≥ 1 µ g/ml.

Pre- and post-booster immunogenicity results: The pre-booster GMTs for PRP antibodies were 0.623 µ g/ml (95 % CI; 0.498-0.781) and 0.416 µ g/mL (95 5 CI; 0.342-0.506) in infants primed at 2, 3 and 4 months (Group 1) and 2, 4, 6 months (Group 2) of age respectively. Protective levels of PRP antibody ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml) persisted in 77.5 % of children in group 2 and 85.2 % in Group 1. Nineteen children in group 1 (2, 3, 4 month) and 14 in group 2 (2, 4, 6 month) included in the per-protocol population for the primary and the booster vaccinations did not achieve an anti-PRP response ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml, after the primary series. Fourteen/ 17 children in group 1 and 11/12 in group 2 had antibody titres ≥ 1 µ g/ml after the booster dose. These titres are assumed with long-term protection. GMTs for HBs antibodies were 51.4 mIU/ml and 36.7 mIU/ml in infants primed at 2, 3, 4 and 2, 4, 6 months of age respectively. The percentage of children still seroprotected at the 10 mIU/ml threshold was  85.5  %  in  Group  1  and  72.8  %  in  group  2.  The  post-booster  response  was  high  with  94.9  % (accelerated regimen) and 97.7 % (extended regimen) seroprotected. The GMTs were 1465 mIU/ml and 1089 mIU/ml respectively. A total of 15 children (11 in group 1 and 4 in group 2) did not achieve seroprotective titres to HBs after booster. Six (5 in group 1 and 1 in group 2) had a high pre-immunisation antibody titre corresponding to maternal antibodies ranging from 455 to 48691 mIU/ml, and four had a weaker antibody titre pre immunisation ranging from 16 to 76 mIU/mL. The antibody persistence for D, T, FHA and PT (EIA and CHO assayed) was similar in both groups. In contrast the persistence of antibodies to polio 3 virus types was higher in group 2 than in group 2. The antibody  titres ≥ 5  (17dil)  were  measured  in  at  least  88.2  %  of  children.  Nevertheless,  the  booster immune response was high to these components and similar in both groups. Study 6: Large scale safety study of Hexavac given as a primary series and as a booster dose during the second year of life This  single  group,  open,  multicentre  study  was  conducted  in  Germany  between  1996  and  1998 involving 1, 783 infants who were to receive three i.m. doses Hexavac at 2, 4 and 6 months of age. 1,735 infants effectively primed, received a booster dose of the vaccine at 12 to 14 months of age. A summary of the safety data obtained during the trial program is provided separately. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Study 7: Analysis of immune responses to a booster dose of Hexavac in children primed with DTaPIPV/Hib combination vaccine (PENTAVAC) and Hepatitis B vaccine

The  immunogenicity  of  a  booster  dose  of  Hexavac  was  assessed  in  129  14-18-month  old  children primed with PENTAVAC and HB-VaxII given concurrently as a primary series at 2, 3 and 4 months of age, in an open one-arm descriptive study conducted in Turkey.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One month after the booster dose, a strong immune response was elicited for all components of the vaccine indicating a high secondary response. All children achieved seroprotective titres to HBs, PRP ( ≥ 1 µ g/ml),  diphtheria  and  tetanus  ( ≥ 0.1IU/ml)  and  to  the  three  types  of  poliovirus.  Antibody  GMT values increased by at least 5-fold from pre-booster levels for poliovirus antigens to 161-fold for PRP antigens. The anamnestic response to the pertussis components was strong and titres increased at least 18-fold from pre- to post-booster levels.

These data indicate that Hexavac, administered as a booster dose in children already primed in infancy with PENTAVAC and HB-VAXII given concurrently in two separate sites is able to elicit a strong secondary immune response to all vaccine antigens.

Diphtheria toxoid (IgG) antibody titres were assayed by EIA with a LLOQ of 0.0006 IU/ml. Anti-D response  was  also  assessed  by  neutralisation  test  on  Vero  cell  culture  in  comparison  to  the  WHO equine antitoxin standard. Results are reported in IU/ml as the highest reciprocal dilution of the test serum  that  allowed  cell  metabolism  in  the  presence  of  four  times  the  minimum  cytopathic  dose  of diphtheria toxin.

Study 9: Analysis of immune responses to a booster dose of Hexavac in children primed with wholecell pertussis DTP-IPV/Hib combination vaccine (PENTACOQ) and Hepatitis B vaccine. All 307 children enrolled in this study to receive a booster dose of Hexavac received PENTACOQ as a three-dose primary regimen; one-third of infants had received two doses of HB vaccine, and two-thirds had received three doses. The booster dose of Hexavac was administered at the mean age of 16 months [range 14-21 months]. Antibodies to HBs and PRP persisted at higher levels (93.8% to 95.5% for HBs and PRP respectively) up to the time of the booster dose in those children primed with PENTACOQ compared with children primed with Hexavac. After  primary  immunisation  with  PENTACOQ  and  HB  vaccine,  high  antibody  levels  to  D,  T poliovirus components were still present at the time of the booster dose, with concentrations being of the same order of magnitude as those observed after priming with Hexavac. In contrast, the level of persistent antibodies to pertussis antigens appeared higher in children primed with Hexavac than in those primed with whole-cell PENTACOQ. A strong anamnestic response was observed for all components of Hexavac in children primed with PENTACOQ and  HB  vaccine,  with  seroprotection  rates  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  those achieved  after  a  fourth  dose  of  Hexavac.  However  except  for  pertussis  and  poliovirus  antibody responses,  GMT values appeared higher after a booster of Hexavac when the children were primed with PENTACOQ, this being most marked for anti-PRP and anti-HBs antibodies. One month after the booster, GMT values for anti-HBs antibodies appeared lower in children who had received  two  priming  doses  of  HB  vaccine  compared  with  those  who  had  received  three  doses, although no impact on seroprotection rates was observed. These findings show that a booster dose of Hexavac elicits an anamnestic immune response to all vaccine components in children who had been primed  with  a  complete  three-dose  primary  series  of  a  whole-cell  pertussis  pentavalent  combined vaccine and two or three doses of HB vaccine. Primary endpoints/assays All serological analyses were carried out in the same laboratory at Aventis Pasteur. Medicinal product no longer authorised

PRP antibody titres were measured by RIA in comparison to the FDA human reference (test derived from Farr's method) with a LLOQ of 0.07 µ g/ml.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Anti-HBs titres  were  assayed  by  RIA  (AUSAB-ABBOTT kit) in comparison to the WHO standard with a LLOQ of 2 mIU/ml.

FHA (IgG) antibody titres were measured by EIA with a LLOQ of 2 EU/ml (EU: EIA Unit).

PT (IgG) antibody titres were measured by measured by EIA with a LLOQ of 2 EU/ml.

PT functional antibody titres were also determined by a toxin neutralisation test on Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cell culture with a LLOQ of 2 (1/dil). Titres were expressed as the highest reciprocal dilution of the test serum resulting in 100 % inhibition of the clustering effect of the toxin. In addition the antibody response to PT (EIA, CHO) and FHA (EIA), the percentage of infants with titre ≥ 4 and ≥ 32 EU/mL were calculated.

| Study code/Study no                                                              | A3R03/no 2                                                                       | A3R03/no 2   | A3R08/no 3   | A3R08/no 3   | A3R13/no 4   | A3R13/no 4   | A3R09/no 5   | A3R09/no 5   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| CRITERION FOR SEROCON- VERSION/ SERO- PROTECTION (%) PER ANTIGEN Pref* Medicinal | CRITERION FOR SEROCON- VERSION/ SERO- PROTECTION (%) PER ANTIGEN Pref* Medicinal | δ **         | Pref         | δ            | Pref         | δ            | Pref         | δ            |
| HBs ≥ 10 90%                                                                     | HBs ≥ 10 90%                                                                     | 14%          |              | 90% 15%      | 92%          | 10%          | 92%          | 10% (15%) #  |
| Miu/mL PRP ≥ 0.15 µg/mL 98%                                                      | Miu/mL PRP ≥ 0.15 µg/mL 98%                                                      | 9%           | 98%          | 10%          | 98%          | 9%           | 99%          | 10%          |
| PRP ≥ 1.0 µg/mL -                                                                | PRP ≥ 1.0 µg/mL -                                                                |              | -            | -            | - 65%        | at least 15% | -            | -            |
| D ≥ 0.01 IU/mL                                                                   | D ≥ 0.01 IU/mL                                                                   | 99%          | 9%           | 99%          | 10% 99%      | 9%           | 99%          | 10%          |
| T ≥ 0.01 IU/mL                                                                   | T ≥ 0.01 IU/mL                                                                   | 99%          | 9%           | 99%          | 10% 99%      | 9%           | 99%          | 10%          |

<!-- image -->

Anti-polio virus 1, 2, 3 antibody titres were measured by microneutralisation on Human Epidermoid Carcinoma Cell line (Hep-2) culture according to the WHO standardised procedure (WHO/EPI/GEN 93.9) with a LLOQ of 5 (1/dil). Results were expressed as the highest reciprocal dilution of the test serum that inHibited the cytopathic effect of the challenge virus. Seroconversion and seroprotection percentages are defined as follows: anti-PRP response: % ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml anti-HBs response: % ≥ 10 mIU/ml anti-diphtheria response: % ≥ 0.01 IU/ml anti-tetanus response: % ≥ 0.01 IU/ml anti-PT and anti-FHA response: % with a four-fold rise in titre anti-polio virus type 1, 2 and 3: ≥ 5 (1/dil) Statistical analysis Statistical  methodology for the immunogenicity evaluation of Hexavac was based on the hypothesis that the observed antibody response to each antigen, one month after completion of the primary series, would not be inferior to predefined reference seroconversion or seroprotection rates by an appropriate pre-established maximum  acceptable difference δ (Tab. 1). Reference values and acceptable differences were based on previous experience or literature data regarding combination vaccines. The same approach to assess non-inferiority of Hexavac immunogenicity was used when a control group was included in the study design, i.e. PENTAVAC plus H-B-VAX II in study 3. Tab 1: Criteria of judgement of clinical and statistical assumptions (studies 2 - 5) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| PT ≥ 4-fold rise   | 90%   | 14%   | 90%   | 15%   | 92%   | 10%   | 92%   | 10% (15%) #   |
|--------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|---------------|
| FHA ≥ 4-fold rise  | 90%   | 14%   | 90%   | 15%   | 92%   | 10%   | 92%   | 10% (15%) #   |
| Polio 1, 2, 3 ≥ 5  | 99%   | 9%    | 99%   | 10%   | 99%   | 9%    | 99%   | 10%           |

Pref: Reference response rate.

** δ : Pre-defined acceptable difference

# : For secondary criteria

Reference  values  for  seroconversion  or  seroprotection  rates  as  well  as  for  acceptable  differences δ , were  established  based  experience  available  at  that  time  with  monovalent  vaccines  or  previously developed combination vaccines but had to be adjusted following the experiences with the first studies.

GMTs for HBs after Hexavac were lower than that observed after three doses of H-B-Vax-II given alone (literature data) or  together at two different sites with PENTAVAC (study 3). On the other hand, seroprotection  rate  and  GMT values for HBs antibodies after completion of the primary series with Hexavac  appeared  comparable  or  higher  to  those  obtained  after  two  5 µ g  doses  of  HB  vaccine combined  with  PRP-OMP  vaccine,  PROCOMVAX,  given  at  2  and  4  months  of  age  (primary immunisation) with a seroconversion rate of 92.1 % and a GMT of 114 mIU/ml (Pivotal trial). In order to  investigate  further  the  immune  response  to  Hexavac,  the  company  has  committed  to  perform antibody persistence studies with Hexavac and also to provide data on anti-HBsAg antibody kinetics over long-term follow-up. These studies have been shown to be adequately designed to provide further information on the persistence of the anti-HBsAg-antibodies. The studies will also provide data on the need for a booster and with 3 time points of blood sampling some information on the antibody kinetics.

The primary immunogenicity analysis was performed on the Per Protocol (PP) population (n=1,654), i.e. excluding infants with at least one major protocol deviation. Most of the reported major protocol deviations  concerned  infants  who  were  outside  the  interval  range  allowed  between  injections  or between the last dose of vaccine and the subsequent blood sampling. For this reason, the percentage of infants  excluded  from  the  PP  analysis  of  immunogenicity  was  rather  high  (approximately  17%  of infants who completed the primary series and who had a blood sample collected one month after the third dose). Results from the Intent to Treat (ITT) population (n=1,993) were consistent with those of the PP population. Antibody titres were summarised using geometric mean titres (GMTs), calculated by taking the antilog of the mean of the log transformed titres, with their 95% CI. Efficacy results Overall analysis of the immune response · HBs antigen (Studies 2 - 5) Except in the Phase II study (study 2), in which a lower seroprotection rate was observed (91.6%), the percentages of infants with seroprotective titres ( ≥ 10 mIU/ml) of anti-HBs antibodies were high and consistent (over 95%) in all Phase III studies whatever the immunisation schedule used (2, 3, 4 month and 2, 4, 6 month) The lower bounds of 95% CI for seroprotection were above 91% in all Phase III studies. When all the Phase II and Phase III studies are considered together, 96% [95% CI 94.9-96.9] of  the  1,634  children  included  in  the  PP  analysis  had  seroprotective titres  of  HBs  antibodies  ( ≥ 10 mIU/ml)  after  completion  of  the  three-dose  primary  regimen,  whatever  the  immunisation  schedule used.  The  seroprotection  rate  achieved  after  primary  immunisation  with  Hexavac  (91.6%-97.1%)  is within  the  range  of  what  has  been  reported  for  licensed  HB  vaccines  given,  as  a  primary  series  in infants (87.7% - 100%). Anti-HBs antibody GMT values were found to be somewhat higher with the extended schedule than with the accelerated schedule (study 4) after the primary immunisation, as may be expected due to the longer time interval between the second and third doses of vaccine Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · PRP antigen (Studies 2,3,4,5)

One month after the third dose of Hexavac given as a primary series, the seroprotection rate to PRP ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml) varied from 92.7 to 98.3% when all Phase III studies were considered (studies 3-6). In each Phase III study the lower bound of the 95% CI for the seroprotection rate was above 88%. When all  Phase  II  and  Phase  III  studies  are  considered  together,  95.4%  [95%  CI  94.3-96.3]  of  the  1,646 children  included  in  the  per  protocol  (PP)  analysis  had  titres  of  anti-PRP  antibodies  ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml) after completion of the primary series. The percentage of vaccinees with antibody titres ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml was comparable in French infants vaccinated according to either the accelerated (2, 3, 4 months) or the extended schedule (2, 4, 6 months) (studies 2, 3, 4). Anti- PRP titres ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml calculated in the PP analysis was achieved by 93.1% [95% CI 91.2-94.8] of 801 French children vaccinated at 2, 3, 4 or 2, 4,  6  months of age. Except for the Phase II study (study 2) anti-PRP immune response, in terms of seroprotection rate ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml) met the predefined requirements of non inferiority to PENTAVAC™, as established for the pivotal study (study 3), or when a reference seroprotection rate of  98%  with  a  maximum  acceptable  difference  of  10%  were  used  as  predefined  clinically  relevant criteria.

## · Pertussis components

In  contrast,  GMT  values  of  PRP  antibodies,  as  well  as  the  seroprotection  rate ≥ 1 µ g/ml,  varied according to the schedule and to the population studied (from 1.42 to 4.37 µ g/mL and from 62.0 to 85.1%, respectively) with the highest seroprotection rate ≥ 1 µ g/ml and GMTs in the Chilean infants. The 2, 3, 4 month schedule induced lower anti-PRP GMT values and lower seroprotection rates ( ≥ 1 µ g) than the 2, 4, 6 month regimen as demonstrated in study 4. The percentage of infants who achieved the threshold of at least 1 µ g/ml for anti-PRP antibodies was lower after immunisation with Hexavac (between 62% and 73.5% in the European populations) than observed after vaccination with the PRP-T, Act-Hib monovalent vaccine. A decrease of GMT values and  seroprotection  rates  ( ≥ 1 µ g/ml)  has  been  reported  with  other  licensed  combination  vaccines containing a Hib component, when compared with data obtained following separate administration of the same vaccines. On the other hand, the seroprotection rate obtained with Hexavac was in the range with  those  reported  for  the  monovalent  PRP-D  vaccine  that  has  been  shown  to  be  effective  in protecting  against  invasive  Hib  disease  during  efficacy  trials  conducted  in  Finland.  In  addition,  the anti-PRP response of infants after three doses of Hexavac observed in the studies was within the same range (91.7%-98.3%) as that seen in native American Navajos, which was associated with a dramatic reduction  in  the  incidence  of  invasive  disease  in  this  population.  These  results  of  the  booster  dose demonstrate that three doses of Hexavac given within the first six months of life can adequately prime infants and can stimulate their immunological memory. The GMT values were approximately twice as high in the Chilean population (study 5) than in the French population although the same lots of Hexavac were administered and the same 2, 4, 6 month immunisation schedule used. A higher immune response in the Chilean population compared to the European  population  has  also  been  previously  reported  in  other  clinical  studies  (Hopenbrouwers  K Safety and immunogenicity of Haemophilus influenzae type b-tetanus toxoid conjugate (PRP-T) and diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP) combination vaccine in infants in a dual-chamber syringe to infants in Belgium and Chile. Vaccine 1998, 9/10, 921). Medicinal product no longer authorised

When all Phase III studies are taken into consideration, the percentage of infants achieving a four-fold rise in antibody titres to PT or FHA, as measured by EIA after primary immunisation with Hexavac, was  remarkably  consistent  throughout  the  clinical  studies,  ranging  from  89.5%  to  93.0%  for  the response  to  PT  (EIA),  and  from  90.5%  to  93.5%  for  the  response  to  FHA  (EIA),  whatever  the population or the vaccination schedule considered. Of 1,561 children included in the PP analysis of Phase II and Phase III studies, 91.7% [95% CI 90.3-93.1] showed a four-fold rise in antibody titres to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PT (measured by EIA) after the three-dose regimen. A four-fold rise in antibody titres to FHA was observed in 91.1% [95% CI 89.6-92.5] of 1,539 children included in the PP analysis.

For these two vaccine components, there was a slight tendency for higher GMTs in the Chilean infants (study 5) compared to French infants (studies 2, 3, 4).

Titres  and  seroconversion  rates  for  PT-neutralising  antibodies  (% ≥ 32  and  %  of  four-fold  rise) measured in a CHO cell assay were somewhat lower than those for anti-PT antibodies measured by EIA  and,  more  importantly,  were  lower  when  Hexavac was  given  at  2,  3  and  4  months  of  age compared with the extended schedule. The impact of the accelerated immunisation regimen on the PT neutralising  antibody  response  and  its  lack  of  effect  on  anti-PT  antibodies  measured  by  EIA  has previously been reported in Senegalese DTaP recipients.

Similarly, the neutralising antibody response to poliomyelitis virus types 1, 2 or 3 was not affected by the combination of the pentavalent vaccine with HB vaccine in the same syringe. The percentages of infants with detectable antibody levels ≥ 5 (expressed as the reciprocal dilution) and GMT values after immunisation with Hexavac were comparable to results obtained after administration of PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II at different sites (study 3) or to historical clinical data obtained with PENTAVAC or TETRAVAC.

It should be noted that, regardless of the immunisation schedule or population, GMT values, as well as the  percentages  of  infants  who  developed  a  four-fold  rise  in  PT  (EIA  or  CHO  assays)  or  FHA antibodies,  which  is  considered  as  a  sign  of  seroconversion,  were  strictly  within  the  same  range  as those observed in infants primed with PENTAVAC or TETRAVAC (DTaP IPV) vaccines. These data were  confirmed  in  study  3  when  seroconversion  rates  to  PT  and  FHA  achieved  after  immunisation with Hexavac were compared with those obtained with PENTAVAC plus H-B-VAX II administration. The  same  held  true  for  the  proportion  of  infants  who  achieved  a  titre  of  anti-PT  antibodies ≥ 32 measured by a CHO assay (69.6%-90.7). · Diphtheria, Tetanus and Poliovirus type 1, 2, 3 components When all Phase III studies are considered together, one month following completion of the primary series,  all  infants  studied  achieved  diphtheria  antibody  titres ≥ 0.01  IU/ml  (as  measured  by  EIA), regardless  of  the  immunisation  schedule  or  population  concerned.  Of  the  1,609  included  in  the  PP analysis, all but one infant, in study 2, i.e. 99.9% [95% CI 99.7-100] had seroprotective titres ≥ 0.01 IU/ml, as measured by EIA. This child who did not attain the seroprotective threshold after primary series had received Hexavac at 2, 3 and 4 months of age. This same child achieved the seroprotective level ( ≥ 0.1 IU/ml), as measured by the seroneutralisation assay, after receiving the booster dose. Among the 1,095 infants included in the PP analysis and for whom sera were assessed by both the Vero cell and the EIA assays, only 4 children did not achieve the seroprotective titre ( ≥ 0.01 IU/ml) for diphtheria neutralising antitoxins after completion of the primary series. For all studies, the overall evaluation of the immune response to diphtheria toxin in terms of GMTs and  seroprotection  rates  was  within  the  same  range  as  that  observed  with  PENTAVAC  and TETRAVAC. One  month  after  completion  of  the  primary  series,  all  1,630  infants  included  in  the  PP  analysis achieved seroprotective titres for tetanus antitoxins at the 0.01 IU/ml level, and 99.8% [95% CI 99.5100]  of  children  achieved  the  0.1  IU/ml  level.  The  3  children  who  did  not  reach  the  0.1  IU/ml threshold were in the group that had received Hexavac at 2, 3 and 4 months of age. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Among the 1,531 infants who completed the primary series and who were included in the PP analysis, one month after the third dose of the primary series, all infants but one showed detectable antibodies to poliovirus  type  1,  2  or  3,  and  at  least  94.7%,  91.0%  and  96.1%  of  children  achieved  a  neutralising antibody titre ≥ 50 to poliovirus types 1, 2, 3, respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

As was seen for the anti-PRP and anti-HBs antibody responses, a much higher serological response to D, T and poliovirus components was observed in Chilean infants compared with a European infant population, when GMTs and seroprotection rates at the higher threshold ( ≥ 0.1 IU/ml for D and T, and ≥ 50 for poliovirus) were considered.

The accelerated immunisation schedule (2, 3, 4 months) induced lower GMTs for antibodies to D, T and poliovirus than the extended one, although no major impact on seroprotection rates was observed.

## Persistence of antibodies and anamnestic response after a booster dose of Hexavac

Three studies evaluated the persistence of antibodies up to the time when a booster dose was given at 12 to 18 months of age, in a total of 1,008 French children who had been primed with the combined Hexavac (studies 2, 3 and 4). A subset of 110 children were followed in Germany (study 6) for antiPRP antibody persistence as well as anti-PRP anamnestic responses. In addition, the immune response following a booster injection of Hexavac was assessed in two other populations: in 129 children primed with PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II (study 7) and in 307 children primed with PENTACOQ and a hepatitis B vaccine currently used in France (study 9). · Persistence of antibodies up to the fourth vaccination Following primary immunisation with Hexavac, serum concentrations of antibodies to HBs decreased over the 8 to 13 months before booster vaccination. Geometric mean titres ranged from 35.3 to 62.3 mIU/mL, and 72.8 to 85.7% of children were still seroprotected ( ≥ 10 mIU/ml) at the time of booster, regardless of the immunisation regimen of the primary series. Levels of anti-HBs antibodies, in terms of  GMT values and seroprotection rates persisting up to booster were within the range of what has been reported at 12 to 15 months of age after administration of two doses of the combined HB-Hib PROCOMVAX vaccine given at 2 and 4 months of age. Among children who had received primary immunisation with Hexavac at 2, 4 and 6 months of age, GMT values and the proportion with seroprotective levels of HBs antibodies was lower 9-12 months after primary immunisation (i.e. booster given after 15 months of age) than those seen 6-9 months after priming (i.e. booster given at 12 months of age). In contrast, when the primary immunisation regimen had been 2, 3 and 4 months, persistence of antibodies appeared to be similar from 8 to 13 months after priming (studies 2, 4). However, the overall antibody persistence to HBs antigen appeared of similar magnitude between 12 and 18 months, whatever the immunisation regimen of the primary series. In  terms  of  GMT  values  and  seroprotection  rates,  levels  of  anti-HBs  persisting  up  to  booster  were lower after primary immunisation with Hexavac than when children were primed with PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II given separately. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Seroprotective titres of PRP antibody ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml) were maintained up until the time of booster dose (12 to 18 months of age) in 73.6 % (study 2) and 85.2% (vaccination at 2,3, 4 months of age in study 4), of children primed with Hexavac at 2, 3 and 4, or 2, 4 and 6 months of age respectively. Persistence of  antibodies  to  PRP  did  not  appear  to  be  affected  by  the  immunisation  schedule  used  to  prime  the children. When primary immunisation was given according to a 2, 4, 6 month schedule, antibodies to PRP persisted at higher levels, in terms of GMT values and seroprotection rates, when children were primed  with  PENTAVAC and  H-B-VAX II  than  when  Hexavac  was  used  (study  3).  Nevertheless, GMT values and seroprotection rates (PRP ≥ 1 µ g/ml) at the time of booster, 11 to 13 months after immunisation with Hexavac at 2, 3 and 4 months of age, were of the same magnitude as those observed after  priming  with  PENTAVAC  and  H-B-VAX  II  (study  4).  When  all  the  Phase  II  and  Phase  III studies  are  considered  together,  78.6%  [95%  CI  75.6-81.4]  of  the  794  children  included  in  the  PP analysis  still  had  seroprotective  titres  of  anti-PRP  antibodies  ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml).  When  children  were primed with two doses of HB-Hib, PROCOMVAX vaccine or with Pedvax-Hib (PRP-OMP conjugate) vaccine administered at 2 and 4 months of age, levels of anti-PRP antibodies persisting at 12 to 15 months of age were similar to those observed when Hexavac was used for primary immunisation (Fig.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

2). The Pedvax-Hib and also PRP-D vaccines were shown to be effective in protecting against invasive Hib disease in double blind efficacy trials.

The serum concentrations of antibodies to PT and FHA, as measured by EIA, decreased over the 8 to 13 months following completion of the primary immunisation series. Mean antibody titres measured 8 to  13  months  after  the  primary  series  with  Hexavac  ranged  from  8.50  to  15.3  EU/ml  for  anti-PT antibodies  and  from  28.9  to  32.2  EU/ml  for  anti-FHA  antibodies.  Despite  the  decrease  in  antibody titres over time, levels measured at the time of booster injection were nevertheless approximately 4- to 6-fold higher than pre-immunisation levels, indicating persistent anti-PT and anti-FHA antibodies in these  children.  Levels  of  antibodies  to  pertussis  antigens  that  persisted  up  to  the  time  of  booster injection were within the range of those observed after primary immunisation with PENTAVAC.

Nevertheless,  the  overall  seroprotection  rates  among  the  802  children  who  received  four  doses  of Hexavac (irrespective of the immunisation schedule) and who were included in the PP analysis, were 96.8% [95% CI 95.3-97.9] at the 10 mIU/ml level.

The persistence of antibodies to Tetanus was satisfactory. All children were still seroprotected against T  (titres ≥ 0.01  IU/ml).  Pre-  and  post-booster  antibody  response  did  not  differ  between  the  two immunisation  schedules  (2-3-4  month  or  2-4-6  months)  investigated.  GMTs  before  the  4 th injection ranged in studies 2 to 4 between 0.279 - 0.447 IU/ml. After the booster the GMTs increased with a post- to pre- ratio between studies of 12.9 - 33.0 demonstrating a strong booster response. For  Diphtheria  between  89.3  %  and  95.8  %  of  the  children  primed  with  Hexavac  were  still seroprotected  ( ≥ 0.01  IU/mL,  Vero  cell  assay)  and  GMTs  ranged  in  the  studies  between  0.049  and 0.060 IU/ml. The booster dose resulted in a strong immune response of GMTs with a Geometric Mean of  post-  to  pre-titre  ratio  between  31.0  and  60.1  (studies  2-4).  One  month after the booster between 99.1 % and 100 % of children in the studies 2, 3 and 4 were seroprotected. Pre- and postbooster titres of Hexavac were comparable with PENTAVAC + H-B-VAX II. For poliovirus types 1, 2 and 3 up to 8 to 13 months after primary immunisation with Hexavac was satisfactory,  with  more  87%  of  children  (study  2  polio  type  2)  still  had  detectable  neutralising antibodies to poliovirus types 1, 2 and 3 at the time of booster. Although  the  2,  4,  6  month  primary  immunisation  schedule  appeared  to  induce  a  higher  immune response one month after the third dose than the 2, 3, 4 month schedule, antibody titres were similar at the time of booster, regardless of the immunisation regimen used. · Anamnestic response after a booster dose of Hexavac A  strong  anamnestic  response  to  a  booster  injection  of  Hexavac  was  obtained  for  all  components, regardless of the immunisation regimen used during the primary series. The  anamnestic  response  to  HBs  antigen  was  marked,  for  both  primary  immunisation  regimens,  as indicated by the 15.6- to 29.6- fold increase in geometric mean titres after the booster immunisation (Tab. 10). GMT values for anti-HBs antibodies one month after the booster appeared lower than those observed in children primed with simultaneous but separate administration of PENTAVAC and H-BVAX II and boosted with the same two vaccines given separately (study 3). GMT values as well as seroprotection rates obtained after booster appeared lower than those observed after immunisation with HB vaccine given as a three-dose regimen at 0, 1, 6 months or as a four-dose regimen given at 0, 1, 2, 12 months in infants. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Of the 26 children who had not achieved seroprotective titres of anti-HBs antibodies (&gt; 10 mIU/ml) after four doses of Hexavac, 14 had high titres before the first dose and 12 were seronegative before immunisation. Of these 26 children, 23 assayed for anti-HBs antibodies before booster immunisation already had titres below 10 mIU/ml and did not respond to the booster dose.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One month after the administration of the booster dose of Hexavac, of the 807 children included in the PP analysis, all children but one had anti-PRP titres greater than 0.15 µ g/ml and 97.4% [95% CI 96.098.4] of children achieved titres greater than 1 µ g/ml (Tab. 11). The immune response to PRP in terms of GMTs were 16.7 (14.4-19.4) and 23 (20.4-26) respectively, and the seroprotection rates appeared to be similar after four doses of Hexavac as after four doses of separately administered PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II  (study  3).  The  priming  effect  provided  by  the  primary  course  of  different  combined DTaP-Hib  vaccines  has  been  previously  demonstrated  by  the  induction  of  a  strong  anamnestic response to PRP antigen after administration of a booster dose of plain unconjugated PRP at 12 to 14 months of age. GMT values for anti-PRP antibodies following a booster dose of plain PRP in children primed  with  PMC  DTaP-Hib  vaccine  appeared  to  be  similar  to  those  observed  in  Finnish  children primed with PRP-T (Act-Hib) vaccine alone. The priming effect for PRP afforded by Hexavac was strongly supported by the high GMT values (13.7 to 45.7 µ g/ml) and the marked 29.3- to 73.3- fold increase in mean antibody titres following the booster dose administration.

An anamnestic response to pertussis antigens was evidenced by the high GMT values as well as the 3.1- to 11.4-fold increase of mean antibody titres observed after the booster immunisation. Of the 785 children who received a booster dose of Hexavac and who were included in the PP analysis, 96.4% [95% CI 94.9-97.6] had pertussis toxin neutralising antibody titres greater than 32. Mean titres of  antibodies  as  measured  by  EIA  were  higher  than  those  induced  after  primary  immunisation  and ranged from 74.6 to 99.9 EU/ml for anti-PT and from 149 to 205 EU/ml for anti-FHA antibodies. As was also seen after primary immunisation, GMT values for anti-PT antibodies measured by EIA after booster with Hexavac appeared somewhat lower than those induced by booster with PENTAVAC. In contrast, a difference in response to Hexavac and PENTAVAC boosters was not apparent in terms of the  percentage  of  children  with  a  four-fold  rise  of  pre-booster  antibody  titres  to  PT  (study  3).  The clinical relevance of the minor quantitative differences in GMT values after Hexavac and PENTAVAC booster remains to be established. The overall antibody responses to pertussis antigens after a booster dose of Hexavac was of the same order of magnitude as those observed previously for PENTAVAC. After booster, all children achieved seroprotective titres of tetanus antibodies greater than 0.1 IU/ml. Concerning  diphtheria  antitoxins,  all  children  had  titres  above  the  seroprotective  threshold  of  0.01 IU/mL after booster, and 97.5% to 100% had titres greater than 0.1 IU/ml. Of  802  children  included  in  the  PP  analysis,  98.9%  [95%  CI  97.9-99.5]  had  titres  greater  than 0.1 IU/ml for diphtheria antibodies measured by EIA compared to 34% [95% CI 30.5-37.7] before the booster  dose.  This  strong  anamnestic  response  was  confirmed  by  the  assessment  of  neutralising diphtheria antitoxins, as measured in the Vero cell assay. Of 718 children included in the PP analysis, all  but  two  children  achieved  diphtheria  neutralising  antibody  titres  greater  than  0.01  IU/mL  and 98.7% [95% CI 97.6-99.4] of children had titres greater than 0.1 IU/ml after the booster dose. All  768  children  included  in  the  PP  analysis  had  detectable  poliovirus  type  1,  2,  3  neutralising antibodies after the booster dose, and 99.6% [95% CI 98.9-99.9] of children achieved titres above 50 (1/dil). These data considered together confirm the ability of Hexavac to prime infants effectively, regardless of the three-dose primary immunisation regimen used, and to induce a good anamnestic response after a booster dose given between 12 and 18 months of age. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Vaccine failures

Four »vaccine failures» were clinical episodes of pertussis infections. No cases of Diphtheria, Tetanus, Poliomyelitis, Hepatitis B, or Haemophilus influenzae type b infections were identified. Two of them occurred  after  the  first  dose  of  Hexavac  (break-through  in  partially  immunised  infants).  Among  the two cases which occurred after a complete primary series, one was after vaccination with Pentavac and H-B-Vax II and one after vaccination with Hexavac.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Supportive studies

The efficacy of the PMC DTaP vaccine was compared to DTP in a randomised double-blind controlled trial involving 4181 children in Senegal. Participants were vaccinated at a 2, 4 and 6 months schedule. The study was designed to estimate the relative efficacy against pertussis disease comparing DTaP to DTP the absolute vaccine efficacy from observational studies (a household contact study and a cohort study). The relative risk of DTaP was 1.5 (95% CI 1.23-1.93). For more severe forms of pertussis the relative  risk  was  estimated  to  be  higher  demonstrating  better  efficacy  of  the  whole  cell  pertussis vaccine used. In the nested case contact study both vaccines were highly efficacious with an absolute efficacy of the DTaP vaccine of 85% [95% CI 66-93] against typical pertussis as defined by the World Health Organisation (WHO). PT-neutralising antibody titres, as well as anti-PT and FHA antibodies, induced by the trivalent DTaP in Senegalese children were within the same range as those obtained in various  populations  and  to  those  obtained  following  administration  of  more  complex  DTaP-IPV  or DTaP-IPV/Hib combination vaccines. The limitations of househould contact studies are well known. The case contact and the cohort study are small studies, especially the groups of unvaccinated subjects were limited resulting in wide confidence intervals. However, in the context of the relative efficacy study both studies are considered to support the efficacy of the two component acP vaccine.

One open, one-arm study (A3R17398) is conducted in Sweden and has started in March 1999. The aim of the study is to assess the immunogenicity in 180 infants vaccinated at 3, 5 and 12 months of age. A historical  comparison  with  PENTAVAC.  will  be  performed.  The  final  study  report  is  targeted  for 4Q2000. Two other studies have been launched during the review process in order to study the possibility of administering  other  vaccines concurrently, but at separate sites. In  one  study  the  concurrent administration of a hepatitis A vaccine (VAQTA paediatric) will be studied in 600 infants at 6 and 12 months of age. In the second study the immune response and safety of simultaneous administration of Hexavac and MMR-II vaccines in 600 toddlers between 12 ands 15 months of age will be assessed. A  Post  Marketing  survey  was  started  in  1998  in  Sweden  in  order  to  assess  the  occurrence  of Hypertonic  Hyperresponsive  Episodes  (HHE)  following  administration  of  two  doses  of  Pentavac  in infants at 3 and 5 months of age. Clinical safety Safety  and  reactogenicity  data  were  recorded  during  three  successive  periods  after  each  injection: immediate  reactions  occurring  within  15  minutes  after  injection  (except  study  9,  where  immediate reactions were recorded within 30 minutes after injection); solicited and unsolicited local and systemic adverse events occurring after the 15 minutes following injection up to and including the 3 rd day after injection; and adverse events occurring from the 4 th day until the 30 th day after each injection requiring a  medical  contact.  Immediate  reactions  were  recorded  at  the  investigational  site  and  were  analysed independently of solicited local and systemic reactions reported during the study. All serious adverse events (AE) were reported during the entire study period covering the period from one  month  after  the  primary  vaccination  until  one  month  after  the  booster  dose.  The  adverse  event relationship  with  vaccination  was  assessed  and  rated  by  the  investigator.  Since  the  scale  for relationship was changed during the course of the development, the analysis focused on the absence or presence of a relationship with vaccination rather than on the degree of relatedness (doubtful, possible, probable, or definite). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Parameters  measured  were  redness,  induration  and  oedema  =  2  cm,  rectal  temperature  =  38  °  C, unusual  drowsiness,  irritability  and/  or  unusual  crying,  inconsolable  crying  for  more  than  3  hours, vomiting and diarrhoea, insomnia, anorexia and other local and systemic adverse events.

## Patient exposure

- Primary immunisation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

During the course of the clinical development of Hexavac, 3,905 infants received at least one dose of this  vaccine,  administered  as  a  primary  immunisation  series,  in  France  (Studies  2,  3  and  4),  Chile (Study 5) and Germany (Study 6). Among the 3,905 infants who received the first dose of Hexavac, 3,831 received two doses, and 3,788 had a complete three-dose primary series. Complete safety and reactogenicity  assessments  are  available  for  3897  infants  post-dose  1,  3826  infants  post-dose  2  and 3784  infants  post-dose  3.  Overall,  a  total  of  11,525  doses  of  Hexavac  have  been  administered  in primary immunisation: 3,246 to French infants (Studies 2, 3 and 4), 5,278 to German infants (Study 6) and  3,001  to  Chilean  infants  (Study  5).  Of  the  11,525  doses  administered,  11,507  (99.8%)  have completed safety and reactogenicity assessment.

<!-- image -->

| Study No.   | No. of doses   | Local reactions ≥ 5 cm   | Local reactions ≥ 5 cm   | Local reactions (5-7 cm)   | Local reactions (5-7 cm)   | Local reactions ≥ 7 cm   | Local reactions ≥ 7 cm   |
|-------------|----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|             |                | Redness%                 | Induration %             | Redness%                   | Induration %               | Redness%                 | Induration %             |
| All         | 11507          | 1.39                     | 0.96                     | 1.27                       | 0.87                       | 0.12                     | 0.10                     |
| studies     |                | (1.18-1.62)              | (0.79-1.16)              | (1.07-1.49)                | (0.71-1.06)                | (0.07-0.20)              | (0.05-0.17)              |

· Booster immunisation In  order  to  establish  the  safety  profile  of  the  booster  immunisation  with  Hexavac,  4,437  children received  a  dose  of  Hexavac  during  the  second  year  of  life.  Among  these  children,  2,697  had  been primed with Hexavac (Studies 2, 3, 4 and 6), and thus were given a fourth dose of Hexavac; 129 had been primed with PENTAVAC (Study 7), and 1,611 with PENTACOQ (Studies 8 and 9). A similar overall analysis of the safety and reactogenicity profile to that conducted after the primary series is presented for the booster vaccination with Hexavac. Local and systemic reactions · Local reactions Primary immunisation: During  the  three  days  after  immunisation,  excluding  the  15-minute  period  immediately  following injection, of the 11,507 doses administered to French, German and Chilean infants, 10.0 to 36.1% were associated with at least one local reaction, 2.44 to 17.4% with local redness ≥ 2 cm, and 6.97 to 23.8% with induration and/or swelling ≥ 2 cm, depending on the infant population studied, and considering all doses in the primary immunisation series. Within three  days  of  vaccination  (excluding  the  15-minute  period  immediately  following  injection), 19.9% to 22.8% of French infants (Tab. 18) experienced at least one local reaction, depending on the dose considered. Redness ≥ 2 cm occurred in 11.8% to 14.0% of infants and induration and/or oedema ≥ 2  cm  in  14.8%  to  16.1%,  depending  on  the  dose.  No  increase  in  the  rate  of  local  reactions  with successive  injections  were  observed.  In  Germany,  rates  of  local  reactions  were  lower  than  those reported in France: 10.0 to 10.6% of German infants experienced at least one local reaction depending on  the  dose  of  the  primary  series  considered,  with  less  than  8%  presenting  redness ≥ 2  cm  or  an induration and/or swelling ≥ 2 cm. These seeming differences between France and Germany might be attributed  to  differences  in  the  injection  techniques,  reporting  procedures,  trial  populations  and experience of investigators. Among the total of 11,507 doses administered for primary immunisation, 1.39 % (95 % CI 1.18 % 1.62  %)  were  associated  with  a  local  redness ≥ 5  cm,  and  0.87  %  (95  %  CI,  0.79  -  1.16  %)  were associated with local induration ≥ 5 cm. Local reactions after Hexavac. Primary series Medicinal product no longer authorised

When Hexavac was compared directly with PENTAVAC  and H-B-VAX II, administered simultaneously but at two different sites (study 3), the rates of local and systemic reactions reported

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

within three days following the primary vaccination were comparable between the two groups with the exception  of  redness.  A  higher  incidence  of  redness  appeared  to  occur  after  Hexavac  compared  to PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II.

A slight  trend  towards  a  higher  local  reactogenicity  was  seen  after  Hexavac  compared  to  Pentavac. However, due to the relatively small sample size no clear conclusion can be drawn. Small differences may not be detectable  because  the  trial  was  not  powered  to  detect  small  differences.  The  applicant commits to perform a large post-marketing safety and reactogenicity study of Hexavac.

## Booster immunisation:

Of the 126 Turkish children who were assessed for safety, 13 (10.3%) presented with an induration and/or swelling &gt; 7 cm after booster with Hexavac (all associated with a large swelling of the limb) and  20  children  (15.9%)  experienced  a  large  swelling  of  the  vaccinated  limb.  These  large  local reactions  generally  began  the  day  of  injection  or  the  day  after.  These  reactions  were  considered  as benign, and resolved over a period of a few days without any sequelae, and did not fulfil the criteria of SAEs.

Within  the  three  days  of  booster  immunisation  with  Hexavac,  of  the  2,688  doses  administered  to French  and  German  toddlers  and  analysed,  16.7  to  28.9%  were  associated  with  at  least  one  local reaction, 13.4 to 24.1% with local redness ≥ 2  cm, and 12 to 21.5% with induration and/or swelling ≥ 2 cm. As in the primary immunisation series, local reactions were more frequently reported in French infants than in German children. However the rates of local reactions ≥ 5 cm after a fourth dose of Hexavac appeared to fall within the same range in the French and German populations of study children. As  expected,  local  and  systemic  adverse  event  rates  were  somewhat  higher  after  the  booster immunisation, compared with rates observed after the primary series. Thus the proportion of children with at least one local reaction increased from 21.2 during the primary series to 28.9% after booster in France (studies 2-4) and from 10.3 to 16.7% in Germany (study 6). Local and systemic adverse event rates observed after booster did not differ markedly with the type of vaccine given as a primary series (Hexavac or PENTACOQ or PENTAVAC). The  rates  of  local  reactions ≥ 5  cm  observed  in  toddlers  who  received  Hexavac  as  a  booster immunisation after having been primed with PENTACOQ appeared to be of the same magnitude as that observed in Hexavac-primed children. However the rates of local reactions ≥ 5  cm reported for Turkish toddlers primed with PENTAVAC and H-B-VAX II who subsequently received a booster dose of Hexavac ranged from 19.8% for redness to 21.4% for induration and/or swelling. A higher frequency of the local reactions ≥ 5 cm was reported in the Turkish study group for unknown reasons.  Differences  in  injection  techniques  cannot  be  excluded.  Twenty  percent  of  the  children received the vaccine in the arm instead of the thigh, in direct violation of the protocol. It could not be verified retrospectively whether immunisations were given strictly intramuscularly. Such a frequency of local reactions ( ≥ 5cm) was not observed in other studies conducted in France or Germany using the same lot of Hexavac (studies  3,  4,  6),  and  under  the  same  conditions  of  administration,  at  least  per protocol. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Similar swelling of the entire limb has been already described with other DTaP vaccines given as a booster immunisation within the second year of life in Swedish, Japanese or German children . Large swelling was also observed in a few cases in the other clinical studies during the primary series with Hexavac as has also been described after administration of DTP-IPV or DTP-IPV-Hib vaccines as a three-dose  primary  immunisation  series,  which  suggests  that  this  phenomenon  is  not  restricted  to  a booster dose. The mechanism causing this benign swelling has not been elucidated. The SPC has been amended to include swelling of the entire limb under the section Undesirable Effects.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Systemic reactions

## Primary immunisation:

Rates of solicited systemic adverse events reported by the parents, such as irritability and/or unusual crying and drowsiness, also depended on the population studied. Compared with French or German infant populations among which irritability and /or unusual crying appeared to decrease in frequency with dose, irritability occurred more frequently in Chilean infants and increased from 17.7% to 40.7% with  successive  doses.  The  high  rate  of  irritability  in  Chilean  infants  might  be  explained  by  an association with respiratory disorders, which were reported at a high frequency in the study. It is of note that this study was performed in the winter, at a time when a bronchiolitis epidemic was reported and when the third dose was given.

The rate of mild fever [38°C-38.9°C] tended to be lowest after the first dose, varying from 7.3% to 16.2% in France, from 8.8 to 17.7% in Germany and from 11.3 to 23.9% in Chile. Fever above 39°C was reported infrequently, with a proportion ranging from 0.34-0.37% at the first dose  to  2.02-2.42%  at  the  third  dose  of  the  primary  series  given  to  German  and  French  infants.  In Chilean infants, a higher rate of fever [39°-39.9°C] was reported, from 0.68% at the first dose to 4.09% at the third dose, with a trend towards an increased rate with successive doses of vaccine. This trend was observed for both mild and high fever ( ≥ 40°C). High fever ≥ 40° C occurred in 0.03 % of doses after the first dose, 0.13 % after the second dose and 0.16 % after the third dose. Inconsolable crying, corresponding to crying lasting for more than three hours, but not high-pitched or abnormal crying, was infrequently reported in the three populations (between 0 and 0.34% irrespective of the dose of the primary series and the population considered). The subjective nature of the reporting of this event should be emphasised, and it is of note that more than half of the children who were noted to present with inconsolable crying, were also reported to present with irritability and unusual crying &lt; three hours. Concerning the immunisation schedule, the data show that when Hexavac is administered to French infants  as  a  three-dose  primary  series,  the  rates  of  local  and  systemic  reactions  within  three  days following vaccination appeared to be similar regardless of the dosing schedule used (2, 3, 4 or 2, 4, 6 months). As mentioned above the reactogenicity profile appeared to vary somewhat depending on the study population. Booster immunisation: The  rate  of  fever  ( ≥ 38°C)  in  French  children  increased  from  7.7.  to  17.6%  during  primary immunisation to 30.3% after booster immunisation, and from 9.2 to 19.9% after primary immunisation to 28.5% after booster in German children. Rates of solicited systemic adverse events following administration of a booster dose of Hexavac, did not differ markedly between the two study populations. Fever between 38° and 38.9°C was observed in  23.9  to  26.4%  of  children,  with  3.5  to  3.7%  having  fever ≥ 39°C.  Less  than  1%  of  children experienced a fever ≥ 40°C, and 0.12 to 0.30% presented with inconsolable crying persisting for more than three hours. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Adverse events and serious adverse event/deaths

## · Adverse events

Primary immunisation:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Of the 11,525 doses of Hexavac administered to 3,905 infants as a primary series, only one case of HHE (within three days after vaccination) (0.025%) was reported. This event was reported as being probably related to vaccination.

High fever of at least 40.0°C was observed in 12 infants (0.3%). All episodes of fever ≥ 40.0°C except one occurred after the second or third injection.

Half of the episodes did not require any medical contact. Five episodes of fever were isolated, with no associated infectious symptoms. One infant presented with a fever at 40.1°C the day of the third dose that was associated with a large local reaction ≥ 7 cm. All episodes of fever ≥ 40.0°C, except two, were considered by the investigators to be related to vaccination.

Following administration  of  a  booster  dose  of  Hexavac  to  children  who  received  either  Hexavac  or PENTACOQ as a primary series, there were 298 reports of unsolicited adverse events occurring within the three days after vaccination.

Two cases of febrile convulsions were reported within seven days after vaccination in Chile (study 5), one occurring seven days after the second dose, and one five days after the third injection. The former case was associated with bronchopneumonia and declared as a SAE. Both cases were associated with gastrointestinal symptoms and were considered by the investigators to have no relation to vaccination. One infant (study 6) experienced a bilateral swelling of the limbs on the day of the first injection. This event lasted two days, did not lead to a medical visit and resolved without any sequelae. Inconsolable  crying,  a  solicited  event  reported  on  the  parental  diary  card,  was  noted  for  18  infants (0.46%) among a total of 11,525 doses administered (0.15% per dose). This event consisted of crying that persisted for more than three hours, in spite of efforts to calm the child by feeding or nursing. Most infants who experienced inconsolable crying presented this event on the day of the injection, or the day after. Half of them were seen by a physician. All of the cases of inconsolable crying except one were considered to be related to vaccination by the investigator. One infant (study 6) who presented with a high-pitched crying on the day of injection that lasted for four hours was recorded as an SAE by the investigator. No neurological abnormalities were found and the child recovered spontaneously. Among the  18  children  with  inconsolable  crying,  12  did  not  have  any  associated  symptoms,  while three experienced at the same time a large local reaction ( ≥ 7 cm). There were no sequelae associated with these adverse events. Seventeen  large  local  reactions  &gt;  7  cm  were  observed  in  16  infants  who  received  primary immunisation with Hexavac, i.e. 0.40% of infants and 0.14% of doses administered. These reactions consisted of redness or induration and/or swelling, and did not fulfil the criteria of a SAE. Seven of the 16 children presented with both redness and induration/swelling at the same time, 6 had only redness, and 3 had only induration and/or swelling. All large local reactions occurred on the day of injection and 14 of them resolved within one or two days. Five of the reactions required a medical contact. One child (study 6) presented with a local reaction &gt; 7 cm after both the first and the second dose. It is noteworthy that this child went on to receive a third dose as well as a booster dose of Hexavac, without experiencing such a reaction. Booster immunisation: Medicinal product no longer authorised

A  total  of  165  events  were  reported  for  150  (5.5%)  of  the  2,688  children  who  were  primed  with Hexavac;  133  events  occurred  in  123  (7.6%)  of  the  1,608  children  who  were  primed  with PENTACOQ. Unsolicited local reactions consisted mainly of injection site pain (25 out of 39 adverse events  reported).  Unsolicited  local  reaction  rates  did  not  appear  to  be  affected  by  the  vaccine  used during the primary series. The SPC has been amended to include 'injection site pain' under the section Undesirable Effects.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In children primed with PENTACOQ and who received Hexavac as a booster dose, two-thirds of the other unsolicited events reported did not require any medical attention (42 out of 133); slightly more than  half  (58%)  (n=78)  were  considered  by  the  investigators  to  have  some  relation  to  vaccination, accounting  for  4.8%  of  the  doses  administered.  These  events  were  similar  to  those  reported  after administration of four doses of Hexavac, and consisted mainly of respiratory or skin disorders, which are common events in childhood.

After booster immunisation with Hexavac, regardless of the vaccine administered as a primary series, only a few adverse events occurring within the three days after vaccination could be considered as clinically relevant

|                                                                     | Primary series with the Hexavac   | Primary series with the PENTACOQ+HB- VAX II   | Primary series with the PENTAVAC+HB- VAX II   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Study code/Study no                                                 | A3R03-08-12-13/ nos 2, 3, 6, 4    | A3R14+20 /nos 8,9                             | A3R16/no 7                                    |
| Number of vaccinated children                                       | 2,697                             | 1,611                                         | 129                                           |
| CLINICALLY RELEVANT ADVERSE EVENTS WITHIN THE 3 DAYS OF VACCINATION |                                   | longer                                        |                                               |
| HHE                                                                 | 0                                 | 0                                             | 0                                             |
| Fever ≥ 40°C                                                        | 20                                | 5                                             | 0                                             |
| Convulsions*                                                        | 0                                 | 1                                             | 0                                             |
| Inconsolable crying > 3 h                                           | 5 no                              | 4                                             | 1                                             |
| Local reactions > 7 cm                                              | 9                                 | 5                                             | 13                                            |

· within 7 days of vaccination HHE= Hypotonic hyporesponsiveness · Serious Adverse Events (SAE)/deaths Primary immunisation: During the  course  of  primary  immunisation  with  Hexavac  in  France,  Germany  and  Chile  involving 3,905 infants (Studies 2, 3, 4, 5, 6), 247 SAEs were reported. More than half of the SAEs occurred in Chile (n=140), with 107 reported in France and Germany. Of the 247 SAEs reported, 5 were considered to be related to vaccination by the investigators. One  infant  (study  6)  presented  with  a  high-pitched  crying,  that  occurred  2.5  hours  after  the  first injection and lasted for four hours. The infant was withdrawn from the study. There were no sequelae associated  with  this  adverse  event  that  was  considered  to  be  probably  related  to  vaccination  by  the investigator. Medicinal product no longer authorised

One infant (study 5) in Chile experienced an hypotonic-hyporesponsiveness episode (HHE) the day after the first dose of Hexavac, which lasted for two days and was considered to be probably related to vaccination by the investigator. This SAE did not meet the definition for HHE recently proposed in a workshop  sponsored  by  the  FDA  and  the  US  Public  Health  Service,  because  the  expected  skin decoloration was not observed. There were no sequelae associated with this adverse event.

In  addition,  a  case  of  intussusception  (Study  4)  occurring  the  day  after  the  second  dose,  a  case  of pyelonephritis due to Escherichia coli infection (study 4) occurring five days after the third dose and a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

case  of  febrile  influenza-like  syndrome  associated  with  gastroenteritis  (study  6)  occurring  two  days after the third dose were reported. The three latter cases were rated probably, possibly and doubtfully related  to  vaccination  by  the  investigators,  respectively.  Two  cases  occurred  in  the  context  of infectious disease.

There  have  been  no  reports  of  neurological  disorders  after  Hepatitis  B  vaccination  in  infants  and toddlers below 24 months of age.

## Booster immunisation:

During  the  period  between  the  end  of  the  primary  series  (one  month  post-dose  3)  and  the administration of a booster dose with Hexavac, 119 SAEs were reported. None was considered to have any relationship with vaccination. During the month following the booster immunisation with Hexavac administered to 4,437 children (studies 2-4,6-9) 33 SAEs were reported; three were considered by the investigators to be related to vaccination, and were reported as such to the Health Agencies. The 30 SAEs considered to have no relation  to  vaccination  by  the  investigators  consisted  of  common  diseases  of  childhood,  i.e.  mainly gastrointestinal or respiratory diseases (n=18), and also three cases of febrile convulsions. The  3  SAEs  considered  to  be  related  to  vaccination  by  the  investigators  were  all  cases  of  febrile convulsions; two cases occurred 8 and 10 days after the vaccination, respectively, both in the context of infectious rhinopharyngitis (subjects 145A07 and 709 studies 4, 6). · Deaths Primary immunisation: Among the  3,905  infants  involved  in  the  primary  immunisation  series  with  Hexavac,  seven  deaths occurred which were attributed to a sudden infant death syndrome, SIDS. Four cases occurred in Chile (in 1,028 infants), two out of 1,094 infants in France, and one out of 1,783 infants in Germany. All the SIDS cases were considered to be unrelated to vaccination either by the investigator himself or, for one infant (subject 57V02 study 3), by the study co-ordinator. The SIDS cases were not associated with any one batch of vaccine. Each SIDS case was reviewed extensively by experts. It is noteworthy that the age at death was under six months in all cases, that four children out of five for whom the position at the time of death was known were found in a prone position (including the two French cases of SIDS), and that four infants had a personal history of disease just prior to the death. The diagnosis of SIDS was questioned for two cases,  one  that  occurred  in  Germany  and  one  in  Chile.  Three  of  the  four  cases  of  SIDS  in  Chile occurred during the winter, a period reported to be associated with an increased incidence of SIDS. For both experts, the most important risk factor to be considered was the age at death. Four deaths occurred after the first dose, before the fourth month of age, one in France and three in Chile, and three after the second dose, and thus before the sixth month of age. The peak incidence of SIDS has been reported to be at 12 weeks of age between 2 and 4 months of age (with 90% of deaths occurring before the age of 6 months). One death occurred in a child (study 6) 151 days after the third dose of the primary series with Hexavac, which was attributed to a pneumococcal septicemia. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Post marketing data

Since  the  Marketing  Authorisation  was  granted,  new  safety  data  have  been  received  which  led  to changes in the product information. These concerned the following adverse reactions, all reported very rarely: convulsions, encephalitis/ encephalopathy, Guilain Barré syndrome, neuritis, allergic reactions and angioedema; thrombocytopenia and purpura; abdominal pain, meteorism and nausea; dyspnoea.

## Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Benefit/risk assessment

Combined vaccines are considered to contribute significantly to the simplification and harmonisation of  vaccination  schedules,  to  increase  vaccine  coverage  and  for  straight-forward  introduction  of  new vaccines.

Hexavac belongs to the new generation of hexavalent vaccines and is based on the combination of a previously known pentavalent vaccine and recombinant hepatitis B component. Safety and efficacy of these vaccines has been demonstrated for many years.

However,  Hexavac  consists  of  a  new  formulation:  all  vaccine  components  including  the  Hib component  are  presented  in  a  liquid  formulation.  A  defined  buffer  system  was  selected  during  the pharmaceutical development, that maintains the Hib component in an unadsorbed status and the D and T components in a partially adsorbed status. Since these changes compared to the established vaccines were considered to be important, close attention was paid to the quality aspects of Hexavac During  the  dossier  evaluation  process  the  following  quality  issues  were  identified  and  discussed intensively. In particular: · Cumulative holding periods of vaccine intermediates · Impact of aged intermediates on the quality of the active substances · Control  of the quality of the vaccines  from  the  time  of  batch release to the end  of shelf life Following an in-depth discussion, the company was able to provide a clear concept of how to monitor the consistent quality of Hexavac. The measures undertaken by the applicant include: · Reduction of holding periods of vaccine intermediates · Setting up extended stability study programs · Reduction of the shelf life to 24 months The CPMP, based on the recommendation given by the BWP, concluded that the quality of Hexavac is acceptable. Concerning  the  clinical  issues,  the  differences  in  the  new  vaccine  formulation  compared  to  the formulation for the established vaccines, were not considered to be clinically significant. The  diminished  antibody  levels  against  Hib  at  the  time  of  the  booster  dose  was  discussed  in  depth during  the  Ad  hoc  Expert  Group  Meeting  on  Combined  Vaccine  held  in  May  2000.  However,  the experts confirmed that these cut-off limits of 1.0 micrograms/ml for unconjugated Hib vaccines and of 0.15  micrograms/ml  for  conjugated  Hib  vaccines  as  minimum  levels  indicative  of  protection  are questionable. Good clinical efficacy against Hib disease has been observed in populations with lower anti-PRP antibody levels. The anti-PRP level after primary vaccination is today known to reflect only part of the immune response to the conjugated Hib vaccines. Medicinal product no longer authorised

After  vaccination  with  conjugated  Hib  vaccines,  a  major  protective  role  is  played  by  persistent  cell based  immunological  memory  as  indicated  by  antibody  titre  response  following  booster  either  with unconjugated or conjugated PRP (higher booster response observed in this second case). Maturation of the  immune  response  is  indicated  by  an  increased  avidity  of  the  antibodies  observed  after  booster challenge. It was concluded that memory lasts longer than measurable antibodies (silent memory) even though it is not known how long. Persistence of memory following the primary immunisation series is to be further studied and the company has provided a concept paper (including timetables) regarding further characterisation of Hib antibodies induced by Hexavac eg. the avidity of antibodies.

There  is  a  notable  decrease  in  antibody  titers  to  HBsAg  in  Hexavac  compared  to  the  monovalent vaccine H-B-Vax II (5 µg), which may have impact on the long term persistency of antibody titres. However, it is noted that the seroconversion rate and GMTs for HBs antibodies after completion of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

primary series with Hexavac appeared comparable to those obtained after two doses of Procomvax, given at 2 and 4 months of age. Procomvax has been licensed recently within the EU. The applicant commits to perform further antibody persistence studies with Hexavac and to also provide data on antiHBsAg antibody kinetics over long-term follow-up.

At present it cannot be established if the number of Pertussis antigens has any direct consequence in terms of actual protection against severe Pertussis infections. In some studies protection of vaccinated infants  was  observed  five  years  after  vaccination,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  there  were  no  detectable antibody titres 18 months after vaccination. This indicates that antibody titres and duration of antibody response after primary immunisation cannot be considered as surrogates of protection.

<!-- image -->

Re-emergence of pertussis in vaccinated populations was also discussed and it was considered that the monitoring of the clinical disease as well as the circulation of strains among the vaccinated population should be continued. A number of post-marketing commitments were undertaken by the company and are designed so as to be a control system that is sufficiently sensitive to monitor the efficacy of Hexavac. National epidemiologic surveillance systems experienced in monitoring the relation between Hib and pertussis vaccination and (re-)emergence of disease will be involved in the post-marketing surveillance. These studies will be performed in collaboration with the company. In summary, based on the principles of evaluating quality, safety and efficacy of medicinal products in general and of vaccines in particular, and considering the state of the art knowledge CPMP concluded that the benefit/risk ratio in relation to Hexavac was positive. Medicinal product no longer authorised