---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:19:25
document_pages: 12
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/infanrix-penta-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: infanrix-penta-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.4838243
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 21:14:32.394997
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion and scientific discussion on procedures which have been finalised before 01 November 2002.  For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Introduction Infanrix penta is a combined vaccine which contains diphtheria toxoid ( D ),  tetanus toxoid ( T ),  three purified  pertussis  antigens  (pertussis  toxoid  ( PT ),  filamentous  haemagglutinin  ( FHA )  and  pertactin ( PRN ; 69 kiloDalton outer membrane protein), and the purified major surface antigen ( HBsAg ) of the Hepatitis  B  virus  ( HBV ).  These  components  are  adsorbed  onto  aluminium  salts.  In  addition, it also contains three types of inactivated Polioviruses ( IPV type 1: Mahoney strain; IPV type 2: MEF1 strain; IPV type 3: Saukett strain). In  the  following  report,  this  combination  vaccine  will  be  referred  to  as  'Infanrix  penta'  or  as  the 'candidate vaccine'. All  components  of  Infanrix  penta have  already  been  licensed,  either  individually  or  as  combined vaccines  in  EU  member  states  and  are  manufactured  by  the  applicant  (e.g.  Infanrix  HepB:  D,  T, Pa and HBV; Infanrix IPV: D, T, Pa and IPV). Infanrix penta is thus a new combination of known and approved components. The rationale for the development of this combination vaccine is: to facilitate the universal vaccination of infants against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and poliomyelitis, in countries recommending the use of inactivated poliovirus vaccine and universal vaccination against hepatitis B in infancy by simplifying vaccine delivery. Incorporation of the hepatitis B and poliovirus vaccines in a  multivalent  formulation  with  DTPa  is  logical  because  the  three  vaccines  are  administered  by  the intramuscular route and that their administration schedule includes multiple doses during the first year of life. The therapeutic indication for Infanrix penta is 'for primary and booster vaccination of infants against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and poliomyelitis'. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The composition of Infanrix penta is given in Table 1. To  potentiate  the  immune  response,  D,  T,  pertussis  antigens  (PT,  FHA  and  PRN)  and  HBsAg  are adsorbed  on  aluminium  hydroxide  and  aluminium  phosphate.  Both  aluminium  salts  are  well-known and universally accepted immunopotentiating agents. The IPV component, although not pre-adsorbed for formulation, does adsorb when mixed with the other antigens. An antimicrobial agent (2-phenoxyethanol) is added since it is not possible to terminally filter the final vaccine and the cloudy appearance of the suspension could  mask microbial contamination. This is in accordance with the CPMP Note for Guidance on the Pharmaceutical and Biological Aspects of  Combined Vaccines (CPMP/BWP/477/97). Sodium chloride is added to establish isotonicity and Medium 199 is used as a stabiliser during production of IPV component.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Composition of Infanrix penta

| Ingredients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Quantity/dose (0.5 ml)                                                                                                                    | Function                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Active substances 1. Diphtheria toxoid, adsorbed (D) 2. Tetanus toxoid, adsorbed (T) 3. Pertussis toxoid, adsorbed (PT) 4. Filamentous haemagglutinin, adsorbed (FHA) 5. Pertactin (69kDa Outer Membrane Protein - PRN adsorbed) 6. r-DNA Hepatitis B surface antigen, adsorbed (HBsAg) 7. Inactivated Polio Virus (IPV) Type 1 8. Inactivated Polio Virus (IPV) Type 2 9. Inactivated Polio Virus (IPV) Type 3 Excipients 1. 2-Phenoxyethanol 2. Sodium chloride (NaCl) 1. Medium 199 (M199) (including aminoacids) 2. Water for injections q.s.ad Adjuvants Aluminium 0.5 mg as aluminium hydroxide (Al(OH) 3 ) 0.20 mg as aluminium phosphate (AlPO 4 ) | longer not less than 30 IU not less than 40 IU 25 µ g 25 µ g 8 µ g 10 µ g 40 DU 8 DU 32 DU 2.5 mg 4.5 mg 1.15 mg (0.09 mg) 0.5 ml 0.70 mg | authorised Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Immunogen Preservative For isotonicity IPV stabiliser Solvent Adjuvant |

<!-- image -->

For  the  preparation  of  the  finished  product,  the  sterile  adsorbed  DT,  PT,  FHA,  PRN  and  HBsAg concentrates  and  the  IPV  component  (trivalent  bulk)  are  mixed  with  a  sterile  solution  of  sodium chloride and with water for injection. A sterile solution of 2-phenoxyethanol is added. The adsorbed DTPa-HBV-IPV vaccine is distributed aseptically in sterile glass (type I, Ph. Eur.) syringes.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Infanrix  penta  is  presented  as  0.5  ml  mono-dose  preparations  in  1  ml  pre-filled  glass  (Type  I, Ph. Eur.) syringes, either presented with separate needles or without needles. Syringes without needles are fitted with grey butyl rubber tip caps. Separate needles are fitted with grey butyl rubber shields. Plunger stoppers are of grey butyl rubber. Needles 23G1', 25G5/8' or 25G1' can be used for needleless syringes. Infanrix penta is to be administered by intramuscular injection. Development pharmaceutics Compatibility studies The compatibility between D, T, Pa and HBV and between D, T, Pa and IPV have been established technically  and  clinically  via  licensed  formulations  containing  these  antigen  combinations  (Infanrix Hep B and Infanrix IPV).  The compatibility of all of the components in a single combination has also been demonstrated. Method of preparation Finished product

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In-process  control  consists  of  checking  pH  during  formulation.  During  filling,  homogeneity  of  the suspension  and  filled  volume  are  checked.  Environmental  monitoring  and  counting  of  non-viable particles is carried out. Humidity and temperature of the filling room is monitored.

The aseptic filling system is validated by media fill studies. The entire process is carried out in aseptic conditions that ensure that the final product is sterile.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The formulation process has been adequately described and validated. ELISA tests showed that, within the detection limits of the tests, all the antigens engaged in the formulation process are adsorbed on aluminium and remain bound to the carrier over time. The IPV component, which is not pre-adsorbed for  formulation, does adsorb on aluminium when mixed with the other antigens. Consistency of the production process is highlighted by the results of QC testing on routine production lots. GMP inspection status The adsorbed DT concentrate is prepared by Chiron-Behring (formerly Behringwerke), Postfach 1140, D-3550  Marburg  1,  Germany.  The  adsorbed  PT,  FHA,  PRN,  HBsAg  concentrates  and  IPV concentrates are prepared by SB  Biologicals at Rixensart, Belgium. Both sites have active manufacturing authorisations demonstrating compliance with GMP. During  its  meeting  on  19-21  October  1999,  the  CPMP  agreed  that  a  GMP  inspection  of  the manufacturing sites was not necessary. Control of starting materials D and T Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids are obtained by formaldehyde treatment of purified Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Clostridium tetani toxins. The toxoids are produced and controlled by Chiron-Behring, Marburg, Germany as previously described and approved for Infanrix HepB. PT, FHA and PRN The acellular pertussis vaccine components are obtained by extraction and purification from phase I Bordetella pertussis cultures, followed by irreversible detoxification of the pertussis, and treatment of FHA and PRN. The antigens are produced according to the methods approved for Infanrix HepB. They comply with the specification limits and are tested as approved for Infanrix HepB. The  pertussis  antigens  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the  Ph.  Eur.  monograph  1356  (1999 supplement). Elimination of adenylate cyclase, tracheal cytotoxin and dermonecrotic toxin was demonstrated for all the production scales validated. Absence of residual pertussis toxin is shown on each lot of the three antigens using the CHO cell test. The histamine sensitisation test in mice is not carried out at that stage but is performed on the finished product. Elimination of detoxifying agents and other reagents has been validated. Polysorbate 80 is the only quantifiable reagent that remains in the bulk antigens (approximately 40 µg/dose). HBV

<!-- image -->

The  surface  antigen  of  the  HBV  is  produced  by  culture  of  genetically-engineered  yeast  cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) which carry the gene coding for the major surface antigen of the HBV. The HBsAg is expressed in yeast cells and purified by several physico-chemical steps. The HBsAg assembles spontaneously, in the absence of chemical treatment, into spherical particles of 20 nm in average  diameter  containing  non-glycosylated  HBsAg  polypeptide  and  a  lipid  matrix  consisting

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mainly of phospholipids. Extensive tests have demonstrated that these particles display the characteristic properties of the natural HBsAg.

The final HBsAg bulk is tested for sterility, HBsAg identity, protein content and mercury content.

## IPV

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  inactivated  polio  vaccine  component  is  produced  on  the  Vero  cell  line  using  poliovirus  strains Mahoney (type 1), MEF-1 (type 2) and Saukett (type 3) as seed materials. The origin and history of the polio virus strains are known. Identity was confirmed by seroneutralisation, infectivity measured and microbiological purity demonstrated (tests for mycoplasma, bacteria, fungi and extraneous agents in animals). A test in guinea pigs for the detection of Marburg virus was also performed. Production and controls follow the requirements of WHO and Ph. Eur. Production is based on the seed lot principle: each production starts with inoculation of Vero cells expanded from one ampoule of the manufacturers working cell bank with one ampoule of the virus working seed lots. The seed lot and cell banking system has been adequately established and characterized. Production of the vaccine includes the following steps: preparation of cell substrate, virus inoculation, virus harvest, virus purification, virus inactivation, sterile filtration and pool of the monovalent bulks to obtain a trivalent concentrate. Results of in process and quality control tests indicate that the production process is adequate. Virus yield  after  culture  is  reproducible.  Purification  gives  a  product  of  consistent  quality  from  which proteins and VERO cell DNA are virtually eliminated. Inactivation  is  performed  in  standard  conditions  using  formaldehyde  and  effective  inactivation  is consistently achieved. For quality control, all the tests recommended by WHO and Ph. Eur. are performed. Control of intermediate products Intermediate  products  are  prepared  in  advance  and  a  shelf  life  is  claimed  for  them.  These  are  the adsorbed  DT  concentrate,  the  adsorbed  PT,  FHA  and  PRN  concentrates  and  the  trivalent  polio concentrate.  As  the  adsorbed  DT  concentrate  is  prepared  at  Chiron-Behring,  Marburg,  Germany, the product is released by them and re-tested at SB Biologicals prior to use. Each lot of DT concentrate is tested for aluminium, formaldehyde, sodium chloride and 2-phenoxyethanol  content,  for  pH  and  sterility,  for  potency  in  animals,  specific  toxicity  and  for absence of blood group substances. Batch analysis data show consistency of production and quality. The adsorbed Pa antigen concentrates are prepared at SB Biologicals and are in process tested for pH and sterility after adsorption and prior to use. The trivalent polio concentrate is tested in conformity with  the  Ph.  Eur.  requirement  for  absence  of  infectious  poliovirus,  sterility,  antigen  content  and polysorbate 80 content. Control of finished product

For the control of the finished product, tests can be performed either on the final bulk or on the final container. Several final container lots can be filled from the same final bulk. Therefore, tests, which involve  animals,  are  carried  out  on  the  final  bulk  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  use  of  animals. This principle is considered acceptable for Infanrix penta.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The following in vivo and in vitro tests are carried out:

- Specific toxicity test for diphtheria and tetanus performed according to Ph. Eur. 444.
- Potency for diphtheria and tetanus, performed according to Ph. Eur. requirements 2.2.7 and 2.2.9 respectively.
- Potency  for  pertussis  antigens  in  mice  (in-house  method  based  on  Ph.  Eur.  214,  supplement 1999).

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Test for residual pertussis toxin activity in mice (in-house method). · Potency for IPV component in rats (in house method). · In vitro potency assay for IPV component by ELISA (final bulk). · In vitro potency assay for HBV component. The other tests performed on each final bulk vaccine are pH, sterility, 2-phenoxyethanol content and formaldehyde  content.  Each  final  container  lot  is  tested  for  appearance,  identity  for  all  antigens, volume, pH, aluminium content and as indicated above, for HBV and IPV content (in vitro potency). Validation data for these methods are presented in the application. The specification limits and tests performed are in accordance with Ph. Eur. monograph 153 (1999 supplement) 'Vaccine for Human use', where applicable. Stability Stability tests on active substances Infanrix  penta  is  formulated  using  the  same  bulk  antigens  as  for  other  licensed  DTPa-based combination vaccines (Infanrix DTPa, Infanrix Hep B and Infanrix IPV). Therefore the applicant has made reference to the data generated on the above mentioned vaccines to support the shelf-life claimed for the active ingredients. The  stability  data  presented  in  the  application  support  all  agreed  storage  periods  for  the  active ingredients. Stability tests on the finished product Three  vaccine  lots  presented  as  mono-dose  vials  and  three  lots  presented  in  pre-filled  syringes  are included in the stability studies. The potency of the vaccine (Ph. Eur. assay for D, T &amp; Pa, mouse immunogenicity for HBV and rat immunogenicity  for  IPV),  through  the  whole  shelf-life,  meets  the  specifications  applied  to  routine quality control tests conducted before each vaccine lot release. After 24 and 36 months of storage, the vaccine  is  also  tested  for  appearance,  identity,  volume,  pH,  aluminium  content,  2-phenoxyethanol, formaldehyde,  endotoxin,  sterility,  general  safety,  D  and  T  specific  toxicity  and  residual  pertussis toxin  activity.  Antimicrobial  effectiveness  was  performed  after  12  months  and  will  be  done  after 36 months. 24  months  stability  studies  are  presented  in  the  dossier.  The  results  indicate  that  a  shelf  life  of 24 months with storage at +2°C to +8°C is acceptable. TSE risk assessment Comprehensive  information  on  the  origin  and  preparation  of  substances  of  animal  origin  used  in master and working seed lots and in routine production is included in the dossier. The applicant has switched  when  possible  from  materials  of  bovine  origin  to  materials  of  either  synthetic  or  nonruminant origin.

Animal derived material used in the manufacture of Infanrix penta complies with the requirements of the CPMP  Note for Guidance for minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy via medicinal products (Revision April 1999, CPMP/BWP/1230/98).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Conclusion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

Infanrix  penta  is  prepared  according  to  Good  Manufacturing  Practices  Rules  and  meets  the  World Health  Organisation  requirements  for  manufacture  of  biological  substances,  of  diphtheria,  tetanus, pertussis and combined vaccines, of hepatitis B vaccines made by recombinant DNA techniques and of inactivated poliomyelitis vaccines.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Starting  materials  of  known  origin  of  adequate  quality  are  used.  Consistency  of  production  is demonstrated. Infanrix penta complies with approved specifications and is tested according to Ph. Eur. methods, where applicable. Methods developed in house are validated. Packaging  materials  are  the  same  as  those  used  for  other  liquid  vaccines  manufactured  by  the applicant. Compatibility between the vaccine components has been shown. A shelf life of 24 months with storage at +2°C to +8°C has been accepted. Several outstanding quality issues will be addressed by the applicant on an ongoing (post approval) basis. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects Toxicology As  indicated  in  the  CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  Preclinical  Pharmacological  and  Toxicological Testing  of  Vaccines  (CPMP/SWP/465/95),  studies  on  reproductive  function,  embryo/foetal  and perinatal toxicity are not necessary  for paediatric  vaccines and  studies  on  mutagenicity  and carcinogenicity  are  normally  not  needed  for  vaccines.  The  absence  of  perinatal  toxicity  data  in  the application  is  thus  justified  on  the  basis  that  Infanrix  penta  is  intended  for  paediatric  use  only. The absence of mutagenicity and carcinogenicity data in the application is justified on the basis that the product is a vaccine and none of the active ingredients or excipients are novel or known to induce mutagenic or carcinogenic effects. The preclinical testing included a repeated dose toxicity study reflecting the clinical use of the vaccine. The  study  was  performed  using  Infanrix  penta  combined  with  an  additional  vaccine  component containing  adsorbed  Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  PRP-T  conjugate.  Since  the  addition  of  this component means that the study was conducted under more stringent conditions, the data generated can  be  accepted  as  being  applicable  to  Infanrix  penta.  The  vaccine  was  well  tolerated  and  no significant toxicological reaction was observed. Data were presented from in vivo safety studies for inactivated trivalent polioviruses demonstrating the safety of these components. Other  data,  which  provide  assurance  with  respect  to  the  safety  of  the  vaccine,  come  from  routine release in vivo tests. These are the specific toxicity testing for diphtheria and tetanus (Ph. Eur. 444) and the test for residual pertussis toxin activity (histamine sensitisation test). General safety (abnormal toxicity) testing is no longer required by Ph. Eur for routine release however, data were presented in the application. All lots met the requirements of this test.

In addition, the applicant addressed the question of potential toxicity and/or potential allergenicity for 2-phenoxyethanol,  which  is  contained  as  a  preservative  in  Infanrix  penta  (2.5mg/dose).  The  same preservative is used at the same concentration in other vaccines manufactured and commercialized by the  applicant.  The  results  of  a  comparison  of  the  adverse  event  profile  of  a  vaccine  containing 2-phenoxyethanol and another vaccine without 2-phenoxyethanol gave no reason for concern.

## Pharmacology (Immune response in animals)

The applicant only presents primary pharmacodynamic data. The absence of secondary pharmacodynamic data (safety pharmacology) is justified because all the vaccine components are well

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

known  and  are  described  in  either  Ph.  Eur.  or  WHO  monographs.  Furthermore,  any  undesirable pharmacological  activities  would  have  been  revealed  in  the  repeated  dose  toxicity  study,  the  safety studies for IPV or other routine toxicity tests.

It  is  indicated  in  the  CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  Preclinical  Pharmacological  and  Toxicological Testing of Vaccines that pharmacokinetics studies (e.g. determining serum concentrations of antigens) are normally not needed and this is considered to be the case for Infanrix penta.

The overall objective of the primary vaccination trials was to demonstrate safety and immunogenicity when  administered  as  a  three-dose  primary  series  in  infants.  Another  important  objective  was  to demonstrate  that  production  lots  (i.e.  lots  produced  at  commercial  scale)  of  the  vaccine  achieve consistent results with respect to reactogenicity and immunogenicity. A further objective was to show that  Infanrix  penta  can  be  administered,  simultaneously  at  separate  sites,  with  other  routinely

Medicinal product no longer authorised Potency  tests  for  diphtheria  and  for  tetanus  demonstrated  a  satisfactory  potency  response  for  the concerned components. A satisfactory immune response for the IPV component was demonstrated in immunogenicity tests. The vaccine elicited a satisfactory immune response for the HBV component in an in  vivo  immunogenicity  test.  For  the  pertussis  component,  the  immunogenicity  has  been demonstrated in mice. The protective capacity of the anti-pertussis antibodies was demonstrated using a lung clearance activity test in a Bordetella pertussis intranasal challenge model of infection in mice. Environmental Risk Assessment The applicant has indicated that although the hepatitis B component of the candidate vaccine is derived from a genetically modified yeast strain, the final vaccine preparation does not contain any genetically modified organisms as the HBsAg undergoes extensive purification following its extraction from the yeast. With respect to the risk associated with use of the vaccine, the applicant has stated that no drug substance  or  identifiable  metabolite  will  be  introduced  into  the  environment  in  quantities  that  merit concern. Conclusion on toxico-pharmacological aspects In conclusion, the applicant has performed adequate preclinical toxicity testing in accordance with the CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  Preclinical  Pharmacological  and  Toxicological  Testing  of  Vaccines. The  testing  shows  that  the  vaccine  was  well  tolerated  in  animals  with  no  significant  toxicological reaction or abnormality. The  applicant  has  provided  adequate  primary  pharmacodynamic  data  to  demonstrate  that  Infanrix penta elicits a satisfactory potency/immunogenicity response in animals with respect to all the vaccine components. The pharmacological properties  of  all  the  vaccine  components  have  been  shown  to  be satisfactory. No environmental  hazard  meriting  concern  has  been  identified  as  being  associated  with  use  of  this vaccine. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Overview of clinical documentation Complete reports of 24 clinical studies and 1 interim report are presented in this application: 16 primary vaccination studies and 9 booster trials. A  total  of  10,078  subjects  were  enrolled  in  the  primary  vaccination  studies,  of  which  7,549  were vaccinated with the candidate vaccineand  were  included  in the ATP  cohort  for  analysis of reactogenicity, with 2,403 subjects included in the ATP cohort for analysis of immunogenicity. Eleven different production lots of the candidate vaccine were used in the primary vaccination studies.

administered vaccines of infancy such as Hib vaccine.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

From  a  total  cohort  of  10,078  subjects  who  received  a  primary  vaccination  course  with  either  the candidate vaccine or other vaccines, 4,381 children were enrolled in 9 booster trials to receive either the  candidate  or  other  vaccines.  From  the  4,381  children  enrolled,  3658  were  primed  with  the candidate  vaccine  and  from  these  subjects,  714  received  the  candidate  vaccine  as  a  booster  dose. 693 were included in the ATP cohort for analysis of reactogenicity and 182 were included in the ATP cohort  for  analysis  of  immunogenicity.  Four  other  booster  options  have  been  examined  to  meet different national booster policies.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The overall objective of the booster vaccination trials conducted was to evaluate the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of the candidate vaccine when administered as a fourth dose in the second year of life.  Four  different  production  lots  of  the  candidate  vaccine  were  used  in  the  booster  vaccination studies.  A change that was made to the manufacturing process during the vaccine development was validated with an appropriate bridging study. The  procedures  used  in these studies were  in accordance  with  the Declaration The protocols were designed according to the Good Clinical Practice guidelines. Clinical efficacy The  immunogenicity  of  the  candidate  vaccine  was  evaluated  by  measuring  the  antibody  response elicited  by  each  vaccine  component.  All  assays  were  performed  blinded  to  vaccine  treatment  using validated procedures with adequate controls. Descriptive analysis of each vaccine group was provided for all studies. The statistical methodology used in most studies to evaluate the immunogenicity and reactogenicity of the candidate vaccine was equivalence or non inferiority testing based on a 90% CI. The pre-specified limits for non-inferiority were defined by the sponsor prior to analysis. Primary vaccination Feasibility studies Three feasibility studies were performed to evaluate the reactogenicity and immunogenicity profile of the candidate vaccine in a limited number of subjects. There was a low incidence of local and general reaction, and a good immunogenicity profile, warranting further development of the candidate vaccine. Comparison  of  the  candidate  vaccine  to  the  separate  administration  of  individual  vaccine components The  reactogenicity  and  immunogenicity  of  the  candidate  vaccine  with  a  licensed  Hib  vaccine administered  simultaneously  but  at  different  sites  was  evaluated  in  comparison  with  the  separate administration  of  individual  vaccine  components  (all  commercial  vaccines)  according  to  the  same schedule (2, 4 and 6 months) in an open randomized trial including 4 groups of 100 infants. There was no clinically  relevant  difference  in  tolerability  between  the  candidate  vaccine  and  the  other  vaccine regimen. In terms of seroprotection or vaccine response rates, the candidate vaccine was as immunogenic as the commercial  vaccines  administered  at  different  sites  for  all  antigens  other  than  FHA.  For  FHA  the response  rate  was  slightly  lower  and  the  upper  limit  of  the  90%  CI  for  vaccination  difference  was slightly exceeding the pre-defined limit of non-inferiority. The clinical expert stated that this difference is  probably  not  clinically  relevant.  In  terms  of  post-vaccination  GMTs  there  was  nostatistically significant  difference  between  the  candidate  vaccine  and  the  commercial  vaccine  administered separately.

## Lot to lot consistency studies

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Two series of lots were used in the evaluation.  The second series was studied due to a change in the manufacturing  process  during  vaccine  development.  The  lot-to-lot  consistency  in  First  Lot  Series (3 lots) was evaluated in 2 double blind studies. The 3 lots were consistent in terms of reactogenicity in both studies.  Due to the high rate of subjects eliminated from the ATP immunogenicity analysis in the second  trial,  no  conclusions  could  be  drawn.  In  the  first  study,  the  three  lots  were  shown  to  be consistent with respect to immunogenicity.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The lot-to-lot consistency of the Second Lot Series formulated according to the final manufacturing process  was  demonstrated  in  a  double  blind  study  in  which  infants  were  randomized  to  receive vaccines from 3 lots of the Second Lots Series. To address the bridging of the manufacturing processes a fourth group of subjects was randomized to receive vaccines from the First Lots Series. There was no difference  in  the  reactogenicity  profile  of  the  3  Second  Series  lots.  The  3  lots  were  highly immunogenic. The 3 vaccine lots were consistent in terms of seroprotection or vaccine response rates for all antigens (D, T, PT, HbsAg, polio 1, 2 and 3) except FHA and PRN. For both antigens, the upper 90%  CI  limit  exceeded  the  pre-specified  limit  for  equivalence.  However  there  was  an  imbalance between groups in the number of subjects with high titres of maternal antibodies. Analysis of the postvaccination titres in function of both vaccine lots and pre-vaccination titres showed that the 3 lots were equivalent  in  terms  of  post-vaccination  titres.  Therefore  the  observed  lot-to-lot  differences  in immunogenicity have no clinical significance. To compare the reactogenicity and the immunogenicity of the First Lot Series to that of the Second Lot Series, the results obtained with the Second Lots series were pooled. The overall incidence of solicited local and general symptoms was similar in pooled groups 1, 2 and 3 (Second Lots Series) and in group 4 (First Lots Series). The 2 series were statistically equivalent in terms of seroprotection and vaccine response rates for all antigens except PRN. For PRN an imbalance in prevaccination titres between pooled groups 1, 2 and 3 (Second  Lots  Series)  and  in  group  4  (First  Lots  Series)  was  found.  Correction  for  this  imbalance showed that the Second Lot Series is as immunogenic as the First Lot Series. Pivotal phase III study for the assessment of safety and reactogenicity In this open randomized study Infanrix penta was co-administered with 4 different commercial Hibcontaining vaccines at the ages of 3, 4 and 5 months. After 1600 subjects had been enrolled, the study was amended to include a control group (group 5) which received the applicant's DTPa vaccine, an Hib vaccine and OPV. A total of 5472 healthy infants were included. The primary endpoint was the percentage of subjects with solicited  grade  3 reactions  over  the  study  period.  The  results  show  that Infanrix penta is not inferior to the comparator vaccines. Primary vaccination studies according to various vaccination schedules The following schedules have been investigated: · 2, 3 and 4 months (2 studies) · 3,4 and 5 months (6 studies) · 3, 4 1 /2, and 6 months (2 studies) · 2, 4 and 6 months (4 studies) · 1 1 / 2 , 2 1 /2 and 3 1 /2 months with one dose of HBV vaccine at birth (EPI schedule) (1 study) · 3, 5, 11 months (1 study: evaluation of Infanrix penta mixed with Hib adsorbed)

Overall,  one  month  after  completion  of  the  primary  vaccination  schedule,  &gt;98%  of  subjects  had protective  titres  against  diphtheria  and  tetanus,  over  95%  had  protective  anti-HBs  titres,  &gt;94%  had neutralizing antibodies to each of the 3 polio antigens, 97% had a vaccine response to PT, 89% to PRN and 86% to FHA. A schedule effect was seen for vaccine response rates and geometric mean titres: values tended to be higher for schedules in which the first dose of vaccine was given later in infancy and in which the interval between doses is longer.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Protective  efficacy  can  thus  be  expected  for  all  vaccine  components  for  which  a  correlation  exists between antibody titres and protection (D, T, HBV, Poliovirus).

For  the  hepatitis  B  component,  the  schedule  effect  impacts  significantly  on  the  protective  efficacy when the EPI schedule (1 1 / 2 , 2 1 /2 and 3 1 /2 months), the most immunologically challenging schedule, is used.  In  a  study  conducted  with  another  candidate  vaccine  (Infanrix  penta  combined  before administration  with  a  Hib  vaccine  adsorbed  on  aluminium  phosphate),  the  rate  of  subjects  reaching hepatitis B antibody titres &gt;10 mIU/ml after vaccination was only 77.7%, whereas it reached &gt;95% if the infants had received one dose of HBV at birth. This implies that the candidate vaccine should not be  used  according  to  the  EPI  schedule  without  a  HBV  dose  given  at  birth.  This  is  stated  in  the appropriate section of the SPC.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised No  correlation between antibody titres and protection has been demonstrated for pertussis. The applicant supports the efficacy of the acellular pertussis component of the candidate vaccine by stating  that  this  component is  identical  to  that  of  other  authorised  vaccines  from  the  same  company (e.g.  Infanrix  HepB),  for  which  efficacy  has  been  demonstrated  in  appropriate  clinical  trials. It  can  therefore  be  expected  that  the  candidate  vaccine  will  be  efficacious.  The  applicant  provided further support of this hypothesis by referring to the pertussis surveillance study currently ongoing in Sweden. During the observation period from the start of the  pertussis  vaccination  in  1996  until  Q3 1998, a DTPa vaccine (Infanrix) from the applicant has been used almost exclusively according to a 3,5 and 12 months schedule. A dramatic drop of 80 to 90% in disease incidence was observed within 3 years. This provides strong evidence of the field effectiveness of the Pa antigens Although no issues specific to the Pa component of the candidate vaccine were identified, other than those  already  relevant  for  the  licensed  DTPa  vaccines,  the  impact  of  genetic  polymorphism  of circulating strains on the protection provided by the vaccine should be further monitored. Therefore, surveillance of the variant strains will be carried out. The 3, 5 and 11 months schedule was not investigated with this vaccine, but with another candidate vaccine  (Infanrix  penta  combined  before  administration  with  a  Hib  vaccine  adsorbed  on  aluminium phosphate).  In  that  study,  the  hexavalent  vaccine  was  not  inferior  to  separately  administered commercially available vaccines used as comparators. To support the use of data generated with the hexavalent vaccine, the applicant refers to 2 open randomized studies, in which the immunogenicity and safety of Infanrix penta administered with Hib vaccine in separate injections was compared to the hexavalent vaccine. The two vaccines were equivalent in terms of immunogenicity and reactogenicity. At the time of submission, only month 6 data (blood samples tested one month after the second dose) were reported in the registration file. As requested by the CPMP, the applicant provided further data on reactogenicity and immunogenicity obtained one month after the third vaccine dose, which confirmed the results obtained after 2 doses of vaccine. Persistence of antibodies up to booster vaccination Subjects from 7 primary vaccination trials participated in booster trials during the second year of life and had antibody titres measured before booster administration. One year after primary vaccination at 2, 4 and 6 months of age, over 96% of subjects had protective levels of antibodies against tetanus and the 3 serotypes of poliovirus. With respect to pertussis antigens, 75.8%, 95.2% and 100% of subjects were seropositive for anti-PT, anti-PRN and anti-FHA antibodies respectively. For antibodies against HBsAg, antibody persistence after vaccination with the candidate vaccine was in line with what was seen following vaccination with commercially available controls. The persistence of antibodies was related to the magnitude of the response after primary vaccination, which was lower after the most immunologically challenging schedule (primary vaccination at 2, 3 and 4 months).

## Booster vaccination

Five different booster options have been investigated as booster policies vary from country to country. In total, 2760 subjects primed with 3 doses of Infanrix penta were evaluable for safety of the booster

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

dose and 612 for booster immunogenicity. Among them, 693 subjects primed with 3 doses of Infanrix penta and receiving the same vaccine plus one of several Hib vaccines (administered at another site) as a  booster  were  evaluable  for  safety  and  182  for  immunogenicity.  There  was  a  marked  increase  in seroprotection / vaccine response rates and geometric mean titres post booster administration. The four other  booster  options  resulted  also  in  a  marked  increase  in  post-booster  antibody  titres  against  all components included in the vaccines.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Clinical safety The safety of the vaccine and the reactogenicity profile was evaluated on the day of the vaccination and  on  the  3  following  days  on  the  basis  of  a  checklist  of  solicited  local  and  general  signs  and symptoms. Non solicited symptoms could be recorded on the diary cards. The parents were instructed to  immediately  inform  the  investigators  of  the  occurrence  of  any  serious  adverse  event  occurring during the study period and investigators had to notify the sponsor within 24 hours. Primary vaccination In  one  large  comparative  trial,  local  reactogenicity  was  reported  in  up  to  50%  of  the  children  and systemic reactogenicity in more than 80% of infants, with similar incidences following the candidate vaccine  or  separately  administered  licensed  DTPa,  Hib  and  OPV  vaccines.  The  applicant  has emphasized that the reactogenicity data in the submitted dossier has been presented per subject rather than per dose which explains the relatively high rates. In  all  of  the  studies,  the  local  reactions  were  only  infrequently  severe  or  extensive.  Virtually  all symptoms  reported  resolved  within  the  follow-up  period,  and  all  recovered  without  sequelae.  In addition, as stated throughout each of the various sections, Infanrix penta was at least as well tolerated as the comparator vaccines. Restlessness  or  fussiness  appeared  to  be  the  most  commonly  reported  solicited  general  symptom. Reports  of  grade  3  symptoms  were  infrequent.  Virtually  all  symptoms  reported  resolved  within  the follow-up period, and all recovered without sequelae. The  most  common  unsolicited  events  reported  following  vaccination  were  bronchitis  (9.8%),  upper respiratory  tract  infection  (9.4%)  and  fever  (6.7%).  Only  1.8%  of  subjects  reported  unsolicited symptoms graded 3 in intensity. The incidence (percentage of subjects reporting at least one symptom) of unsolicited symptoms assessed with related, possibly related, probable or suspected relationship to vaccination was 15.9 %. Booster vaccination Reactogenicity with the candidate vaccine increased as compared with the reactogenicity reported for the same subjects during the primary vaccination. In particular, there was a concern relating to the increase of incidence of high fever in a substantial number of infants after booster vaccination. The applicant was therefore asked to address this safety concern in an oral explanation. In particular, the applicant was asked to present a full distribution and size of the complete population experiencing high fever above 39 ° C. The company was asked to show that this high fever induced by the Infanrix penta in a substantial number of children is not a matter of concern and has no influence on the vaccine acceptability.

The  applicant  performed  an  analysis  of  fever  after  4  different  boosters  (DTPw-IPV/Hib+HBV; Infanrix  penta+Hib,  DTPa-IPV/Hib+HBV;  DTPa-IPV/Hib).  The  data  were  pooled  regardless  of priming. Furthermore, the duration of fever above 37.5 ° C was compared following 4 different boosters (DTPa+Hib; DTPa/Hib; DTPa-IPV/Hib; Infanrix penta+Hib). From the data it can be concluded that there was a similar incidence and distribution of high fever and a similar duration of fever episodes in the various booster groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The incidence of high fever above 39 ° C observed with Infanrix penta after boosting was also discussed in  an  Ad  hoc  Expert  Meeting,  which  was  convened  at  request  of  the  CPMP  and  BWP  in  order  to clarify the advantages and risks of new combination vaccines presently under CPMP evaluation. It was concluded that concerns are still present with reference to high fever, even though such reactions have been observed also with other licensed combined vaccines. Therefore, an appropriate statement should be present in the SPC. Further detailed evaluation of such severe adverse reactions is needed with postmarketing studies based on well-defined protocols and conformity in data measurements across study centres.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Serious adverse events A  total  of  241  SAEs  were  reported  by  219  subjects  in  the  16  primary  vaccination  studies; 185  occurred  in  170  infants  receiving  Infanrix  penta.  Only  8  reports  were  considered  as  related, possibly or probably related to the vaccine. All resolved without medical intervention or sequelae. In the booster trials, all but one of the 31 reported SAEs were assessed as unrelated to vaccination; one SAE was considered as possibly related to vaccination and resolved without medical intervention and sequelae. Conclusions on clinical efficacy and safety The clinical investigation of the candidate vaccine followed a well conducted programme developed according to comprehensive design. Infanrix penta has shown to be immunogenic in defined conditions of use (specific primary and booster vaccination schedules). No interference was detected between the components. The safety profile of Infanrix penta has been acceptably documented, including the reactogenicity of a booster dose injected around one year after the primary immunization programme. Concerns relating to the incidence of high fever above 39 ° C are adequately addressed in the SPC. 5. Overall conclusions on quality, efficacy and safety and benefit/risk assessment The  quality  of  Infanrix  penta  has  been  acceptably  documented.  The  applicant  has  agreed  to  solve remaining quality issues by providing additional data on an ongoing basis after approval. Following  evaluation  of  the  toxicological/pharmacological  documentation,  it  is  concluded  that  the applicant has performed adequate preclinical toxicity testing in accordance with the CPMP Note for Guidance on Preclinical Pharmacological and Toxicological Testing of Vaccines. The testing shows that the vaccine was well tolerated in animals with no toxicological significant reaction or abnormality. The pharmacological properties of all the vaccine components were shown to be satisfactory. The  clinical  documentation  presented  by  the  applicant  conforms  to  ICH  guidelines  and  is  adequate from a GLP and GCP point of view. Infanrix penta was shown to be immunogenic when administered according  to  a  variety  of  vaccination  schedules.  Comprehensive  data  have  been  submitted  to characterise  the  reactogenicity  profile  of  Infanrix  penta.  The  observed  tendency  towards  higher reactogenicity of Infanrix penta (incidence of high fever after boosting) is not considered to be barrier to  a  positive  opinion  for  this  vaccine.  However,  the  applicant  is  asked  to  further  monitor  severe adverse reactions and their impact on vaccine acceptability. From the practical point of view, Infanrix penta is a further contribution to decrease the number of injections required for primary and booster vaccination in infants. The vaccine will assist in increasing vaccination compliance and in further simplifying vaccination schedules and programmes.

## Benefit/risk assessment

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Infanrix penta is favourable for the primary and booster vaccination of infants against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and poliomyelitis.