---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:40:32
document_pages: 23
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/ketek-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: ketek-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.8047958
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 09:15:12.858101
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## PRODUCT INFORMATION

| Tradename of the medicinal product:    | Ketek                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Applicant:                             | Aventis Pharma S.A. 20 avenue Raymond Aron F-92160 Antony France authorised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Active substance:                      | Telithromycin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| International Nonproprietary Name:     | Telithromycin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Pharmaco-therapeutic group (ATC Code): | Antibacterial for systemic use JO1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Therapeutic indications: Medicinal     | When prescribing Ketek, consideration should be given to official guidance on the appropriate use of antibacterial agents. Ketek is indicated for the treatment of the following infections: In patients of 18 years and older: - Community-acquired pneumonia, mild or moderate, - Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, - Acute sinusitis, - Tonsillitis/pharyngitis caused by Group A beta streptococci, as an alternative when beta lactam antibiotics are not appropriate . In patients of 12 to 18 years old: Tonsillitis/pharyngitis caused by Group A beta streptococci , as an alternative when beta lactam antibiotics are not appropriate product no longer |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

Telithromycin is a novel semi-synthetic antibacterial agent belonging to a new family of antibiotics, the ketolides, closely related to the well-known macrolide antibiotics. Telithromycin (HMR 3647) is indicated  for  oral  administration  for  treatment  of  community-acquired  pneumonia  (CAP),  and  for acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, acute sinusitis and tonsillitis/pharyngitis. The proposed dose is 800 mg once daily and the treatment duration is 5 days for all indications except CAP, for which a treatment duration of 7 to 10 days is suggested.

2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Telithromycin tablets are formulated as an immediate release tablet, with a film-coating. The product is  composed  of  excipients  commonly  used  in  this  type  of  product:  maize  starch);  microcrystalline cellulose); povidone K25); croscarmellose sodium (); magnesium stearate); lactose monohydrate);and a hypromellose-based film-coating (hypromellose 6 cp, macrogol 8000, talc, titanium dioxide, red iron oxide, yellow iron oxide). The tablets are presented in white opaque PVC/aluminium blister packs, in a variety of pack sizes: 10; 14; 20; 100 (hospital pack).  Two tablets (the recommended dose) are enclosed in each blister. Active substance Telithromycin is a semi-synthetic antibacterial agent synthesised from erythromycin. Flow diagrams of  the  synthesis  were  provided.  It  is  stated  that  none  of  the  suppliers  of  the  erythromycin  starting material uses any genetically modified organism (GMO).  The information regarding compliance of the active substance with the revised EMEA TSE Guideline  was provided Satisfactory  control  specifications  and  associated  method  validations  are  provided  for  the  starting materials and key intermediates and proof of structures have also been supplied for these.  Satisfactory specifications have also been provided for all reagents and solvents. Proof of the structure of telithromycin has been provided by means of elemental analysis, UV, circular dichroism, IR, NMR ( 1 H, 13 C), MS and X-ray diffraction.  Telithromycin is freely soluble in acidic solutions), its solubility decreasing with increasing pH. Telithromycin is a chiral molecule possessing 13 asymmetric centres The HPLC method used for the determination of related substances allows for separation of all the potential  impurities  arising  from  the  synthesis,  including  by-products  from  potential  side  reactions, and their separation from telithromycin. The limits proposed for the related substances have been adequately justified by toxicological studies and analysis data. Potential degradation products from stressed stability samples are presented. The specified impurities have all been adequately characterised. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The limits for residual solvents and total impurities have been justified.

All methods in the specification have been satisfactorily described and validated.

Batch analysis data confirm both compliance with the proposed specification and consistency between batches.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

It is worthy of note that although erythromycin (from which telithromycin is derived) is very sensitive to low pHs that telithromycin did not degrade when stressed in an acidic solution.

The claimed retest period () is supported.

## Other ingredients

All  excipients  in  the  product  comply  with  the  appropriate  specifications  and  monographs  of  the current  PhEur except for the iron oxides, which comply with the current monographs of the Ph.Fr. (and the NF). Regarding the TSE compliance of the excipients, the lactose originates from milk of US cows and the magnesium stearate used is of vegetable origin. Satisfactory control specifications and certificates are provided for the packaging materials. Product development and finished product An oral dosage form was chosen based on the properties of the active substance  In order to minimise the bitter taste of the active substance the tablets were film coated. The development work leading to the actual composition, as well as the manufacturing process, have been well described and the critical process parameters identified.  In-process controls have also been defined. Three full-scale batches were manufactured and used for method validation purposes. All methods have been satisfactorily described and validated. Batch analyses data have been provided for the three first full-scale and pilot-scale batches and these demonstrate both compliance with the proposed specifications and consistency of manufacture. Stability of the product The conclusions from the stability data provided are that there is no significant degradation, of the telithromycin  substance  itself,  or  as  part  of  the  tablet  formulation,  at  either  the  long-term  or accelerated  conditions  studied.  The  data  support  the  shelf-life  claimed  in  the  SPC,  with  no  special storage precautions, of 2 years. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

The pharmacological action of telithromycin involves inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis and is similar to that of macrolides, but differences on the molecular level may exist. Telithromycin interacts with the translation at the 23S ribosomal RNA level and some data also indicate that assembly of the 30S and 50S subunits may be impaired. The in  vitro antibacterial  profile of telithromycin has been characterised  using  standard  strains  and  clinical  isolates.  Antibacterial  activity,  as  indicated  by MIC50/90  values  against  important  pathogens  ranged  from  0.001  to  0.06  mg/l  for Streptococcus pneumoniae and Mycoplasma  pneumoniae to  0.5  and  4,  (8)  mg/l  for Haemophilus  influenzae ( parainfluenzae ).

Efficacy  of  telithromycin  has  been  extensively  studied  in  animal  models  of  local  and  disseminated experimental infections. These included models of infection, such as the intra-abdominal abscess in mouse  induced  by B.  fragilis ,  that  involve  microorganisms  not  directly  relevant  to  the  applied

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

indications. Comparison  with  several  macrolides  showed  that  superior  or  inferior  activity of telithromycin  as  reflected  in  MIC  values in  vitro and in  vivo, by  survival  rates,  or  reduction  of bacterial burden, was species and strain dependent. In mouse models of respiratory tract infection due to Haemophilus influenzae , telithromycin (50-100 mg/kg, bid) seemed more active than erythromycin, but  equipotent  to  clarithromycin,  and  slightly  less  efficacious  than  azithromycin.  In  a  guinea-pig model using Legionella  pneumoniae, telithromycin (10-15 mg/kg, ip)  seemed equipotent to erythromycin,  while  the  rate of reduction  of  lung bacterial  burden  seemed  slower  than  for azithromycin. In vivo studies in mouse suggested activity of telithromycin against some erythromycin and penicillin resistant strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae . In the mouse-thigh model, poor activity was evident against Staphylococcus aureus with a constitutive resistance mechanism. It is noteworthy that in some cases, and for unknown reasons, in vivo activity was not evident despite low MIC values. Data obtained in the mouse-thigh model were also taken to support AUC/MIC as the most relevant parameter for prediction of activity. Results are, however, inconclusive due to the small number of animals and infrequent sampling. The animal data support activity of telithromycin against relevant microorganisms,  but  are  generally  inconclusive  with  respect  to  prediction  of  active  dose  and appropriate dosing intervals.

Similarly to macrolides, telithromycin increased ADP50/90 values in rabbit Purkinje fibers and inhibited activity at HERG (cloned human potassium channels) and Kv1.5 (shaker channels) at concentrations of ≥ 10 µ M (8 mg/l). Early after-polarisations were seen only with telithromycin. Inhibition of HERG channels expressed in CHO cells was overall comparable with erythromycin and clarithromycin while the  major  human  metabolites,  RU76363  and  RU71094,  had  little  effect.  In  rabbit  Purkinje  fibers, synergistic effects were noted with sotalol, supraadditive effects with quinidine and additive effects during hypokalaemic conditions. Phosphodiesterase activity was inhibited by telithromycin (IC50 ≤ 10 µ M). In vivo studies in dogs showed changes in the ECG and a threshold plasma level of approx. 10 mg/l was identified. Taking protein binding into account, exposure margins to expected clinical levels are  approx.  10x  based  on  a  free  plasma  concentration  of  0.6  mg/l  in  humans.  Both  preclinical  and clinical  studies  indicate  that  telithromycin  has  cardiovascular  effects  comparable  with  those  of clarithromycin. The QT effects are considered in appropriate sections of the SPC.

Pharmacokinetics Most of the species used in toxicology studies were characterised pharmacokinetically. Telithromycin exhibited non-linear pharmacokinetics with greater than dose-proportional increases in Cmax and AUC after repeated doses, particularly at high doses. Usually an increase in systemic exposure with time was  also  observed.  Absorption  was  rapid  and  studies  in  rat  indicated  ileum  as  the  major  site  of absorption and an involvement of p-glycoprotein. In mouse, maximum levels in plasma were reached at 1.5 hours, but at 0.25 hours in rat and dog, compared with 1 hour in humans. The half-life in plasma ranged  from  1.2  hours  in  mouse  to  over  2  hours  in  dog.  Protein  binding  ranged  from  36  to  90%, depending on species and concentration. In rats, a wide distribution, except to the CNS, was evident and distribution was overall similar in the pregnant and non-pregnant rat. In the pigmented rat, high label was detected in the uveal tract, while levels were low in black skin. Telithromycin is extensively metabolised with 5 to 19 metabolites detected in plasma, urine and faeces in different species. There were differences in metabolism, but all human metabolites were represented in other species and these can be considered as valid models. The major human metabolite, RU76363 was present only at low levels in rat and dog. In rat, the major pathway involves CYP3A1/3A2 and in humans CYP3A4/3A5. The  main  route  of  excretion  was  faecal,  with  10  to  17%  excreted  in  urine  in  rats.  Unchanged compound accounted for the major part. Toxicology The toxicity of telithromycin with respect to general, reproductive and genetic effects was investigated in mouse, rat, dog, monkey and rabbit. The studies were in compliance with relevant guidelines and toxicokinetic data was available for pivotal studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

CPMP/1014/01 5/23 Effects  of  single  doses  of  telithromycin  on  other  major  organ  systems: renal,  digestive,  respiratory, and genital systems were, overall, unremarkable. In rats, gastric acid secretion was inhibited at high

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

doses and the compound was weakly emetic in dogs but did not cause diarrhoea. In contrast, emesis and diarrhoea were commonly seen in dogs treated with azithromycin.

Telithromycin was shown to inhibit the H2 receptor and had some inhibitory activity at the M1 and M2 receptors  and  these  interactions  were  suggested  to  be  involved  in  the  potentiation  of  effects  in combination with yohimbine, oxotremorine, tacrine and carbachol that resulted in mortalities in mouse studies.  Telithromycin  is  also  an  inhibitor  of  thromboxane  synthetase  (IC50=3 µ M). In  vitro antiaggregatory activity was potentiated by aspirin, but coadministration in vivo in rabbits did not indicate any anti-aggregatory interactions, possibly due to differences in metabolism. In vitro histamine release was  not  significantly  affected  by  telithromycin,  but  histamine  release  was  increased  in  dogs  after intravenous infusion and observations in other in  vivo studies indicated interactions with histamine. The magnitude of these effects appeared modest and the clinical relevance is likely limited.

The potential for reproduction toxicity of telithromycin was investigated in rat and rabbit. In rat, high doses were related to a slight decrease in male and female fertility indices and daily sperm production. Embryofetal development was studied in rat and in two strains of rabbit at doses up to 300 mg/kg and 180  mg/kg,  respectively.  In  rabbit  (NZW),  and  to  some  extent  in  rat,  a  pronounced  decrease  in systemic exposure was evident from day 6 to day 18, particularly at the high dose, and margins of exposure at the identified no effect levels are not readily apparent. In rat, 5 of 310 fetuses examined at the high dose, but none in other groups, had malformations (protruding tongue and acaudate). This was considered related to maternal toxicity, but the relationship to toxicity is not clear. Treated groups in  the  rabbit  study  (NZW)  also  exhibited  an  increased  incidence  of  malformations  (absence  of tail/anus, uni/bilateral absence of kidney/ureter), while no increase in malformations was recorded in the  Himalayan rabbit study. The lack of data on the disposition of telithromycin in rabbits and the contradictory  results  in  different  strains  made  an  assessment  of  the  potential  for  teratogenic  effects uncertain.  Supplementary  data  showed  that  the  difference  in  teratogenic  potential  in  the  two  rabbit strains  was  likely  not  directly  related  to  differences  in  metabolism.  Also  a  direct  relationship  to maternal toxicity was not clear. The malformations are also found in historical control data, however, taken together, studies on the potential for adverse effects on foetal development are inconclusive and results are equivocal. The sections 4.6 and 5.3 of the SPC are rephrased to reflect the data. Teratogenic effects (cleft palate) of clarithromycin have been reported in mouse, but the relevance of this finding is

Toxicity of telithromycin after single doses was low, with lethal oral doses over 1000 mg/kg in mouse and rat. Deaths at high doses were considered coupled to an effect on the circulatory system. Toxicity after  repeated  doses  was  primarily  manifested  as  changes  in  liver  enzyme  activities  related  to histopathological changes such as single cell necrosis and hepatocellular hypertrophy. These effects were seen in rats and dogs, but not in a 1-month monkey study. Electron microscopy of livers showed that  bile  duct  cells  were  primarily  affected  in  rats,  but  hepatocytes  in  dogs,  and  that  azithromycin caused similar changes in rats. Increased caecum weights were noted in rat studies and is an effect seen with several macrolides. Telithromycin induced phospholipidosis in lung, bile duct and lymph nodes  in  rat  and  dog,  this  has  also  been  reported  with  macrolides.  Signs  of  nephrotoxicity  were reported in 15 and 30-day dog studies at doses of 150 mg/kg or higher. Special toxicity studies showed that single oral doses of telithromycin did not aggravate renal failure in rat induced by glycerol and furosemide. In albino rats, cataracts developed at the end of 6 months treatment. Data are consistent with this being a strain-specific effect. No ocular effects were seen in a 6-month study in pigmented rats and ERG examinations in monkey after 1 months dosing were not indicative of any significant effects on parameters monitored. In dogs given 150 mg/kg, changes occurred in the pigmentation of the tapetum lucidum, a structure not found in human. In several rat studies, decreases in APTT and PT values  were  noted  while  increases  in  fibrinogen  were  reported  in  rats  and  dogs.  No  statistically significant  effects  of  oral  doses  of  150  mg/kg  of  telithromycin  on  Brainstem  Evocated  Responses Audiometry were reported in a 1-month ototoxicity study in rats  with  kanamycin  as  the  'positive' control.  The  sensitivity  of  this  study  would  have  improved  if  erythromycin,  known  for  its  ototoxic potential, had also been included in the study. Overall,  the  general  toxic  profile  of  telithromycin  was  qualitatively  similar  to  that  seen  with macrolides.  At  the  no-effect  levels,  systemic  exposure  in  rat  studies  was ∼ 1x  the  expected  clinical exposure, approx. 4-8x in dog, and 1-2x in monkey and margins of exposure are, thus, modest. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

unknown. Telithromycin is excreted in milk of lactating animals. In the peripostnatal study in rats, parental treatment  with  telithromycin  caused  an  initial  slight decrease  in  pup  viabilility that subsequently  was  comparable  with  control  values  and  physical  and  mental  development  of  pups seemed unaffected.

Telithromycin was tested in the standard battery of genotoxicity tests that included some studies with monkey  S9  to  provide  exposure  to  the  major  human  metabolite,  which  is  present  only  in  small amounts in rat. Overall, negative results were reported. The tests using monkey S9 are equivocal in that  the  positive  control  cyclophosphamide  did  not  give  any  significant  increase  in  mutation frequency. Separate studies with the main human metabolites RU76363 and RU71094 were, however, negative.

Under experimental conditions,  ketolides  lack  the  potential  to  induce  resistance  to  erythromycin  in S.pneumoniae, S.aureus, S.pyogenes (and E.faecalis ),  in  contrast to macrolides and azithromycin. In erythromycin resistant S.pneumoniae, six to eight transfers in the presence of telithromycin are needed to select resistance against the ketolide. In vitro studies showed that highly erythromycin resistant S. pyogenes (ermB and mefA genes) also exhibited resistance to telithromycin and telithromycin is, thus, not a drug of choice in the treatment of erythromycin resistant S. pyogenes .

To conclude, the preclinical studies with telithromycin have provided an adequate characterisation of the pharmacology and toxicology of the compound. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Erythromycin  A  is  a  therapeutic  alternative  in  respiratory  tract  infections  especially  in  penicillin allergy and in infections caused by atypical agents. Newer derivatives such as clarithromycin exhibit improved bioavailability and disposition but the antibacterial activity is nevertheless reduced at a low pH, and cross-resistance between the macrolides occurs. In ketolides, the 14-membered macrolactone ring is retained, but the α L -Cladinose sugar moiety in position 3 has been replaced by a ketone group, conferring (together with the C11-C12 carbamate side chain) new in vitro properties. Ketolides are less affected by a low pH than the newer macrolides. Telithromycin is more active than clarithromycin against both macrolide-susceptible and most macrolide-resistant gram-positive cocci, including those harbouring an inducible type of resistance, without inducing such resistance by itself. Like macrolides in general, telithromycin inhibits protein synthesis in bacteria by acting on ribosomes, but  it  has  a  higher  affinity  for  the  50S  ribosomal  subunit  than  erythromycin,  interacts  with  two domains,V and II of 23S rRNA in the 50S ribosomal subunit, and blocks the protein assembly of both the 50S and 30S ribosomal subunits. Antibacterial activity: The antibacterial spectrum includes the main gram positive pathogens S.pneumoniae, S.pyogenes and S.aureus and  the  gram  negative  RTI pathogens H.influenzae, H. parainfluenzae and M. catharralis, which, generally, have higher MICs . Atypical organisms such as Chlamydia spp, Mycoplasma spp and Legionella spp are also susceptible. In addition, there is activity against anaerobic gram positive cocci  and  bacilli.  Macrolide  antibiotics  are  generally  merely  bacteriostatic,  but  telithromycin  is reported  to  possess  bactericidal  activity,  as  shown  in  kill-kinetic  studies  versus S.pneumoniae , irrespective of antibiotic susceptibility. It is mainly bacteriostatic against S.pyogenes. A postantibiotic effect has been demonstrated against the major respiratory pathogens. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Telithromycin has been shown to be active in murine septicaemia and respiratory infection models against  both  erythromycin  susceptible  and  erythromycin  resistant  pneumococci,  as  well  as  against H.influenzae .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## PK/PD relationship:

The dosage 800 mg once daily results in peak plasma concentrations of approximately 2 mg/l at steady state, with through levels of 0.07 mg/l (range 0.015 to 0.259 mg/l). The higher levels obtained at the site  of  infection  would  then  exceed  the  MIC 90 of  the  targeted  respiratory  pathogens,  as  the  ratio tissue/plasma at 24 h is 1383 in granulocytes and 540 in alveolar macrophages, and 14.3 and 13.1 in epithelial  lining  fluid  and  tonsils,  respectively.  The  applicant  claims  that  the  relationship  between telithromycin plasma, tissue and WBC levels is a more accurate predictor of efficacy than classical dose comparison studies. It is, however, unclear whether all of the tissue-bound antibiotic is bioactive, and  if  moderately  susceptible  hematogenously  disseminated  organisms  are  exposed  to  sufficient amounts of antibiotic. MIC90 for the common pathogen H.influenzae is  up to 4 mg/l, and this serum concentration is not achieved with the recommended dosing regimen. Even more susceptible strains, with a MIC of 1 mg/l, will not be exposed to telithromycin serum concentrations above 1 mg/l for more than 1/8 of the dosing interval. Therefore, the breakpoint for S ≤ 0.5 mg/l is now suggested for H. influenzae, and most of the strains are, thus, considered intermediately susceptible (I≥ 1 mg/l). The choice of dosage appears to have been influenced by preclinical studies of the PK/PD of telithromycin against S.pneumoniae and S.aureus in the mouse thigh-infection model. In  the  preclinical  model,  the  24h  AUC/MIC  was  found  to  be  the  best  parameter  determining  the efficacy of telithromycin. Corresponding data are not available from human studies, and a population PK/PD analysis performed on patients from the open CAP study supplied data that could be equally interpretative of Peak/MIC as the most relevant parameter. A reduction of the duration of treatment from the traditional 7-10 days to 5 days in most RTIs was thought to be supported by the high antibacterial activity, and the high tissue concentrations achieved. In  CAP,  however,  the  documentation  was  considered  insufficient  to  support  a  treatment  duration shorter than 7-10 days. Pharmacokinetics A  total  of  682  subjects  participated  in  a  clinical  pharmacology  programme  of  31  studies.  The pharmacokinetics of telithromycin has been well studied and the documentation was well organised. Telithromycin was studied at oral doses of 50 to 2400 mg and intravenous doses of 120 to 2000 mg. Most of the clinical  pharmacokinetic  studies in  patients  at  risk,  tissue  penetration  studies  and  drug interaction studies were conducted with the proposed oral dose of 800 mg telithromycin, given as 2 x 400mg tablets, once a day. Telithromycin is fairly rapidly and almost completely absorbed. There is a substantial first pass effect and the bioavailability of a single dose of 800 mg is 57%. A mean maximum plasma concentration of about 2 mg/l is reached within 1-3 hours after dose during once daily dosing of 800 mg. Food does not affect the rate or extent of absorption. Telithromycin  displays  a  triexponential  decay  from  plasma  after  intravenous  administration  with  a rapid distribution half-life of 0.17 h. The volume of distribution, Vss, is large, 2.91 ± 1.0 L/kg, and telithromycin shows good penetration into respiratory tissues and white blood cells. In vitro protein binding is about 70%. Telithromycin  displays  non-linear  pharmacokinetics with a  more  than  proportional  increase  in  Cmax and  AUC, reduced clearance and increased elimination  half-life  as  the  dose  is  increased.  The  nonlinearity seems to be due to saturation of the metabolism. At an intravenous dose of 400 mg, clearance was 57.7±5 l/h. The main elimination half-life was about 2-3 h. There is a terminal half-life of about 10 h, accounting for a small proportion of the AUC. MRT was estimated to be 3.66 h. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Telithromycin  is  mainly  eliminated  by  metabolism.  About  20-23%  of  an  i.v.  dose  is  excreted unchanged  in  urine  and  about  12%  unchanged  in  faeces.  Renal  clearance  seems  generally  to  be independent of dose and is about 12 l/h.  Renal excretion of telithromycin involves both filtration and active tubular secretion. After oral administration, excretion is primarily in faeces, 76%. About 17% of the  dose  was  excreted  in  urine.  In  faeces,  unchanged  telithromycin  represented  28.7  %  of  faecal excretion  and  20%  of  the  administered  dose.  In  urine,  unchanged  telithromycin  represented  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

majority of the radioactivity (69.1% of the radioactivity excreted in urine, corresponding to 12 % of the administered dose). In urine, faeces and plasma, a total of 19 metabolites were present. The plasma concentration and excretion in urine and faeces of the four main metabolites have been determined. Telithromycin is the main circulatory compound in plasma, representing 56.7% of the total AUC of radioactivity. The main metabolite identified in plasma, RU 76363, an alcohol resulting from the loss of  aryl  rings,  represented  7.6  %  of  the  AUC  of  radioactivity.  The  other  three  metabolites  each represented less than 2 % of the AUC of radioactivity. RU 76363 is further metabolised to RU 78849, the  main  metabolite  identified  in  faeces.  The  metabolites  are  not  likely  to  contribute  to  the bacteriological efficacy of telithromycin. RU 76363 is not formed by human liver microsomes, is not produced  by  CYP  or  other  membrane  bound  enymes,  but  may  be  produced  by  soluble  drugmetabolizing enzymes in the liver. Thus, the main metabolic pathway is not CYP dependent. CYP3A4 is  the  major  enzyme involved in the production of other minor metabolites of telithromycin. Minor contribution by CYP1A, 2A6 and 2B6 is possible.

Other in vivo interaction studies suggest that telithromycin has no effect on CYP2C9. AUC of digoxin increased  by  37%  and  Cmax  by  73%  on  coadministration  with  telithromycin,  presumably  through inhibition of gastrointestinal Eubacterium lentum. Also, renal clearance of digoxin increased by 27%. This  could  possibly  be  caused  by  an  induction  of  P-gp.  However,  the  effect  on  P-gp  seems  to  be moderate  (15-20%)  and  is  probably  of  limited  clinical  relevance.  Telithromycin  had  no  clinically relevant effect on the pharmacokinetics of oral contraceptives or warfarin. According to data from in vitro studies , telithromycin has no or limited effect on CYP1A , 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19 and 2E1.

Concomitant medication with 3A4 inhibitors resulted in up to 2-fold increase in systemic exposure of telithromycin. The increased exposure was within a well-tolerated range. It is therefore not necessary to  change  the  telithromycin  dose  during  concomitant  medication  with  CYP3A4  inhibitors.  No interaction  studies  have  been  performed  with  CYP3A4  inducers.  Concomitant  administration  of CYP3A4  inducers  could  lead  to  a  major  reduction  in  telithromycin  exposure.  The  Applicant  is presently conducting an interaction study with CYP3A4 inducers, but results are not yet available. Meanwhile, treatment with Ketek should be avoided during and 2 weeks after treatment with CYP3A4 inducers. Ranitidine administered 1 h before telithromycin caused a mild but not clinically relevant reduction in telithromycin Cmax and AUC, while Maalox (Al(OH)3 and Mg(OH)2) had no effect on telithromycin pharmacokinetics. As telithromycin and its metabolites are excreted in faeces, drugs that affect  the  biliary  excretion  could  possibly  interact  with  the  excretion  of  telithromycin  and  its metabolites. In vitro data showed that telithromycin is an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. In vivo studies with simvastatin, midazolam and cisapride have demonstrated a potent inhibition of intestinal CYP3A4 and a  moderate  inhibition  of  hepatic  CYP3A4.  The  data  indicate  that  the  inhibition  potential  of telithromycin is similar to that of clarithromycin, and is slightly higher than that for erythromycin.. The  inhibition  potential  is,  however,  lower  than  that  for  itraconazole  and  ketokonazole.  Major interaction with CYP3A4 substrates with low bioavailability is expected, while 3A4 substrates with almost complete bioavailability will be less affected. As it will be difficult to predict the extent of interaction for specific drugs, concomitant medication with drugs metabolised by CYP3A4 should be avoided during telithromycin treatment unless plasma concentrations, effect or adverse events can be closely monitored and relevant dose adjustments can be made. An in  vivo interaction  study  with  the  CYP2D6  substrate  paroxetine  has  been  performed.  However, paroxetine is itself a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6 and is not an ideal substrate to use to evaluate interaction potential with CYP2D6. These data can not be used to support a lack of interaction with CYP2D6. Also, the Ki for 3A4 inhibition (58 µM) was in the same range as that for 2D6 (46 µM) and telithromycin caused a 2.2-fold increase in midazolam AUC (i.v. administration). A similar inhibition of 2D6 as of hepatic 3A4 cannot be ruled out. The applicant has committed to further evaluate  the interaction potential with CYP2D6. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No proper evaluation of the relationship between plasma concentration and effect in humans has been performed. In a population PK/PD  analysis, the covariate influence of Cmax, AUC,  trough concentration, Peak/MIC, AUC/MIC and time over MIC (and a number of demographic covariates) on

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

clinical  and  bacteriological  outcome,  respectively,  was  studied  using  a  logistic model.  The analysis has contributed little to the understanding of the concentration effect relationship for telithromycin. No firm conclusions can be drawn from this analysis.

The  pharmacokinetics  of  telithromycin  in  subjects  with  CAP  is  comparable  with  that  in  normal subjects. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, the results suggested that elderly subjects, subjects with decreased creatinine clearance, and subjects with severe illness at pre-dose tended to have higher telithromycin plasma concentrations, while increased body surface area (&gt;2.1 m 2 )  and smoking was associated with lower telithromycin plasma concentrations. The magnitude of the covariate influence was small and considered to be of limited clinical relevance.

•

- Two studies in acute sinusitis (3002 and 3005).

The pharmacokinetic parameters observed in adolescents aged 12 to 17 years were similar to those observed in healthy male volunteers aged 18 to 40 years. There was a tendency towards an increased exposure  in  patients  of  the  lower  weight  range  (&lt;  60  kg).  Moreover,  there  was  a  difference  in pharmacokinetics between male and female adolescents, with females having about 50% higher AUC and more than twice as high C24h. The difference persisted when the parameters were normalised to body surface area (BSA). However, all data were within the range observed in adults. Influence of renal and hepatic impairment on telithromycin pharmacokinetics was studied after single dose  administration  and  showed  a  50%  increase  in  AUC  and  increased  inter-subject  variability  in patients  with  mild  to  severe  renal  impairment.  Based  on  estimation  of  exposure  at steady  state  and safety analysis of patients included in phase III studies it has been concluded that dosage adjustment is not required in renal impairment except in subjects with severe renal impairment( creatinine clearance &lt; 30 ml/min) where the dose should be halved. AUCs were similar between patients with hepatic impairment and control subjects, Cmax was reduced, C24h increased 2-fold and main and terminal half-lives were prolonged. Thus, increased accumulation could  be  expected.  Steady  state  concentrations  cannot  be  predicted  from  single  dose  data  and telithromycin should be used with caution in liver impairment. The pharmacokinetics was similar between male and female subjects, while elderly subjects had up to twice the exposure of young subjects. The pharmacokinetics has not been studied in children below the  age  of  12  years.  Dose  adjustment  is  not  recommended  in  any  special  population,  although  an increased exposure is observed in the elderly, in renal impairment and during concomitant medication with CYP3A4 inhibitors. This is acceptable, as the increase was not more than two-fold and as the increased exposure is considered to be within a tolerable range. Overall,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  pharmacokinetic  documentation  of  telithromycin  is  sufficient. The results from the ongoing interaction study with rifampicin should be provided when available and further  evaluation  of  the  interaction  potential  with  CYP2D6  substrates  should  be  performed  as  a postmarketing commitment. Clinical efficacy The phase III documentation submitted consists of 10 clinical trials (4155 subjects were randomised, and 2485 received telithromycin.) conducted by Hoechst Marion Roussel between 1997 and 1999 in the following indications: Four trials in community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) (Studies 3000, 3001, 3006 and 3009). Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Two trials in acute bacterial exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (AECB) (3003 and 3007).
- Two  trials  in  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  caused  by  group  A  beta-hemolytic  streptococci  (GABHS) (3004 and 3008). The clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP standards and agreed international medical ethics.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Diagnosis criteria and analysis sets are given in tables 1-2.

Table 1.        Diagnosis                                             Entry criteria

| Community acquired pneumonia (CAP)              | At least 2 of the following: Cough, purulent sputum, positive auscultation, dyspnoea, fever (>38˚ orally, >38.5˚ tympanically, or >39˚ rectally), WBC>10.000 or > 15% immature neutrophils and positive chest X-ray                                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (AECB) | Documented history of chronic bronchitis, with symptoms for >2 consecutive years and most days in a consecutive 3-months period, and with a clinical diagnosis of AECB based on at least two (three) of the following clinical signs and symptoms of AECB: Increased cough/dyspnoea; increased sputum volume; increased sputum purulence (Anthonisen criteria)  |
| Acute (maxillary) sinusitis                     | At least one sign/symptom that had lasted for less than 28 days: Purulent discharge, maxillary tenderness/toothache, maxillary pain at percussion, facial pain/pressure, nasal congestion and abnormal maxillary sinus X- ray showing presence of air/fluid level and/or total sinus opacity (+amendment in controlled study: > 6 mmthickening of sinus mucosa) |
| Acute tonsillitis/pharyngitis                   | Clinical tonsillitis or pharyngitis with sore throat combined with one or more of the following: Fever, erythema or oedema of the uvula, pharynx or tonsils, exudate, cervical lymphadenopathy and positive streptococcal antigen test or a positive throat culture                                                                                             |

| Table 2.        | Analysis populations                                                                                                                                           |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Population MITT | Definition All subjects with clinical signs and symptoms of the disease who received at least one dose of study medication, as treated no                      |
| BmITT           | All mITT subjects with a causative pathogen isolated at pretherapy/entry                                                                                       |
| PPc             | All mITT subjects excluding those with major protocol violations                                                                                               |
| PPb *           | All PPc subjects who had a causative pathogen isolated at pretherapy/entry                                                                                     |
| Safety          | All subjects who received at least one dose of study medication, with at least one postbaseline safety assessment, (clinical or laboratory) as treated product |

* PP in Studies 3004 and 3008 where bacteriological outcome was the primary analysis of efficacy Subjects  were  included  in  the  per-protocol  population  if  they  had  no  predefined  major  protocol violations. The mITT population was selected to avoid inclusion of subjects with clear misdiagnoses. Each study included five visits: pretherapy/entry, on-therapy, end of therapy, posttherapy/test of cure (TOC)  and  late  posttherapy.  Efficacy  was  analysed  at  the  two  last  visits.  All  subjects  with indeterminate response were included as failures in the mITT population and as unsatisfactory in the bmITT population. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The diagnosis of infection was clinical, with radiological confirmation in the CAP and acute sinusitis studies.  Samples  for  bacteriological  diagnosis  were  taken  before  treatment  when  possible  in  all studies,  and  sinus  puncture  cultures  were  performed  on  all  subjects  in  Study  3002  and  at  selected centres  in  Study  3005.  In  the  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  studies,  multiple  throat  swabs  were  performed. Susceptibility  to  telithromycin  was  tested  at  the  investigator's  local  laboratory    and  retested  in  a central laboratory. Overall, the susceptibility of major pathogens to telithromycin was similar for local (by disk diffusion method) and central (MIC determination) laboratories. Serologic criteria considered

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

diagnostic for atypical pathogens in CAP were determined for C. pneumoniae , M. pneumoniae , and L. pneumophila.

Efficacy was evaluated in terms of both clinical and bacteriological response. Clinical efficacy was based  on  signs  and  symptoms,  and  also  on  radiological  findings  in  CAP  and  acute  sinusitis.  The clinical  response  was  categorised  as  cure  or  failure.  Bacteriological  response  by  pathogen  and  by subject was assessed. Efficacy was evaluated by the investigator as specified, and bacteriological data were compiled by computer and verified manually.

<!-- image -->

The primary analysis of efficacy was the per protocol analysis at posttherapy/TOC of clinical outcome (PPc population) in studies 3000, 3001, 3002, 3003, 3005, 3006, 3007 and 3009, and the per protocol analysis of bacteriological outcome (PP population) in studies 3004 and 3008. Other analyses performed included per protocol analyses of clinical and bacteriological outcome at late posttherapy, and modified intent-to-treat (mITT and bmITT) analyses of clinical and bacteriological outcome at posttherapy/TOC and late posttherapy. A  two-sided  95%  confidence  interval  (CI)  was  calculated  for  the  difference  in  cure  rate  between telithromycin and comparator. A non-inferiority margin of -15% was chosen for the CAP, AECB and sinusitis  studies,  and  -  10%  in  the  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  studies.  Pre-specification  of  non-inferiority margin, confidence level, power etc. is essential in the planning of a clinical trial. However, failure to meet the non-inferiority margin used in the sample size calculation does not necessarily invalidate a study. This must always be a matter of regulatory and clinical judgement taking internal as well as external data into account. Community Aquired Pneumonia (CAP) Four  studies  were  performed  in  patients  with  CAP.  These  were  mostly  outpatients  requiring  oral therapy. Study 3000 was open and uncontrolled and enrolled hospitalised and, possibly more severely ill patients. In addition to assessment  of efficacy and  safety, this study used  a population pharmacokinetic approach to investigate the relationship between pharmacokinetics and efficacy. The  other studies were  double-blind, randomised, parallel group and active controlled.  The telithromycin dose was 800 mg once daily for 10 days in Studies 3001 and 3006, and for 7 to 10 days in Studies 3000 and 3009. The comparator regimen was amoxicillin 1,000 mg three times daily for 10 days in Study 3001, clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily for 10 days in Study 3006, and trovafloxacin 200 mg once daily for 7 to 10 days in Study 3009. A total of 1,341 patients were randomised, and 1,340 treated in the four CAP studies. The median duration of treatment was 10 days (PPc population). In the PPc population, 578 of 598 subjects received telithromycin for at least 7 days. 57 patients were treated for at least 7 but less than 10 days. Results There  were  considerable  differences  between the  CAP  studies  as  regards  prognostic  factors/risk factors. In studies 3006 and 3009, only about 25% of the patients had fever &gt;39˚C at inclusion, and less than half had leukocytosis. In contrast, 3/4 of patients in study 3001 were febrile, 60% had leukocytosis, and  pneumococcal  bacteraemia  was  more  common.  None  of  the  pneumococcal  isolates  exhibited telithromycin  resistance,  and  the  overall  resistance  pattern  was  surprisingly  benign.  Resistance  in H.influenzae and M.catharralis was, however, not uncommon. The applicant does not comment on the atypical  organisms detected by serology and PCR, but in practice, all respiratory  mycoplasmal and chlamydial strains are regarded as susceptible. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  atypical  infections  diagnosed  using  highly  specific  criteria  (66  telithromycin-treated  and  42 comparator-treated)  or  less  stringent  criteria  (346  versus  285)  could  explain  the  difference  in  risk factors found between study 3001 and studies 3006 and 3009. It is well known that leukocytosis and high fever are characteristic features in pneumococcal pneumonia, in contrast to atypical pneumonias, where moderate fever and absence of leucocytosis is common.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Outcome data are given in Table 3.

|                                    | outcome (PPc) 3000 HMR 3647        | and bacteriological 3001           | outcome AMX                        | (PPb) in CAP 3006 HMR36 CLA        | studies 3009 HMR36 47 TVA          |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Clinical outcome cure              | Clinical outcome cure              | Clinical outcome cure              | Clinical outcome cure              | Clinical outcome cure              | Clinical outcome cure              |
| Posttherapy/TOC                    | 183/197 (92.9%)                    | 141/149 (94.6%)                    | 137/152 (90.1%)                    | 143/162 (88.3%) 138/156 (88.5%)    | 82/90 (91.1%) 91/96 (94.8%)        |
| 95% CI                             | --                                 | [-2.1;11.1]                        |                                    | [-7.9;7.5]                         | [-12.1;4.8]                        |
| Late posttherapy                   | 165/182 (90.7%)                    | 115/125 (92.0%)                    | 116/136 (85.3%)                    | 129/150 (86.0%) 121/143 (84.6%)    | 68/77 (88.3%) 79/84 (94.0%)        |
| 95% CI                             | --                                 | [-1.7;15.1]                        |                                    | [-7.4;10.2]                        | [-15.8;4.3]                        |
| Bacteriological outcome authorised | Bacteriological outcome authorised | Bacteriological outcome authorised | Bacteriological outcome authorised | Bacteriological outcome authorised | Bacteriological outcome authorised |
| Posttherapy/TOC                    | Posttherapy/TOC                    | Posttherapy/TOC                    | Posttherapy/TOC                    | Posttherapy/TOC                    | Posttherapy/TOC                    |
| By subject (satisfactory)          | 40/45 (88.9%)                      | 36/40 (90.0%)                      | 35/40 (87.5%)                      | 25/28 (89.3%) 27/28 (96.4%) longer | 16/17 (94.1%) 26/26 (100.0%)       |
| By pathogen (eradicated)           | 43/52 (82.7%)                      | 42/48 (87.5%)                      | 39/45 (86.7%)                      | 28/32 (87.5%) 29/30 (96.7%)        | 21/22 (95.5%) 36/36 (100.0%)       |
| Late posttherapy                   | Late posttherapy                   | Late posttherapy                   | Late posttherapy                   | Late posttherapy                   | Late posttherapy                   |
| By subject (satisfactory)          | 37/42 (88.1%)                      | 30/36 (83.3%)                      | 29/36 (80.6%) no                   | 23/26 (88.5%) 23/26 (88.5%)        | 14/15 (93.3%) 21/22 (95.5%)        |
| By pathogen (eradicated)           | 41/49 (83.7%)                      | 36/44 (81.8%)                      | 34/40 (85.0%)                      | 25/30 (83.3%) 25/28 (89.3%)        | 17/18 (94.4%) 28/32 (87.5%)        |

<!-- image -->

AMX = amoxicillin, CLA = clarithromycin, TVA = trovafloxacin, CI = confidence intervals HMR 3647=telithromycin As  can  be  seen,  differences  between  treatments  were  within  the  predefined  limits  in  all  studies  at posttherapy/TOC.  In  study  3009,  95%  CI  was  -15,8;4.3  at  late  posttherapy  and,  consequently,  not within the predefined limit at that point of time. The lower limit of the confidence interval for study 3001 and 3006, -2.1% and -7.8% respectively, is in accordance with a conclusion of non-inferiority. This conclusion is not contradicted by the outcome in the smaller and prematurely terminated study 3009, especially as trovafloxacin is no longer a relevant comparator. The clinical cure rate - as provided by the Applicant in the original dossier - with telithromycin in the PPb  population  at  posttherapy/TOC  was  90.8%  (69/76)  in  subjects  with  proven  pneumococcal pneumonia, 76.5% (26/34) in H. influenzae infections, 90.0% (9/10) in H.  parainfluenzae infections, and  72.7%  (8/11)  in  M. catarrhalis  infections.  Using  the  stringent  criteria  for  diagnosis  of  atypical infection,  the  clinical  cure  rate  was  95.5%  (63/66)  for  subjects  with  proven  atypical  infection (C. pneumoniae 33/35 [ 94.3% ] , M. pneumoniae 26/27 [ 96.3% ] and L. pneumophila 4/4. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Efficacy was shown in a moderate number of patients with bacteraemic pneumococcal pneumonia, but in view of exclusion criteria to the conducted trials, it could be argued that the indication should be restricted to mild to moderate pneumonia. With additional  data presented in the Applicant's response to the CPMP questions, efficacy outcome results are available from 89 cases (82 evaluable cases) of penicillin and/or erythromycin resistant S. pneumoniae, showing that the results obtained in this subset of population were similar to those seen in the overall population with S. pneumoniae infection. This seems promising, especially as telithromycin lacks the capacity to select resistance in vitro . There are,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

however, indications that cross-resistance between erythromycin and telithromycin linked by the ermB gene can appear. In vitro results have also shown that telithromycin is affected by the erythromycin ermB or mefA related mechanisms but, to a lesser extent than erythromycin. Also other mechanisms could  be  involved  conferring  telithromycin  resistance.  Thus,  it  is  important  to  closely  monitor  the development of resistance to telithromycin in S. pneumoniae , especially in areas where penicillin/erythromycin resistance is as high as in the southern parts of Europe (40-50%).

The experience with treatment of erythromycin resistant pneumococci is limited and clinical failures have appeared. In areas with low incidence of penicillin and/or erythromycin resistant S. pneumoniae , telithromycin should be considered a second-hand choice. In areas with a prevalence of &gt; 10 % of resistance  against  penicillin  and/or  erythromycin,  telithromycin  could  be  recommended  for  the treatment of infections caused by S.  pneumoniae . Consideration should rather be given to local/regional  official  guidance  on  the  appropriate  use  of  antibacterial  agents  than  restricting  the indications under 4.1.

<!-- image -->

Acute bacterial exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (AECB) Studies 3003 and 3007 were double-blind, randomised, comparative studies in subjects with AECB. Study 3003 was restricted  to  subjects  with  COPD  and  evidence  of  airway  obstruction  (FEV1/FVC ratio ≤ 70% in the past year). Subjects had to have 3 Anthonisen signs of acute exacerbation in Study 3003 and at least 2 in Study 3007. The dosage of telithromycin in both studies was 800 mg once daily for 5 days.  Amoxicillin 500 mg/clavulanic acid 125 mg three times a day for 10 days was used as the comparator in Study 3003, and cefuroxime axetil 500 mg twice daily for 10 days in study 3007. The bacteriological evaluation in both studies was based on culture of an adequate sample ( ≥ 25 PMNs and &lt;10 epithelial cells per high power field in direct microscopy). Results: In  the  bmITT  population  in  the  two  studies, H. influenzae (102/288;  35.4%), H. parainfluenzae (22/288; 7.6%), S. pneumoniae (38/288; 13.2%) and M. catarrhalis (41/288;  14.2%)  were the  most common  isolated pathogens. Among  the main pathogens isolated at baseline, 1.1% (1/94) H. influenzae , 18.2% (4/22) H. parainfluenzae , 2.8% (1/36) S. pneumoniae and 0% (0/36) M. catarrhalis were resistant to telithromycin  by disk diffusion method in the local laboratory. Two out of 37  (5.4%) H. influenzae and 2/10  (20.0%) M.  catarrhalis isolates were  resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic  acid.  The  median  number  of  days  of  active  treatment  was  5 days  for  the telithromycin group in both studies and 10 days for both amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and cefuroxime axetil (PPc population). The  two-sided  95%  confidence  interval  for  the  difference  in  cure  rates  indicated  therapeutic equivalence between  telithromycin    and  the  comparator  drugs  (amoxicillin/clavulanic  acid  and cefuroxime axetil) in both studies (Table 4). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4.      Clinical outcome (PPc) and bacteriological outcome (PPb) in AECB studies

|                           | 3003           | 3003           | 3007                            |
|---------------------------|----------------|----------------|---------------------------------|
|                           | HMR3647 5- day | AMC10-day      | HMR3647 5- day CXM 10-day       |
| Clinical outcome cure     |                |                |                                 |
| Posttherapy/TOC           | 99/115 (86.1%) | 92/112 (82.1%) | 165/185 (89.2%) 164/190 (86.3%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-6.4;14.3]    |                | [-4.3;10.0]                     |
| Late posttherapy          | 82/105 (78.1%) | 81/108 (75.0%) | 143/173 (82.7%) 146/180 (81.1%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-9.2;15.4]    |                | [-7.1;10.1]                     |
| Bacteriological outcome   |                |                |                                 |
| Posttherapy/TOC           |                |                |                                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 27/39 (69.2%)  | 21/30 (70.0%)  | 51/58 (87.9%) 49/57 (86.0%)     |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 32/42 (76.2%)  | 26/32 (81.3%)  | 60/67(89.6%) 62/73(84.9%)       |
| Late posttherapy          |                |                |                                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 19/33 (57.6%)  | 16/26 (61.5%)  | 51/58 (87.9%) 44/55 (80.0%)     |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 21/35 (60%)    | 20/28(71.4%)   | 60/67(89.6%) 54/71(76.1%)       |

Late posttherapy Bacteriological outcome Posttherapy/TOC By subject (satisfactory) 27/39 (69.2%) By pathogen (eradicated) Late posttherapy By subject (satisfactory) 19/33 (57.6%) By pathogen (eradicated) AMC = amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, CXM = cefuroxime axetil, CI = confidence intervals The clinical cure rates for telithromycin were slightly higher than for the comparator in both studies. Cure rates in Study 3003 were slightly lower compared to Study 3007, probably because of the severe underlying COPD in Study 3003. Cure rates at late posttherapy were lower than at posttherapy/TOC in both studies, as expected in this chronic relapsing disease. Bacteriological  responses  were  lower  than  the  clinical  response  for  both  telithromycin  and  the comparators. The bacteriological response by subject for telithromycin was similar to the comparator in both studies at posttherapy/TOC as well as at late posttherapy, but the eradication rate for telithromycin in Study 3003 was slightly lower than for the comparator. The by subject response and eradication rate were lower for both telithromycin and the comparator in the subjects with more severe COPD (study 3003). The clinical cure rate in the mITT population confirmed the results of the PPc population shown in the above table. The results indicate that 800 mg (2 x 400 mg) telithromycin given orally once daily for 5 days is as effective as 10 days therapy with the comparators in the treatment of AECB. However, persistence of pathogens, especially Gram negative such as H. influenzae can be seen in AECB patients despite an adequate clinical response. Since patients will be neither asymptomatic, nor bacteriologically sterile between  treatments,  it  is  difficult  to  assess  efficacy  when  there  is  no  \"normal  state\"  to  return  to. Objective measurements such as inflammatory parameters are not available, and the effect against a placebo  comparator  is  unknown.  Time  to  next  exacerbation  could  be  some  kind  of  objective measurement,  and  might  differ  between  5  and  10  days  duration  of  treatment.  Such  information  is lacking. The treatment with antibiotics in AECB may sometimes be questioned, even though some of the  patients  treated  probably  will  do  better  with  antibiotics.  These  questions  are  controversial  and difficult  and  involve  not  only  telithromycin,  but  all  antibiotic  treatment  in  AECB.  Positioning  of telithromycin in the treatment of AECB must be guided by local/regional guidelines. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Sinusitis

The  efficacy  of  telithromycin  800 mg  once  daily  in  acute  sinusitis  was  tested  in  two  randomised, double-blind, comparative studies (3002, 3005). X-ray confirmation of sinusitis was required in both studies. Sinus puncture was required to gain appropriate material for culture in subjects with X-ray

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

findings of air fluid level or total sinus opacity in study 3002. This study compared two durations of treatment (5 days vs. 10 days) with telithromycin in a blinded manner.

In Study 3005, the treatment regimens were telithromycin 800 mg once daily for either 5 days or 10 days,  and  amoxicillin  500 mg/clavulanic  acid  125 mg  three  times  a  day  for  10  days.  Sinus  X-ray findings of air fluid level, total opacity or mucosal thickening of ≥ 6 mm were required for enrolment; sinus  puncture  was  only  performed  at  selected  centres.  Equivalence  was  tested  between  the telithromycin  10-day  group  and  amoxicillin/clavulanic  acid  and  between  the  telithromycin  5-day group and amoxicillin/clavulanic acid using a closed comparison procedure. Altogether 1,132 subjects were randomized, and 1,126 treated in the two studies. The median number of days of active treatment was 5 days for the telithromycin 5-day group and 10 days for the 10-day group in both studies and 10 days for the amoxicillin/clavulanic acid group in Study 3005 (PPc population).

|                           | 3002            | 3002               |                 | 3005            | 3005   | 3005            |
|---------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------|-----------------|
|                           | HMR3647 5-day   | HMR3647 10-day     | HMR3647 5-day   | HMR3647 10-day  |        | AMC             |
| Clinical outcome cure     |                 |                    |                 |                 |        |                 |
| Posttherapy/TOC           | 112/123 (91.1%) | 121/133 (91.0%) no | 113/149 (75.8%) | 109/147 (74.1%) |        | 103/138 (74.6%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-7.7;7.9]      |                    | [-9.5;11.9] a   | [-11.3;10.4]    | b      | --              |
| Late posttherapy          | 96/108 (88.9%)  | 107/120 (89.2%)    | 98/139 (70.5%)  | 97/140 (69.3%)  |        | 93/131 (71.0%)  |
| 95% CI                    |                 | [-9.3;8.7]         | [-12.1;11.1] a  | [-13.3;9.9]     | b      | --              |
| Bacteriological outcome   | product         |                    |                 |                 |        |                 |
| Posttherapy/TOC           |                 |                    |                 |                 |        |                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 65/70 (92.9%)   | 62/69 (89.9%)      | 6/7             | 6/7             |        | 6/8             |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 78/86 (90.7%)   | 84/92 (91.3%)      | 6/7             | 6/7             |        | 8/10            |
| Late posttherapy          |                 |                    |                 |                 |        |                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 54/60 (90.0%)   | 53/61 (86.9%)      | 5/7             | 5/7             |        | 5/7             |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 63/72 (87.5%)   | 74/82 (90.2%)      | 5/7             | 5/7             |        | 5/7             |

Results: In the bmITT population, S. pneumoniae (81/283; 28.6%) was the most common pathogen, followed by H. influenzae (41/283;  14.5%) ,  S.  aureus (30/283;  10.6%)  and M.  catarrhalis (18/283;  6.4%). Among the main pathogens isolated at baseline, only 1/30 (3.3%) S. aureus and 1/6 H. parainfluenzae isolates were resistant to telithromycin by disk diffusion method in the local laboratory. Equivalence was found between the telithromycin 5-day and 10-day regimens in Study 3002, and these regimens were shown also to be equivalent to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for 10 days in Study 3005. Table 5.    Clinical outcome (PPc) and bacteriological outcome (PPb) in acute sinusitis studies AMC = Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid Medicinal product no longer authorised

a Pairwise comparison between 5-day HMR 3647 and AMC

b Pairwise comparison between 10-day HMR 3647 and AMC

The  applicant  has  forwarded  several  explanations  for  the  lower  outcome  rates  in  study  3005.  An alternative explanation that should be considered is that all patients in study 3002 underwent a sinus

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

puncture. The maxillary sinuses were reportedly not rinsed, but aired. A maxillary sinus puncture may be conceived as a therapeutic intervention, and may also serve as an explanation for the continuation of the excellent clinical outcome in study 3002, in contrast to study 3005. Clinical cure was achieved in about 90% of telithromycin treated patients in the former study both at posttherapy/TOC and late posttherapy,  whereas  it  was  reduced  from  75  to  70%  in  both  telithromycin  groups  between posttherapy/TOC and late posttherapy in study 3005. Another plausible explanation is that in study 3005, the includion criteria were not as strict as in study 3002, thus allowing inclusion of patients with other  diseases  than  acute  purulent  sinusitis.  As H.  influenzae is  often  the  cause  of  acute  sinusitis, telithromycin should only be used when other antibiotics are inappropriate, such as in allergies or in areas with high a prevalence of erythromycin resistant pneumococci.

|                           | 3004                    | 3004            | 3008            | 3008            |
|---------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
|                           | HMR3647                 | PEN             | HMR3647         | CLA             |
| Clinical outcome cure     |                         |                 |                 |                 |
| Posttherapy/TOC           | 109/115 (94.8%) product | 112/119 (94.1%) | 139/150 (92.7%) | 123/135 (91.1%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-6.1;7.4]              | [-6.1;7.4]      | [-5.5;8.6]      | [-5.5;8.6]      |
| Late posttherapy          | 100/108 (92.6%)         | 100/111 (90.1%) | 120/134 (89.6%) | 103/118 (87.3%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-5.8;10.9]             | [-5.8;10.9]     | [-6.5;11.0]     | [-6.5;11.0]     |
| Bacteriological outcome   |                         |                 |                 |                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 97/115 (84.3%)          | 106/119 (89.1%) | 137/150 (91.3%) | 119/135 (88.1%) |
| 95% CI                    | [-14.3;4.8]             | [-14.3;4.8]     | [-4.6;11.0]     | [-4.6;11.0]     |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 98/115 (85.2%)          | 106/119 (89.1%) | 137/150 (91.3%) | 120/135 (88.9%) |
| Late posttherapy          |                         |                 |                 |                 |
| By subject (satisfactory) | 89/108 (82.4%)          | 94/111 (84.7%)  | 112/136 (82.4%) | 98/120 (81.7%)  |
| 95% CI                    | [-13.0;8.5]             | [-13.0;8.5]     | [-9.5;10.9]     | [-9.5;10.9]     |
| By pathogen (eradicated)  | 93/108 (86.1%)          | 96/111 (86.5%)  | 115/136 (84.6%) | 99/120 (82.5%)  |

Tonsillitis/pharyngitis Telithromycin  was  investigated  in  the  treatment  of  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  due  to  Group  A  betahemolytic  streptococci  ( S.  pyogenes )  in  two  randomised,  double-blind,  comparative  studies.  The regimen  was  800  mg  once  a  day  for  5  days  in  both  studies.  In  Study  3004,  the  comparator  was penicillin V 500 mg three times daily for 10 days. In Study 3008, the comparator was clarithromycin 250 mg twice daily for 10 days. Results Of the 648 S. pyogenes isolates in the bmITT population, 4/631 (0.6%) were resistant to telithromycin, 13/339 (3.8%) were resistant to clarithromycin and none of the 288 isolates tested were resistant to penicillin by the disk diffusion method. The two-sided 95% confidence interval indicated equivalence between the telithromycin 5-day regimen and clarithromycin for 10 days in Study 3008. Similarly, the telithromycin 5-day regimen was shown to be equivalent to penicillinV for 10 days in Study 3004 for clinical efficacy (table 6). Table 6. Clinical and bacteriological outcome (PP population) in tonsillitis/pharyngitis Medicinal product no longer authorised

PEN = Penicillin V, CLA = clarithromycin

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The by subject bacteriological response and the eradication rate at posttherapy/TOC for telithromycin treated subjects were slightly lower than in the penicillin V group in Study 3004 and fell outside the protocol-defined  non-inferiority  margin  of  -10%.  The  difference  was  mainly  due  to  persistence  of erythromycin A resistant S. pyogenes in the telithromycin group. There were six isolated such strains in  the  telithromycin  group,  with  clinical  cure  in  6/6,  but  eradication  in  only  1/6.  This  could  be compared with cure and eradication in 8/9 cases in the PcV group. The genotyping results of the 6 erythromycin A resistant strains from telithromycin treated subjects indicated a correlation between the presence of mefA and ermB erythromycin A resistance genes and persistence of S. pyogenes . As the response rates for both treatment groups were lower than expected, the sample size required for the study was underestimated resulting in  an increase in the width of the CI. The CPMP guideline for evaluating anti-infectives proposes that  a delta of 10% can often be used. However, as mentioned in the CPMP guideline the ultimate choice will have to rely on clinical judgement and the justification available in the protocol. It is judged that the two treatments can be regarded as being equivalent.

In Study 3008, similar observations were made in telithromycin-treated patients with erythromycin A resistant  strains.  Clinical  cure  was  achieved  in  4/5  patients  at  posttherapy/TOC,  but  3/5  had bacteriological persistence. Of the 4 subjects with cure at posttherapy/TOC, all were cured and had achieved  eradication  at  late  posttherapy  ( i.e. two  patients  achieved  eradication  secondarily).  In contrast, only 2/4 in the clarithromycin group showed clinical cure, whereas 4/4 had bacteriological persistence.  Both  patients  with  cure  at  posttherapy/TOC  had  clinical  cure  and  bacteriological persistence  at  late  posttherapy.  Also  in  this  study,  all S.  pyogenes strains  that  persisted  after telithromycin treatment belonged to the mefA or ermB genotypes. Generally,  five  days  treatment  with  telithromycin  appears  to  be  similarly  effective  as  10  days treatment with penicillin V or clarithromycin. As cross-resistance with highly erythromycin resistant (mefA,  ermB  resistance  genes)  strains  has  been  observed,  telithromycin  should  not  be  used  in  the treatment  of  acute  tonsillitis  caused  by  erythromycin  resistant S.pyogenes .  The  risk/benefit  of telithromycin  compared  with  clarithromycin  for  the  treatment  of S.  pyogenes tonsillitis  could  be questioned  as  more  gastrointestinal  side  effects  were  recorded  for  telithromycin  treated  patients compared  with  clarithromycin.  However,  the  side  effects  were  not  severe  and  would  not  entirely disqualify the treatment of acute tonsillitis from a positive opinion. The indication is thus modified as outlined in the SPC Clinical studies in special populations No clinical studies have been performed with special populations as targets. Supportive studies As indicated above, the Applicant has submitted additional data on resistant S.pneumoniae . There are 3 ongoing studies (Two studies conducted in the US and one in Japan ). Clinical safety All patients who received at least one dose of study drug and had at least one post pretherapy/entry safety  evaluation  were  evaluated  for  safety.  The  investigators  assessed  the  intensity  and  causal relationship. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Patient exposure

At  least  one  adverse  event  irrespective  of  relationship  to  study  drug  was  reported  in  1387/2461 (56.4%) of telithromycin patients versus 48.6% of comparators. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs)  were  reported  in  50.3%  telithromycin  patents  and  48.6%  comparators.  In  the  controlled studies,  the  frequency  of  TEAEs  was  similar  in  the  telithromycin  5-day  (47.8%)  and  comparator

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

groups (48.6%) and higher in the telithromycin 10-day group (59.5%). The frequency of TEAEs was generally higher in CAP studies and in studies conducted in North America.

## Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths

TEAEs were most frequently reported from the digestive and nervous systems. The frequencies of events per body system were generally similar for telithromycin and comparators, but digestive system symptoms were more frequent with telithromycin (30.8%) than comparators (22.6%). Moderate and severe  symptoms  were  essentially  equally  common  with  telithromycin  (9.9%  and  2.6%)  as  with comparator (7.7% and 1.5%). TEAEs assessed as possibly related to the study treatment were reported for  35.8%  of  the  telithromycin  patients  and  28.3%  of  the  comparator  patients.  Diarrhoea,  nausea, dizziness,  vomiting,  dyspepsia,  abdominal  pain,  flatulence  and  gastrointestinal  pain  occurred  more frequently with telithromycin than with comparators, but discontinuation due to TEAEs was equally common in both groups (5.0% versus 4.4%), and the rate of discontinuation because of adverse events did not differ either (4.6% versus 4.4%).

A  system  of  predefined  changes  was  used  in  all  trials.  Incidences  of  predefined  change  abnormal (PCA)  values  and  clinically  noteworthy  abnormal  laboratory  values  (CNALV)  were  similar  for telithromycin and comparator treatment patients. Abnormal findings were generally more common in CAP patients.  Elevated  ALT  was  observed in  1.1%  with telithromycin  5-days  and  3.3%  with  7-10 days  treatment,  versus  1.7%  in  the  combined  comparator  group.  Thus,  an  extended  duration  of treatment, from 5 to 10 days, especially in association with CAP, seems to be connected with elevated transaminases.  Additionally,  the  data  from  trial  3000  in  CAP  created  concern.  In  this  study,  LFT abnormalities were reported in 28/240 (11.6%) of patients on telithromycin. However, this might be explained by the patients being more severely ill and more patients being hospitalised and that this

As  some  14-membered  macrolides,  for  example  erythromycin,  induce  contractile  activity  in  the gastrointestinal  tract,  mimicking  the  effect  of  the  GI  peptide  motilin,  telithromycin´s  affinity  to  the motilin receptor was questioned. However, it was demonstrated that the affinity of telithromycin was less than that of clarithromycin and erythomycin. The gastrointestinal adverse effects were mostly mild and only one patient developed gastroenteritis suspected  to  be  caused  by C.  difficile and  telithromycin  had  a  discontinuation  rate  due  to  possibly related diarrhoea similar to that of clarithromycin. The impact on the salivary and faecal microflora of telithromycin  and  clarithromycin  showed  that  telithromycin  caused  a  selective  reduction  of  the microflora to the same extent as did clarithromycin  and no C.  difficile strains  were  isolated  during treatment.  That  a  motilin  effect  might  explain  the  relatively  high  frequency  of  GI  TEAEs  is  not plausible, as the affinity to the motilin receptor seems to be much weaker for telithromycin than for clarithromycin or erythromycin. Dizziness  and  blurred  vision  have  been  reported  more  frequently  in  telithromycin-treated  patients across all studies. The increase in dizziness is hardly significant but blurred vision, although reversible and infrequent, was reported in 15/2461 (0.6%) in the telithromycin group, versus 1/1631 (0.06%) in the comparator group. Further studies on blurred vision are planned by the applicant. The total number of serious adverse events reported was 59 (2.4%) for telithromycin treated patients against  40  (2.5%)  comparator  patients.  There  were  three  serious  hepatic  TEAEs  in  telithromycin treated and one in a comparator treated patient(clarithromycin). Two  telithromycin patients demonstrated a hepatocellular injury pattern (one of them with a history of alcoholic abuse), the third had an 'allergic hepatitis'. Deaths  were  reported  in  0.1%  of  both  telithromycin  and  comparator  patients  during  the  treatmentemergent period, but the events had no causal relationship to the study treatments. Three further events occurred post-treatment (one telithromycin and two comparator patients) that were likewise considered unrelated to study treatment. Laboratory findings Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

study  was  a  non-controlled  study.  In  summary,  there  were  no  clear  indications  that  telithromycin causes more frequent or more severe hepatic adverse effects than clarithromycin.

## QTc prolongation

Evaluation  was  undertaken  in  compliance  with  the  CPMP  points  to  consider  document. In  vitro, telithromycin inhibited  cloned human  Ikr  channels  to  a similar extent  as  eryhtromycin  and clarithromycin  and  increased  the  action  potential  duration  in  isolated  rabbit  purkinje  cells.  These effects  were  observed  at  concentrations  ≥  10x  the  free  concentration  seen  in  clinical  use.  Toxicity studies with telithromycin in dogs showed increased heart rate and QTf prolongation (16-31 msec) at concentrations of free drug approximately 8x the free concentration seen in clinical use.

In the phase III studies, a modest mean increase in QTc (+1.1 (21.1) msec) and QTf (+3.1 (19.6) msec) interval  was  observed  with  telithromycin  treatment.  There  was  no  clinically  significant  difference between telithromycin and the comparators for the change in QTc interval. Significant QT dispersion (&gt;100 msec)  was  not  observed  either  during  therapy  or  post-treatment  in  any  telithromycin  treated patients.  Subjects  with  prolonged  QTc  at  baseline  generally  experienced  a  decrease  of  QTc  during treatment with telithromycin. Data for subjects with cardiovascular disease or ECG abnormalities did not vary notably from the population as a whole. No case of cardiac arrest, torsades de pointes, other serious ventricular arrhythmias or seizures were reported during the phase III program.

In clinical pharmacology studies, multiple ECGs were recorded and alert terms were set up to detect asymptomatic corrected QT. The effect of telithromycin was studied at therapeutic and supraclinical doses,  as  was  the  potential  for  increased  drug  levels  by  drug  interaction,  such  as  itraconazole, ketoconazole and cisapride. At 800 mg, no clinically significant QTc changes were noted throughout the studies. Four alert terms were reported in healthy subjects, one in a young subject at 800 mg, not confirmed by the expert review, and the other three in elderly subjects (1 at 600 mg and 2 at 800 mg). No QTc prolongation &gt;500 msec was observed and all events were asymptomatic. In  healthy  volunteers  given  a  single  supra  therapeutic  dose of telithromycin  (2400  and  3200  mg)  a significant increase of QTc of 17 and 16 msec ,respectively, compared with placebo was found. These doses  were  associated  with  an  increased  heart  rate  of  11  and  13  bpm  and  the  more  appropriate correction by the Fredericia formula gave a QTf of 6 and 3 msec, respectively. In  patients  with  hepatic  impairment,  2  QTc  prolongations  were  observed,  both  asymptomatic,  in  2 patients  who  had  QTc  prolongation  before  administration  of  telithromycin.  In  patients  with  renal impairment,  3  QTC  prolongations  were  declared  as  alert  terms,  none  confirmed  by  expert  reading ECG. At supraclinical doses,  based on  expert  ECG  reading,  the  statistical  analysis  showed  a  mean maximal increase in QTc from baseline of 28 msc at 2400 mg of telithromycin in young subjects and 19 msc at 2000 mg of telithromycin in elderly subjects. A PK/PD analysis was performed using all ECGs overread by the experts at therapeutic and supraclinical doses. In healthy subjects, an increase in telithromycin concentration led to a small concentration dependent increase in QTc interval. For each mg/L increase, there was a corresponding increase of 1.96 msec in QT, or 1.62 msec in QTf. A study comparing the QT interval at different heart rates induced by exercise tolerance test, thereby avoiding the need for heart rate correction, showed that neither telithromycin, nor clarithromycin had significant effects on the QT interval at therapeutic doses. In  a  study  including  24  patients  with  established  cardiovascular  disease  (presumably  having  an increased  risk  of  QT  prolongation  and  TdP),  a  single  dose  of  telithromycin  1600  mg  significantly prolonged QTc by 7 msec compared with placebo, but no difference was seen in the frequency of ∆QTc &gt; 30 msec. Medicinal product no longer authorised

It  is  concluded  that  telithromycin  has  a  potential  to  induce  a  modest  QTc  prolongation,  but  the adequately  performed  study  program  strongly  suggests  that  this  has  minor  clinical  relevance  at therapeutic doses. The potential to induce a clinically relevant QTc prolongation is not increased in comparison with clarithromycin. This issue is considered in the relevant sections of the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Safety in special populations

Safety findings have been assessed for elderly subjects, men and women, racial origin, weight, and disease  states  such  as  cardiovascular  and  chronic  respiratory  disease,  diabetes,  renal  and  liver impairment,  and  in  patients  on  treatment  with  drugs  metabolized  by  CYP3A4  and  CYP2D6, antiarrythmics, theophylline, anticoagulants, cardiac glycosides, corticosteroids, CNS drugs, and with drugs known to increase QTc, and diuretics. Patients with abnormal ECG/increased QTc at baseline and with risk factors for torsade de pointes or hypokalemia have been similarly assessed. Generally, the frequencies of adverse events did not differ between telithromycin and comparators

In  the  present  studies  the  prevalence  of  highly  resistant S.  pneumoniae was  much  lower  than  the alarming rates (&gt;40%) reported from several countries and therefore no conclusions can be drawn as to  the  efficacy  of  telithromycin  in  populations  dominated by highly resistant pneumococci. Clinical efficacy  was,  however,  documented  in  the  majority  of  the  pneumonia  or  sinusitis  patients  infected with  macrolide  or  penicillin  resistant  pneumococci  studied.  This  seems  promising,  especially  as telithromycin lacks the capacity to select resistance in vitro. Persistence of macrolide resistant strains and failure of therapy was, however, seen in isolated cases after telithromycin in spite of low MIC values. There are indications that cross-resistance between erythromycin and telithromycin linked by the  ermB  gene  can  appear. In  vitro results  have  also  shown  that  telithromycin  is  affected  by  the erythromycin ermB or mefA related mechanisms but, to a lesser extent than erythromycin. Also other mechanisms could  be  involved  conferring  telithromycin  resistance.  Thus,  it  is  important  to  closely monitor the development of resistance to telithromycin in S.  pneumoniae ,  especially  in  areas  where penicillin/erythromycin resistance is as high, as in the southern parts of Europe.

5. Part V: Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined in the SPC.  Thus, the physicochemical and biological aspects relevant to the uniform clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology The preclinical documentation provides overall an adequate characterisation of the pharmacology and toxicology of telithromycin and relevant information has been included in the SPC. Preclinical studies showed the liver to be the primary target for toxic effects of telithromycin. Data from investigations on reproduction  toxicology  were  not  conclusive  concerning  the  potential  for  adverse  effects  on  fetal development  and  the  compound  should  not  be  used  during  pregnancy  unless  clearly  necessary. Telithromycin and its major human metabolites were negative in tests for genotoxic potential. As the clinical use is expected to be short-term no carcinogenicity studies were conducted. Efficacy and Safety Telithromycin is a new antibacterial agent, closely related to the macrolides, but with activity in vitro against most organisms that are macrolide resistant. The effect against pneumococci is bactericidal. Telithromycin was active in vitro against all penicillin-resistant pneumococci, but eradication may fail in erythromycin-resistant but telithromycin-susceptible isolates. The performed clinical trials, in general, support similar efficacy of telithromycin and comparators in the  indications  investigated  (CAP  not  clinically  serious  enough  to  warrant  parenteral  therapy  but efficacy has been demonstrated in a limited number of patients with risk factors such as pneumococcal bacteraemia  or  age  higher  than  65  years,  AECB,  sinusitis,  and  pharyngotonsillitis  caused  by S. pyogenes ). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Cross-resistance to highly erythromycin resistant (ermB, mefA resistance genes) S.pyogenes strains is a fact, and therefore telithromycin should not be used in infections caused by erythromycin resistant S. pyogenes.

More  than  half  of  the H.  influenzae isolates  failed  to  be  inhibited  by  1  mg/l  of  telithromycin,  a concentration that will only be achieved during 3-4 hours of the dosing interval with the recommended dosage  of  800  mg  once  daily.  Cure  rates  were  only  around  60%  in  the  elderly.  Therefore  the breakpoints for H. influenzae and H. parainfluenzae have been set to the same as for other bacteria, i.e. S≤ 0.5 mg/l and thus, H. influenzae is considered intermediately susceptible (I ≥ 1 mg/l).

<!-- image -->

As for macrolides, H.influenzae is classified as intermediately susceptible and the effect is thus less than  optimal  for  an  airway  antibiotic.  This  should  be  taken  into  account  when  treating  infections caused by H.influenzae.

From in  vitro data,  good  activity  is  expected  against  atypical  organisms,  and  this  is  supported  by clinical experience, although the documentation is scarce for L. pneumophila . Treatment-emergent  adverse  events  (TEAEs)  are,  as  for  macrolides,  mainly  reported  from  the digestive  and  nervous  systems,  with  diarrhoea,  nausea,  headache  and  dizziness  as  most  prevalent. TEAEs assessed as possibly related to study treatment were reported for 35.8% of the telithromycin patients,  versus  28.3%  of  the  comparators.  Gastrointestinal  AEs,  especially  diarrhoea  were  more common with telithromycin, however, they were mostly mild. Serious  hepatotoxicity  similar  to  the  known  macrolide-associated  was  seen  in  three  patients.  LFT elevations  occurred at  similar frequencies  as  with  comparators.  Prolongation  of  the  QTc  interval,  a class effect for macrolides, has been investigated. These prolongations appear to be of the same extent as for clarithromycin. Liver adverse reactions and events potentially related to QT prolongation are specifically targeted for post-marketing follow-up by the applicant. Blurred  vision,  although  transient,  was  recorded  in  0.6%  of  patients  and  seemed  dose-dependent. Further studies to investigate this have been planned. Possible  advantages  of  five  days  treatment  vs.  10  days  treatment  can  only  be  speculative,  i.e.,  less development  of  resistance,  better  compliance  etc.  The  applicant  has  not  been  able  to  show  any advantages in the submitted documentation with respect to these properties. Benefit/risk assessment Telithromycin  retains  activity  against  Gram-positive  cocci  that  are  macrolide  resistant  by  an  efflux mechanism or an MLSB inducible type of resistance and is bactericidal against S. pneumoniae . Thus, telithromycin  is  considered  a  potentially  valuable  addition  for  the  treatment  of  respiratory  tract infections (CAP, sinusitis) caused by penicillin and/or erythromycin resistant S. pneumoniae ., Clinical experience  is  still  limited  in  the  treatment  of  these  infections  but  so  far  clinical  efficacy  and eradication  rates  have  been  similar  compared  with  the  treatment  of  susceptible S.pneumoniae , Telithromycin  should  be  used  with  caution  until  further  experience  of  emergence  of  resistance  has been  gained,  especially  in  areas  with  a  high  prevalence  of  resistant  pneumococci.  This  is  further supported  by  data  that  appear  to  indicate  that  telithromycin  is  not  unaffected  by  ermB  and  mef  A resistance genes in S. pneumoniae . Cross-resistance to highly macrolide resistant S. pyogenes seems established and there is no evidence to  support  preferential  use  of  telithromycin  in  these  infections.  In  pharyngotonsillitis,  telithromycin could, thus, be used in the same way as macrolides, i.e. if other, more suitable agents such as beta lactam antibiotics are not appropriate. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Telithromycin displays a similar pattern of side effects compared  with  the macrolides and azithromycin,  but  evokes  more  gastrointestinal  side-effects  than  clarithromycin.  The  frequency  and severity of increased hepatic enzyme activity and liver disease appear similar as for clarithromycin but justify close post-marketing surveillance, as does the potential prolongation of the QT-interval.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Considering  the  efficacy  and  adverse  events  profiles  documented,  the  overall  risk/benefit  ratio  is considered  favourable.  There  are,  however,  no  indications  that  telithromycin  would  confer  specific benefits over currently available antibiotics, except in infections caused by erythromycin resistant S. pneumoniae.  Reference  is  made  in  the  SPC  to  official  guidelines  that  should  be  used  to  provide guidance regarding the use of telithromycin.

The Applicant has committed to perform post-marketing surveillance studies regarding emergence of resistance particularly and also addressing the effect on erythromycin resistant S. Pneumoniae.

<!-- image -->

'Based  on  the  CPMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CPMP  considered  by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Ketek in the treatment of the following infections: In patients of 18 years and older: -Community-acquired pneumonia, mild or moderate -Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, -Acute sinusitis -Tonsillitis/pharyngitis caused by Group A beta streptococci, as an alternative when beta lactam antibiotics are not appropriate . In patients of 12 to 18 years old: -Tonsillitis/pharyngitis caused by Group A beta streptococci , as an alternative when beta lactam antibiotics are not appropriate. was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised