---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:56:34
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/leukoscan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: leukoscan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.5215372
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 11:59:57.146834
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures, which have been finalised before 1 October 2002. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

1. Introduction LeukoScan  consists  of  the  Fab'  fragment  of  the  antibody  Sulesomab  :  this  parenteral  monoclonal antibody  is  produced  in  murine  ascites  fluid  and  is  formulated  for  direct  labelling  with 99m Tc  with binding activity to both carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and surface granulocyte non-specific crossreacting antigen (NCA90) which is present on virtually all neutrophils. As such, it was anticipated to be a good carrier for targeting areas where granulocytes have accumulated and potentially useful for imaging infection and inflammation foci. LeukoScan is presented as a lyophilised powder to be reconstituted with approximately 1100 MBq of sodium  pertechnetate 99m Tc  in  sterile  isotonic  saline  solution  for  intravenous  administration.  The finished  medicinal  product  LeukoScan  is  presented  as  a  kit  consisting  of  one  vial  containing  the sterile, non-pyrogenic, lyophilised powder, which  is to be  mixed with 99m Tc solution after reconstitution. 99m Tc is not provided in the kit. The reconstituted product is indicated for diagnostic imaging for determining the extent and location of  inflammation  and  infection  in  bone  in  patients  with  suspected  osteomyelitis.  In  particular LeukoScan has been developed for the diagnosis of osteomyelitis complicating diabetic foot ulcers or various  lesions  in  other  long  bones.  Osteomyelitis  is  one  type  of  lesion  which  can  be  difficult  to diagnose, particularly when an area of intense inflammation is nearby. The detection of occult sites of infection  and  inflammation  is  an  integral  part  of  the  clinical  evaluation  of  the  febrile  patient.  The anatomical  delineation  of  the  site  and  extent  of  local  inflammation  is  critical  to  the  clinical management  of  the  infectious  processes,  both  for  diagnosis  and  for  monitoring  the  response  to therapy. The  anatomical  site  of  the  inflammatory  processes  and  whether  major  structural  derangement  has occurred at the site determines the efficacy of an imaging technique. The use of a patient's autologous leukocytes  for  detection  is  a  non-invasive  diagnostic  technique  used  in  clinical  practice.  Labelling White Blood Cell Scanning with 111 Indium or 99m Tc hexamethyl propylene amine oxime present major problems such as: requirement for a blood sample from a patient who is frequently critically ill, as well as a potential hazard of infecting nuclear medicine personnel handling leukocytes from high-risk patients. 67 Gallium scintigraphy is also being used, but it has poor resolution, imposes high radiation dose  to  the  patient,  the  interval  between  administration  and  imaging  is  long  and  it  is  not  always available to the nuclear medicine facilities. 99m Tc has advantages over other radionuclides, including 123 I and 111 In. Its shorter half-life results in lower dose exposure to a patient when the same activity is injected and it is available and convenient to the user. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects LeukoScan  consists  of  the  Fab'  fragment  of  the  antibody  Sulesomab  :  this  parenteral  monoclonal antibody  is  produced  in  murine  ascites  fluid  and  is  formulated  for  direct  labelling  with 99m Tc  with binding activity to both carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and surface granulocyte non-specific crossreacting antigen (NCA90) which is present on virtually all neutrophils. As such, it was anticipated to be a good carrier for targeting areas where granulocytes have accumulated and potentially useful for imaging infection and inflammation foci. Medicinal product no longer authorised

LeukoScan is presented as a lyophilised powder to be reconstituted with approximately 1100 Mbq of sodium  pertechnetate 99m Tc  in  sterile  isotonic  saline  solution  for  intravenous  administration.  The finished  medicinal  product  LeukoScan  is  presented  as  a  kit  consisting  of  one  vial  containing  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

sterile, non-pyrogenic, lyophilised powder, which  is to be  mixed with 99m Tc solution after reconstitution. 99m Tc is not provided in the kit.

## Composition

The active substance of this medicinal product is a mixture of Fab'-SH, (Fab)2', heavy and light chains and other fragments.

The  excipients  used  are:  stannous  chloride  (as  a  reducing  agent),  sodium  potassium  tartrate  and sodium acetate (they prevent the precipitation of stannous chloride at physiological pH by acting as weak  chelating  agents),  sodium  chloride  and  sucrose  as  protein  stabilisers  (for  example  during lyophilisation). The active substance is produced by ascites technology. Injecting mice produce murine ascites fluid after pristane priming, with the hybridoma cell inoculum. The hybridoma was produced by fusion of lymphocytes from CEA immunised mice and the SP2/0 mouse myeloma cell line. Ascites develops 14 to  28  days  following  inoculation  and  the  fluid  is  removed  from  the  mice  by  a  process  known  as 'tapping'. The ascites fluid contains antibodies (Sulesomab IgG) produced by the hybridoma cell line, which are shown to bind to granulocytes. Sulesomab IgG is then purified from the ascites fluid and processed by digestion with pepsin to produce Sulesomab F(ab')2. The final step in the process is the reduction of the Sulesomab F(ab')2 with cysteine. The applicant has justified the choice of Sulesomab rather than the intact antibody or divalent F(ab')2 because of the following: I) monovalent  Fab'  is rapidly cleared from  blood to permit imaging  within an hour of administration, ii) there  are  free  thiol  groups  on  the  Fab'  following  chemical  reduction  for  direct  radiolabelling with 99m Tc iii) Fab'  is  less  immunogenic  and  at  the  dose  chosen,  no  development  of  human  anti-murine antibodies (HAMA) were developed. The  applicant  has  provided  information  on  the  two  formulations  used  in  the  clinical  trials:  the differences  between  these  two  formulations  are  not  significant  in  terms  of  ratio  of  the  active constituent to excipients which remains unchanged . A third formulation intended for marketing has been also developed with a higher amount of stannous ion (see table I). The initial formulation chosen for LeukoScan, and used in Phase I, II and early Phase III clinical trials was  based  on  the  formulation  for  another  Fab'-SH  monoclonal  antibody  product  (formulation  1). However, the Phase II  studies  showed  that  Sulesomab,  was  effective  as  an  imaging  agent  at  doses much  lower  than  those  previously  used  for  the  other  Fab'-SH  monoclonal  antibody  product. Formulations 1 and 2 were used in respectively 66% and 34% of the patients who entered into the pivotal clinical trials. The commercial formulation was afterwards developed, which contained three times the amount of stannous ion which resulted in satisfactory labelling of the Fab' fragment. Three commercial batches have been shown to be physico-chemically equivalent to formulation 2. Furthermore, an in vivo study has  been  carried  out  to  demonstrate  bioequivalence  of  the  commercial  formulation  and  the  clinical trial formulation. Method of preparation Murine ascites fluid containing Sulesomab IgG is purified and digested with pepsin to F(ab')2 and then reduced to Fab'-SH using cysteine. The yield from processing up to 3 l of ascites fluid ranges from 8 000-12 000 vials of lyophilised final product. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The solutions of the excipients used in the final product are prepared and filtered. These solutions are added gradually to the Fab'-SH solution. An in-process control is instituted to check the concentration of Fab'-SH by absorbance at 280 nm before the formulated solution is filtered through 2 filters which are arranged in tandem into vials for lyophilisation. The actual manufacturing formula as well as the details in the form of a flow chart including critical in-process control parameters was provided. The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

applicant set also an appropriate prefiltration bioburden limit for the definitive sterilisation step in the manufacturing process.

## Control of starting materials

The source material for Sulesomab bulk IgG is ascites fluid, which is produced, in pristane-primed mice (CD2F1) following inoculation of the mice with Sulesomab hybridoma cells. Sulesomab ascites fluid,  stored  at  -20  °C  by  Charles  River  Laboratories  (CRL)  and  tested  to  assure  it  meets specifications, is thawed at 37 °C (approximately one hour), centrifuged at 15 000 to 20 000 x g and filtered  through  sterile  pyrogen-free-glass  wool,  by  CRL,  prior  to  shipment  to  Immunomedics.  The centrifuged ascites fluid is  shipped  at  2-8°C,  received  at  Immunomedics  and  stored  at  2-8  °C  for  a maximum of 48 hours prior to loading onto the Q-Sepharose column.

iii)

It was noted that the reference standards prepared for Fab' bulk were manufactured by a process not in compliance with the proposed manufacturing process, e.g. in the case of Fab'-SH a different chemical modification method was chosen. However consistency in the manufacturing process was proven with strict limits on the specifications for each of the intermediates.

The ascites fluid harvests are subject to extensive viral testing where they have to be tested negative before they are released. The  mice  used  in  production  are  monitored  according  to  the  CPMP  guideline  on  Production  and Control of Monoclonal Antibodies of Murine Origin. CDF-1 and Balb-C strains of mice are used in the production. Reassurance was provided that the CDF-1 and Balb-C mice will be monitored as far as viral safety is concerned in compliance with the relevant CPMP guidelines. Both the Master Cell Bank (MCB) and the Manufacturer's Working Cell Bank (MWCB) have been tested  virologically  and  bacteriologically  according  to  the  Notes  to  Applicants  for  Marketing Applications  on  the  Production  and  Quality  Control  of  Monoclonal  Antibodies  of  Murine  Origin Intended  for  Use  in  Man.  Tests  for  ecotropic  and  xenotropic  viruses  and  also  an  in  vitro  test  for adventitious agents have been carried out. MWCB but not MCB has been tested to contain reverse transcriptase activity. The down stream process encompasses seven steps; three chromatographic steps for the purification of IgG, the enzymatic cleavage by pepsin to F(ab')2 and subsequent chromatographic purification and a chemical conversion to the active substance Fab'-SH followed by chromatographic purification. The process is very similar to the strategy adopted for another product manufactured by the company. In order to avoid cross-contamination, the company gave written assurance that the columns are product specific.  Details  relating  to  sanitation,  equilibration  of  the  columns  and  elution  conditions  has  been reasonably well documented. In  process  specifications  have  been  provided  to  ensure  satisfactory  progress  of  the  production.  The quality  of  the  intermediate  is  monitored  by  IEF,  HPLC,  immunodiffusion  to  isotype  the  IgG, immunoreactivity and SDS-PAGE.  Furthermore,  tests including amplified  XC  plaque,  MAP, amplified S+L-focus and reverse transcriptase are also carried out to ensure viral safety. Other control tests  include  DNA content, pristane, bioburden and endotoxin. In addition, in-process controls have been included to monitor the pepsin digestion and cysteine reduction steps. The specification for Fab'SH contains four types of control tests to determine i) the  potency,  e.g.,  an  immunoreactivity  test;  justification  for  the  use  of  this  assay  and  the proposed  control  limits  are  required.  During  the  hearing  with  the  company  at  the  BWP,  the company agreed to establish an appropriate potency assay (flow cytometric assay) in addition to the  currently  used  immunoreactivity  assay  and  to  provide  the  full  validation  report  within  3 months ii) the purity eg. HPLC, IEF uptake of 99m Tc by Fab' radiolabelling (SEC) and free 99m Tc (ITLC) iv) bioburden and endotoxin. Control tests on intermediate products Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Control tests on the finished product

The  proposed  specification  is  extensive  utilising  a  battery  of  physico-chemical  tests  to  control  the finished product. The purity of the finished product is tested by 3 different methods; HPLC, IEF and SDS-PAGE.

The major bands on the IEF and SDS-PAGE are quantified by densitometry.

| Potential Impurity                                               | Test                                                | Limit of Detection   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (from fetal calf serum) product | NA*                                                 | NA*                  |
| Pyrogen++                                                        | LAL                                                 | 0.001 EU/mL          |
| Microorganisms                                                   | Sterility                                           | NA                   |
| Mycoplasma                                                       | Mycoplasma Assay                                    | NA                   |
| Murine Retroviruses                                              | XC Plaque, S + L -                                  | NA                   |
| Viruses                                                          | MAP, Cocultivation with Vero, MRC-5 and 2.775 cells | NA                   |
| Protein A                                                        | Protein A Assay                                     | 2 ng/mL              |
| Pristane                                                         | Pristane by GC                                      | 260 ppm+++           |
| Murine DNA                                                       | Murine DNA Assay                                    | 1 pg/mg              |
| Aggregates                                                       | HPLC                                                | 1%                   |
| Degradation Products                                             | HPLC                                                | 1%                   |

HPLC  =

High Pressure Liquid Chromatography

* =

The supplier of the fetal calf serum (Hyclone) certifies that all serum is collected from USDA inspected abattoirs in the USA

ITLC method is used for the determination of 99m Tc-labelled antibody. Size-exclusion chromatography with Gamma-Ram detector is also employed to determine the 99m Tc incorporation of the product. The company supplied sufficient data on radiolabelling efficiency. The results  of  a  series  of  tests  addressing  the  issue  of  batch-to-batch  consistency,  particularly  with reference to mouse serum albumin, host immunoglobulins and Sulesomab IgG were provided. The information submitted demonstrated batch-to-batch consistency by: · reasonable consistency of the yield of intermediates · strict limits on the specifications for each of the intermediates and finished product, · consistency of molecular homogeneity tested by SDS-PAGE and HPLC, · carbohydrate analysis of the finished product, · consistency in secondary and tertiary structure tested by circular dicroism, · consistency in primary structure tested by C and N terminal aminoacid analysis. Stability Stability studies have been carried out on the intermediates, the bulk drug substance and the finished product.  No  storage  times  have  been  proposed  for  other  intermediates  although  stability  data  have been provided. For the bulk drug (Fab'-SH), the company has provided 11 day stability data to justify their position that the product should be lyophilised within 10 days. Data justify the proposed shelf life of 18 months. Process validation A  summary  of  the  potential  impurities  are  tested  for  on  starting  materials,  intermediates  and/or finished product, are provided along with the limits of detection in the following table: NA = Not Applicable, are biological tests LAL = Limulus Ameboycte Lysate MAP = Mouse Antibody Production GC = Gas Chromatography Medicinal product no longer authorised

The residual levels of pepsin in the finished product for three lots is less than 3 ng per 0.3 mg i.e. 10 ppm. The levels found in the corresponding lots of F(ab')2 bulk were between 5 and 50 ppm.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Viral safety

Studies have been carried out to validate the process of viral burden reduction. Three model viruses, XMuLV, pseudorabies and SV40 were selected for the validation studies in order to examine viral reduction capacity for four steps of the down stream process:

- Q-sepharose chromatography for ascitic fluid fractionation,

Specificity of LeukoScan is demonstrated by in vitro studies examining its relative binding capacity to granulocytes, monocytes and lymphocytes Cross-reactivity with various human tissues was evaluated by immunostaining of cryostat frozen sections and fixed/paraplast-II embedded sections using indirect immunofluorescent staining with FITC-anti-murine Ig and assaying by fluorescent microscopy.

· protein A chromatography, for purification of IgG, · pepsin digestion procedure · S-sepharose column for purification of F(ab')2 after pepsin digestion. For  the  single  use  columns,  Q-sepharose  and  S-sepharose,  two  unused  columns  prepared  in  an identical manner were used for each viral spiking study . Protein A columns were validated for re-use for  up  to  20  runs  where  duplicate  studies  were  carried  out  using  a  unused  column  and  a  reused column, which had been recycled for 20 times. Substantially  the  effective  mechanism  for  the  reduction  of  the  viral  burden  by  the  manufacturing process  of  LeukoScan  is  the  inactivation  of  viruses  by  low  pH  treatment  realised  in  the  pepsin digestion step (37 °C, 90-100 min, pH 3,7) and the following S-Sepharose chromatographic step (4 hours processing time at pH 4.0). The BWP during its meeting on 7-8 October 1996 considered that there are weaknesses in the capacity of the manufacturing process to remove/inactivate non-enveloped viruses. The effective mechanism for reduction of the viral burden by the manufacturing process of LeukoScan is the inactivation of viruses by low pH treatment during the pepsin digestion step and the S-Sepharose step. Although experimental studies provided did not sufficiently meet the requirements of the CPMP Guidelines, there are some indications that the low pH treatment is effective in inactivating enveloped viruses.  However,  validation  studies  do  not  provide  full  confidence  that  non-enveloped  viruses  are effectively removed. Therefore,  the  company  should  carry  out  viral  testing  in  accordance  with  Annex  1  Table  2  of  the CPMP Note  for  Guidance  on  the  Production  and  Quality  Control  of  Monoclonal  Antibodies  on  a routine basis . No detectable viruses should be present in the ascitic fluids except for retroviruses. No viruses should be detectable in the intermediate IgG. Contaminated batches should be discarded. The BWP recommended that a positive opinion may be issued on quality grounds, provided that the quality assurance and routine control measures as indicated above are implemented. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics The desired pharmacodynamic  action of LeukoScan  is the in vivo radiolabelling of blood granulocytes, granulocytes migrating to the site of infection and granulocytes at the site of infection. The  functional  integrity  of  the  antibody  was  demonstrated  by  its  specificity  for  CEA.  Certain antibodies against CEA that cross react with granulocytes have been proven to be specific for imaging of granulocytes in bone marrow and in sites of infection and inflammation. The molecule present on granulocytes that is reactive with Sulesomab has been shown to be NCA-90, in studies using HeLa cells transfected with cDNA genes that are known to be specific for CEA, NCA-90 and NCA-95. The company provided sufficient information on the NCA90 epitope and its relationship to CEA as well as information  on  the  development  of  the  product  with  particular  reference  to  the  specificity  and  CD classification of the molecular targets. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Human  tissue  staining  studies  performed  with  LeukoScan  [ 99m Tc]  demonstrated  staining  of  tissue granulocytes, blood granulocytes and the apical membranes of epithelial cells in the colon, rectum and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

small intestine. Other organs known to be targeted by the agent are the kidneys and also the spleen and the  bone  marrow,  which  are  both  known  to  be  rich  in  granulocytes.  In  vitro,  a  positive  binding  to lymphocytes up to 2-6% has been shown. The effect on lymphocyte function has not been determined.

It has also been shown that binding of LeukoScan to activated granulocytes is increased over binding of the agent to non-activated blood granulocytes, which would favour its reaction with granulocytes that are migrating to, or have accrued at sites of infection. In vitro assays have shown that it does not inhibit the function of granulocytes.

Mutagenic potential: No tests have been performed. The chemical constituents of the Fab' are the same  as  the  chemical  constituents  present  in  human  IgG.  The  chemical  reducing  agent  stannous chloride,  and  other  pharmaceutical  excipients  are  already  approved  in  IV  preparations  used  for radioisotope  imaging. 99m Tc  is  known  to  be  widely  accepted  in  clinical  practice  as  an  in  vivo radioimaging  agent.  The  radionuclide  emits  only  pure  gamma  radiation  of  a  relatively  low  energy. Mutagenicity tests were therefore considered not to be necessary.

The  possibility  of  LeukoScan  causing  anti-mouse  antibodies  exists,  but  probably  not  in  high proportion  on  first  exposure.  Any  pre-existing  anti-mouse  antibodies  would  be  expected  to  react  to some extent with LeukoScan. Pharmacodynamic studies with LeukoScan have not been performed in animals because NCA-90 is not present on the granulocytes of animals, with the possible exception of the higher primates. It is argued that drug interactions are unlikely to occur as the Fab' fragment is identical with the Fab domain of human IgG in blood which is present at much higher concentrations. Pharmacokinetics Two studies, one in mice and the other in hamsters, performed to study the biotransformation of 99m TcLeukoScan in these species. Size-exclusion HPLC analysis in sera of mice and hamsters showed that almost all the radioactivity was  associated  with  Fab'  and  F(ab')2.  The  relative  increase  in 99m Tc-F(ab')2  is  consistent  with  the different pharmacokinetic properties of Fab' and F(ab')2. F(ab')2 has a significantly longer blood halflife because it is not filtered by the kidneys whereas Fab' is rapidly excreted by the kidneys. After 1 hour of injection with 99m Tc-LeukoScan the 99m Tc products in the urine of hamsters was similar to mice, although in hamsters, considerably more radioactivity was associated with intact Fab' even at 6 hours post infusion. Biotransformation studies have also shown that 99m Tc LeukoScan is stable in blood,  demonstrating  that  the  assay  of 99m Tc  is  a  reliable  surrogate  of  the  biodistribution  of  the fragment. However the animal model, which does not express the epitope, the antibody is binding. and furthermore, there is no evidence that these biotransformation data are comparable to the studies done in humans. Pharmacokinetic studies after repeated administration have not been performed because of the lack of the target antigen (NCA-90), the rapid transformation of the agent by the kidney and the short half-life of the radioisotope. Autoradiography studies aimed at investigating the distribution in normal and pregnant animals were not  performed  because  of  the  lack  of  NCA-90  in  animals.  Therefore  such  studies  would  not  be expected to identify any cell type or structure with which the agent would specifically react. Toxicity Single dose toxicity: No toxic effects were seen in mice or rats after the animals were injected with more than 50 times the human 99m Tc-LeukoScan dose. Repeated dose toxicity: 99m Tc-LeukoScan was repeatedly injected intravenously into rats and rabbits following a schedule designed to induce maximum allergic reaction to the agent. No treatment-related abnormalities  in  a  range  of  parameters  including  haematology,  clinical  chemistry  and  histology,  or toxicities were detected after repeated injections with doses exceeding the human dose by fifty-fold. Reproductive  toxicity: Animal  reproductive  toxicity  studies  have  not  been  conducted.  The  use  of LeukoScan in pregnancy is addressed in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Carcinogenic potential:

No studies have been performed for similar reasons stated above.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Local tolerance: No evidence of toxicity at the local site of injection was observed in either the single dose or repeated dose toxicity studies, with the exception of redness at the site of injection in some animals in the repeated dose toxicity study.

Immunotoxicity: The low dose of Fab'-SH used clinically is essentially non immunogenic as it lacks the  Fc  domain of IgG. The use of the monovalent Fab'SH fragment also eliminates potential direct immunopharmacotoxic effects that could result from the use of the intact antibody, i.e. complement activation or antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity, both of which are Fc-mediated

This in-vivo labelling of human granulocytes is a new development, but has been routinely applied, especially  for  imaging  the  bone  marrow,  in  ten  thousands  of  patients.  The  main  advantage  is  that nuclear medicine methods are not invasive and have no pharmacodynamic effects. When using 99m Tc labelled  antibody fragments, the images are of higher quality due to the better count rates obtained when using 99m Tc instead of 111 In or 67 Ga. The use of 99m Tc also enables the application of SPECT, which  makes  the  localisation  more  precise.  The  risk  of  damaging  the  granulocytes  by  separation procedures can be avoided, and also the risks which are inherent when manipulating with the blood or the cells of the patient.

Ecotoxicology: No assessment of the potential for environmental effects has been provided. During the centralised procedure questions regarding the preclinical characterisation were answered comprehensively so that no issues were left open. 4. Clinical aspects The  localisation  of  the  site  and  extent  of  an  infectious  process  is  very  important  to  the  clinical management of infection  foci  affecting  musculoskeletal  system,  and  can  significantly  influence  the treatment (e.g., drainage, therapy with antibiotics, surgery etc.). The anatomically orientated imaging modalities (conventional radiography, x-ray CT-scan, magnetic resonance  imaging  (MRI),  ultrasonography)  are  extremely  useful  for  the  detection  of  focal  sites  of inflammation in the brain, in the thorax or intraabdominally. For  evaluating  patients  with  focal  inflammation  after  surgery,  or  involving  the  musculo-skeletal system, these morphologically orientated procedures are less effective and very difficult to interpret after bone trauma or surgery. If  there  is  no  morphologic  alteration  (early  in  the  beginning  of  an  inflammatory  process)  these methods can be completely normal despite severe clinical symptoms (e.g., fever of unknown origin). Radionuclide techniques, such as 111 In-WBC or 67 Ga-citrate imaging have been applied with relatively good  success  for  detection  of  early  inflammation.  However,  a  number  of  problems  are  not  solved when  using  this  method,  e.g.,  the  long  time  between  injection  and  imaging  (mostly  more  than  24 hours),  the  complicated  biodistribution  (especially  for 67 Ga),  and  the  very  time-consuming  and complicated  procedures  for  isolating  granulocytes  from  the  patients´  blood  when  using 111 In-oxine imaging. The gold standard in nuclear medicine imaging of infectious diseases using radiolabelled autologous white  blood  cells  requires  time-consuming  ex-vivo  blood  handling  techniques,  special  training  and presents potential risk of infecting nuclear medicine personnel or even by infecting the patient (which has occurred by confusing the blood samples) (Becker et al., 1994). The in-vivo labelling of leukocytes using monoclonal antibodies avoids the complicated isolation of granulocytes  by  labelling  the  cells  with  a 99m Tc  labelled  monoclonal  antibody  in-vivo.  Areas  of concern using murine monoclonal antibodies include the development of human anti-mouse antibodies (HAMA), the altered biodistribution after repeated injection which could alter imaging and interfere with in-vitro immunoassays. To avoid this problem, chimeric or humanised or human antibodies are developed, lower doses of antibodies are used, and antibody fragments instead of intact IgG can be applied. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

Dose determining studies (see Table 1).

Data was pooled from 53 patients enrolled in 3 studies (01, 02, and 03).

It was observed that there was satisfactory sensitivity and specificity at doses ranging from 0.1 mg to 1.0 mg. Thus the SPC recommendation of 0.25 mg is considered to be reasonable.

<!-- image -->

| Study no.   | Phase &study aim                                                             |   Centres | Study design                                       | Dose of radio- label (Mbq), antibody (mg)   |   Patient no. |
|-------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------|
| 01 02 03    | Phase I/II: Dose tolerance, pharmacokinetics                                 |         5 | Single group open label uncontrolled               | 185-925 MBq, 0.1-1.0 mg                     |            53 |
| 15          | Phase I/II: Bioequivalence of 2 formulations product                         |         1 | 2 way double blind cross-over                      | 740-1110 MBq, 0.25 mg                       |            13 |
| 12 ongoing  | Phase I: Evaluation of granulocyte function                                  |         1 | single group, open label                           | 555-925 MBq, 0.25 mg                        |             5 |
| 07          | Phase III: Diagnosis of osteomyelitis in patients with dia-betic foot ulcers |        20 | single group blinded, primary-standard- controlled | 555-925 MBq, 0.25 mg                        |           102 |
| 08          | Phase III: Diagnosis of long bone osteomyelitis                              |        19 | single group blinded, primary-standard- controlled | 555-925 MBq, 0.25 mg                        |           130 |

Study  12  is  a  single  group  open  label  design,  which  was  designed  to  investigate  in  patients  with known abscesses: i) granulocyte function ii) safety and efficacy of LeukoScan [ 99m Tc]. As  far  as  granulocyte  function  is  concerned,  where  the  measurements  of  chemiluminescence  were made  on  whole  blood,  it  is  argued  that  macrophages  could  also  contribute  to  these  responses  and therefore the term 'phagocyte function' is considered to be preferable. Pharmacokinetics Studies 01, 02, and 03, show that the pharmacokinetics and clearance observed with an investigational batch are satisfactory. Dosimetry demonstrates that doses to organs are within acceptable levels for radiopharmaceuticals. Study  no.  15  was  designed  to  evaluate  bioequivalence,  dosimetry  and  in  vivo  stability  of  the  2 formulations of LeukoScan; the investigational and commercial. Bioequivalence in terms of AUC as defined in the protocol could not be adequately demonstrated between the 2 formulations. However, the mean blood clearance curves show close similarity between the 2 formulations of LeukoScan. It is thought unlikely that the differences between the 2 formulations would be of any clinical significance as radioimmunodiagnostic agents are generally employed on a single occasion. Summary of clinical studies: Efficacy Two major phase III trials in osteomyelitis were submitted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Study  07 evaluated  LeukoScan  in  the  detection  of  osteomyelitis  in  102  patients  with  diabetic  foot ulcers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study 08 evaluated LeukoScan in 130 patients with suspected long bone osteomyelitis.

Studies 07 and 08 have many similarities in design and clinically diabetic foot ulcer patients generally have osteomyelitis in long bones. Hence a combined analysis of the efficacy data was performed with a total number of 175 evaluable patients.

LeukoScan  is  shown  to  be  more  sensitive  (93.3%  versus  80.6%-p=NS),  but  less  specific  (51,6  % versus 72.9% - p = NS) in diagnosing osteomyelitis in diabetic foot ulcer patients than in patients with other forms of long bone osteomyelitis a equivalent diagnostic accuracy. The same trend is observed in WBC imaging.

Clinical data showed also that induction of human anti-murine antibodies (HAMA) with LeukoScan will be a very rare event.

The global analysis confirms the efficacy of LeukoScan in osteomyelitis of long bones and associated with diabetic foot ulceration. Efficacy end points were defined in terms of: 1. Diagnostic utility; where the primary endpoint was to compare LeukoScan imaging with bone biopsy histopathology and microbial culture and the secondary endpoint was the comparison of LeukoScan  to  conventional  leukocyte  imaging  i.e.  LeukoScan  and  white  blood  cell  (WBC) scans  are  read  at  the  site  by  the  nuclear  physician.  Sensitivity,  specificity,  accuracy,  positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) were measured. 2. Clinical benefit; defined as one for whom both the LeukoScan diagnostic procedure was correct and  a  diagnostic  imaging  procedure,  a  clinical  management  action  (or  both)  was  changed  as result of LeukoScan interpretation. The clinical implication of diagnosing osteomyelitis is that intensive antibiotic treatment and surgery may be required. LeukoScan was found to be equivalent to WBC scanning, with statistically superior sensitivity (95% vs. 84%), but lower specificity (55.6% vs. 63.0%). LeukoScan has advantages over WBC scanning in terms of convenience and lacks the potential for inadvertent administration of the wrong blood sample. Hence the indication for LeukoScan is justified. It  should be noted that comparing LeukoScan versus bone-scan, the sensitivity of the antibody scan was higher than for the bone scan in osteomyelitis in patients with diabetic foot ulcer: this could be possibly due to the infection being strictly limited to the bone marrow and therefore not inducing any detectable alteration in the bone structure. Safety The safety profile of LeukoScan is regarded as acceptable in relation to reported adverse events, vital signs and the lack of generation of Human Anti Mouse Antibodies (HAMA). The fall in leukocyte and neutrophil numbers that occurs 24 hours following injection of LeukoScan is considered  to  be  as  within  the  normal  range.  An  approximately  10%  fall  in  blood  leukocyte  and neutrophil  numbers  was  noted  24  hours  following  injection  of  LeukoScan.  The  overall  minimal variations in WBC count seen in some of the clinical trials were of no clinical relevance, were likely due to change or 'tendency to the mean' and were seen in uninfected individuals. The risk of Immunotoxicity of LeukoScan has been proved to be minimal because the Fab' cannot activate  complement  or  effect  antibody-dependent  cytotoxicity,  Fab'  is  monovalent  and  therefore cross- linking of antigen on cell surface is not possible, and finally the low dose of Fab' minimises any pharmacological  effect of the mAb  on  granulocyte  function.  In vitro assays of granulocyte activation/function predicted that any direct immunotoxicity was unlikely. The company committed to complete the studies on the LeukoScan binding to the human blood white cells submitting additional information on the labelling of lymphocytes as well as on the functional consequences of this binding to the lymphocytes. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Conclusion

During the centralised procedure questions regarding the preclinical characterisation were answered comprehensively so that no issues were left open.

Clinical safety of the product: No adverse effects definitely related to the antibody injection have been reported in 350 patients studied. Like all diagnostic nuclear medicine procedures, immunoscintigraphy uses  only  very  small  amounts  of  radiolabelled  substances  (tracer  technique)  and  therefore  adverse reaction  rates  are  very  low.  No  clinically  significant  changes  in  blood  chemistry  or  hematology parameters  were  recorded.  The  use  of  a  antibody  fragment  also  reduces  possible  immunological reactions following the antibody injection. The incidence of HAMA is extremely low: In 228 patients tested, no human anti-mouse antibody reactions (anti-idiotypic as well as anti-isotypic responses) were found (very low immunogenicity of the product). The benefit risk ratio, which has been calculated (3.1:1) also demonstrated that the product is safe. Clinical  efficacy  of  the  product:  Clinical  trials  have  been  performed  in  285  patients.  Two  major indications i) detection of bone infection in patients with diabetic foot ulcers (n = 102 patients) and ii) detection of long bone osteomyelitis (n = 130 patients) were studied in single-group, non-randomised prospective  design  trials.  Diagnostic  efficacy  could  be  proven  in  178  patients,  which  had  bone biopsies  and  /  or  microbiological  culture  after  immunoscintigraphy.  158  patients  had  comparative studies with white blood cell scans labelled by the conventional method (double radionuclide studies). 175 patients were assessed for diagnostic utility and clinical benefit. The data presentation was clear and the data convincingly demonstrated that the product is useful for the  claimed  indications,  statistically  significant  superiority  of  the  product  has  been  shown  in comparison to the conventional diagnostic techniques (ex-vivo white blood cell labelling) used up to now  in  the  clinic  (diagnostic  accuracy  of  LeucoScan  76.6  %  vs.  70.9  %  for  conventional  WBC labelling). Of  special  importance  (and  from  a  clinical  standpoint  most  essential)  was  the  detailed  analysis  of clinical  benefit  results  for  the  product.  It  was  clearly  demonstrated  that  anti-granulocyte  antibody imaging reduced significantly the number of patients requiring other diagnostic procedures (85.4 % reduction),  reduced  the  number  of  patients  requiring  antibiotic  treatment  (56.8  %  reduction),  and increased the need for surgery (61.3 % increase). Overall, 72 % of the patients experienced additional benefit and in 43 % an improvement of clinical outcome attributable to immunoimaging was recorded. On  this  favourable  risk/benefit  assessment,  the  CPMP  in  their  meeting  on  15-16  October  1996 unanimously agreed on a favourable opinion for granting a marketing authorisation to LeukoScan in the following indication: 'LeukoScan  is  indicated for diagnostic imaging  for determining the location and extent of infection/inflammation  in  bone  in  patients  with  suspected  osteomyelitis,  including  patients  with diabetic foot ulcers. When bones scan is positive and imaging with LeukoScan is negative, infection is unlikely. When a bone scan is negative, imaging with LeukoScan may rarely show a positive response and this may indicate early osteomyelitis.' Medicinal product no longer authorised