---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:47:45
document_pages: 29
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/levviax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: levviax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 18.2502898
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 05:47:56.580412
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 30 March 2007 Product name: LEVVIAX Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/354/A22/41

## Medicinal Product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK

Tel. (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68

E-mail: mail@emea.europa.eu     http://www.emea.europa.eu

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE

## 1.1. Origin of regulatory Activities

Medicinal Product no longer authorised On 9 July 2001, the European Commission granted Aventis Pharma S.A. a marketing authorisation for Levviax for treatment of the following infections: mild to moderate community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis (AECB), and acute sinusitis (ABS) in patients of 18 years  and  older,  as  well  as  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  caused  by  Streptococcus  pyogenes  in  adults  and adolescents, as an alternative when beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate. Throughout  the  year  2006,  the  CHMP  has  been  reviewing  relevant  safety  data  on  Levviax.  The CHMP/EMEA  have  asked  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  to  submit  comprehensive  safety reviews, including updated analysis on hepatic adverse reactions, a review of the benefit-risk balance in  each  of  the  therapeutic  indications  and  comparative  data  from  clinical  trials  with  telithromycin compared to other antibiotics. In their meeting in January 2007 the CHMP concluded that the Marketing Authorisation Holder failed to submit a reassuring answer to these questions. The CHMP thus remained concerned regarding the overall benefit-risk balance of Levviax. Compared to other macrolides, Levviax seems to be associated with a somewhat different risk profile, i.e.  adverse  reactions  as  eye  disorders,  which  sometimes  are  of  severe  nature,  and  serious  adverse reactions  as  aggravation  of  myasthenia  gravis,  loss  of  consciousness  and  acute  liver  failure. Altogether,  these  adverse  reactions  constitute  a  significant  risk  which  could  have  impact  on  the approved  therapeutic  indications.  Furthermore,  the  CHMP  noted  the  submission  of  the  Risk Management.  However,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  did  not  propose  Risk  Minimisation Activities. Further to the FDA Joint Advisory Committee meeting held on December 14-15, 2006, the following regulatory  steps  were  advised  regarding  revision  of  the  US  prescribing  information;  the  indications acute  bacterial  sinusitis  (ABS)  and  acute  exacerbation  of  chronic  bronchitis  (AECB)  should  be removed  from  the  labelling,  and  the  safety  partss  of  the  labelling  should  be  updated.    On  the  12 February  2007,  FDA  authorised  a  new  Levviax  labelling,  where  these  issues  were  implemented, including a contraindication in myasthenia gravis. During the January 2007 meeting, these concerns were discussed and CHMP requested the responses to  the  following  questions  to  be  provided  by  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  in  writing  by 12 February 2007 and in an oral explanation at the March 2007 CHMP meeting. 1. The Marketing Authorisation Holder should carry out a benefit-risk evaluation for Levviax in all the authorised indications. Comparative  data  from  clinical  trials  with  telithromycin  compared  to  other  antibiotics  (such  as erythromycin,  clarithromycin,  roxithromycin,  amoxicillin/clavulanic  acid  etc…)  for  which  data  is available to the Marketing Authorisation Holder should be included in the evaluation. 2. In the context of the identified risks the Marketing Authorisation Holder should propose adequate Risk Minimisation Measures whenever necessary.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.2. QUESTION 1 ON THE BENEFIT-RISK ASSESSMENT IN THE AUTHORISED INDICATIONS

The MAH has provided:

Medicinal Product no longer authorised · A review of current medical need for antibiotics in the treatment of respiratory tract infections (RTIs), · An overall and by indication summary of the microbiological and clinical efficacy data pertaining to the benefits of telithromycin, · An overall and by indication summary of the risks associated with telithromycin, · An overall and by indication comparative evaluation of the Benefit-Risk profile of telithromycin vs. other antibiotics. 1.2.1. Review of the current medical need The present Benefit-Risk Evaluation includes a review of the current medical need for antibiotics in the treatment of community-acquired RTIs. The key organisms associated with RTI are Streptococcus pneumoniae (including  penicillin-  and/or  macrolide-resistant  strains), Haemophilus  influenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis (including β -lactamase-producing strains), Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus  pyogenes .    In  addition,  atypical  and  intracellular  pathogens  such  as Mycoplasma pneumoniae , Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Legionella  pneumophila represent important causes of CAP.  All  these  pathogens  have  been  shown  to  be  sufficiently  covered  by  the  spectrum  of telithromycin. Beta-lactam agents and macrolides are commonly used for the treatment of community acquired RTI, but resistance against S. pneumoniae, the most important RTI pathogen, has reached significant levels in several European countries. 1.2.1.1 Clinical impact of antibiotic resistance S. pneumoniae resistance to antibiotics varies greatly among European countries and remains high in several countries particularly in Southern Europe (Table 1). Large  differences  in  penicillin  non-susceptibility  in  invasive S.  pneumoniae isolates  are  reported among European countries by the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (EARSS), varying from 1% in the Netherlands to 36% in France and 39% in Romania in 2005. Several countries reported a significant increase such as Sweden (from 1.5% in 1999 to 3.6% in 2005), Iceland (from 2.1% in 1999 to 8.1% in 2005), and Bulgaria (from 8% in 2002 to 32.6% in 2005). In contrast, Spain (from 32.5% in 1999 to 25.6% in 2005), Ireland (from 19.5% in 2000 to 11.1% in 2005), Belgium (from 13.5% in 1999 to 11.8% in 2005), and the UK (from 7.4% in 1999 to 3.9% in 2005) reported a decrease in the proportion of nonsusceptible strains over the same period. Erythromycin resistance is generally more prevalent than penicillin resistance in the EU. In 2005, the majority  of  countries  reported  between  10%  and  25%  erythromycin  resistance.  Belgium,  France, Hungary,  Italy,  Romania  and  Slovakia  reported  rates  over  30%.  Only  Estonia,  Czech  Republic, Sweden, Denmark and Bulgaria still reported antibiotic resistance levels below 10%. Until 2000, The Netherlands,  Austria,  Norway,  Germany  and  Finland  also  reported  levels  below  10%,  but  the proportion of antibiotic-resistant S.  pneumoniae in  these  countries  has  increased  significantly  in  the last 5 years.

The  Prospective  Resistant  Organism  Tracking  and  Epidemiology  for  the  Ketolide  Telithromycin (PROTEKT) - Global study, an international study initiated in 1999 is a longitudinal microbiological surveillance study designed to evaluate the activity of telithromycin against S. pneumoniae and other common RTI pathogens and to compare its activity with that of other  antibacterial  agents.    In  this study,  all  isolates  (not  only  invasive  isolates)  coming  from  RTIs  are  collected  (Table  1).  In  many countries, PROTEKT results reports higher resistance rates in comparison with EARSS. This may be explained by the fact that both invasive and noninvasive isolates are collected in the PROTEKT study.

Levviax/H/C/354/A22/41

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The frequency of the erm (B) genotype among macrolide resistant S. pneumoniae is higher in Europe compared to the US. This genotype is found in the vast majority of macrolide resistant S. pneumoniae in many EU countries (Belgium, France, Hungary, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden) and  in  approximately  half  of  the  strains  in  Italy  and  Germany.  This  genotype  of  resistance  is associated  with  very  high  MICs, ≥ 64  mg/l  for  the  macrolides  (erythromycin,  clarithromycin, azithromycin).

|             | EARSS 2005   | EARSS 2005   | EARSS 2005   | PROTEKT 2003-2004   | PROTEKT 2003-2004   | PROTEKT 2003-2004   |
|-------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Country     | ERSP%        | PNSP%        | PRSP %       | ERSP%               | PNSP%               | PRSP %              |
| Austria     | 15           | 5            | 1            | 16.9                | 12.3                | 6.2                 |
| Belgium     | 31           | 12           | 3            | 30.7                | 16.2                | 9.9                 |
| Bulgaria    | 8            | 33           | 30           | 20                  | 20                  | 0                   |
| Czeh Rep.   | 2            | 4            | 0            | 2.9                 | 7                   | 4.1                 |
| Germany     | 17           | 5            | 0            | 22.2                | 9.4                 | 2.2                 |
| Denmark     | 6            | 4            | 1            | longer -            | -                   | -                   |
| Estonia     | 0            | 2            | 0            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Spain       | 23           | 25           | 9            | 33.5                | 40                  | 28.5                |
| Finland     | 20           | 7            | 1            | 15.9                | 18.9                | 4.4                 |
| France      | 41           | 36           | 5            | 51.1                | 53.4                | 38.4                |
| Greece      | -            | -            | -            | 49.4                | 55                  | 43.6                |
| Croatia     | 17           | 17           | 0            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Hungary     | 37           | 22           | no 2         | 43.6                | 48.7                | 23.7                |
| Ireland     | 15           | 33           | 8            | 18                  | 20                  | 16                  |
| Iceland     | 17           | 8            | 0            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Italy       | 31           | 9            | 5            | 45.6                | 17.6                | 13.2                |
| Luxemburg   | 24           | 12           | 7            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Latvia      | 3            | 0            | 0            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Netherlands | 11           | 1            | 0            | 10.2                | 3.4                 | 1.7                 |
| Norway      | Product 16   | 2            | 1            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Poland      | 33           | 33           | 17           | 18.2                | 11.2                | 9.8                 |
| Portugal    | 19           | 17           | 1            | 6.1                 | 15.1                | 3                   |
| Romania     | 31           | 39           | 22           | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| Sweden      | 6            | 4            | 0            | 6                   | 12.8                | 4.5                 |
| Slovakia    | 40           | 0            | 0            | 13.4                | 38.3                | 17.2                |
| Slovenia    | 11           | 11           | 2            | -                   | -                   | -                   |
| UK          | 11           | 4            | 2            | 24.2                | 9.1                 | 3                   |

Convincing evidence that resistance has an adverse effect on clinical outcomes particularly mortality is sparse, especially in out-patients. However, it has recently been suggested that resistance may need to  be  reconsidered  as  an  independent  predictor  of  poor  clinical  response,  but  interpretation  of  the studies  is  difficult  due  to  confounding  factors  such  as  comorbidities,  severity  of  illness,  and  age

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

[Tleyjeh,  2006].  A  recent  study  using  a  large  claims  database  found  no  statistically  significant association  between S.  pneumoniae susceptibility  and  RTI  treatment  outcomes  in  AECB  and  ABS, conditions  that  are  not  associated  with  bacteremia  [Furuno,  2006].  On  the  other  hand,  four  recent studies focusing on patients with pneumococcal bacteremia provide evidence that macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae contributes to an increased risk of treatment failure with macrolides [Lonks et al, 2002; Van Kerkhoven et al, 2003; Danneman et al, 2006; Grant et al., 2006].

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1.2.1.2 Current antibiotic treatment CAP, AECB, and ABS are most often treated empirically with the following antibiotics: β -lactams (eg, penicillin, amoxicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, oral cephalosporins), macrolides (eg, clarithromycin,  azithromycin,  and  erythromycin),  ketolides  (telithromycin),  and  quinolones  (eg, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin).  To a lesser extent, tetracyclines and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole are also used in the treatment of RTIs. 1.2.2 Summary of the microbiological data of telithromycin supporting the benefits of the agent Overall,  the  antibacterial  spectrum  of  telithromycin  is  targeted  against  RTI  pathogens.  The  main pathogens covered by telithromycin are: -Streptococcus pneumoniae (including macrolides and/or penicillin resistant strains) -Haemophilus influenzae (natural  intermediate  susceptibility;  including β -lactamase-positive  strains) -Moraxella catarrhalis (including ß-lactamase-positive strains) -Streptococcus.  pyogenes (susceptible  to  macrolides  or  resistant  to  macrolides  by  the  presence  of mef (A)or erm (TR)  genes,  but  not  high-level  erythromycin  A  resistant erm (B)  positive  strains. -Atypical and intracellular pathogens C. pneumoniae, M. pneumoniae, and L. pneumophila. Streptococcus pneumoniae S. pneumoniae resistance to telithromycin is less than 1% worldwide, including Europe, and there is currently no trend towards an increase of resistance. In contrast to the macrolides, telithromycin binds tightly  to  2  sites  on  the  ribosome,  domains  II  and  V  of  the  23S  rRNA  on  the  50S  subunit  and  is therefore active against bacteria that harbour a macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B  (MLSB)inducible type of resistance and does not induce MLSB resistance in vitro .  Telithromycin is active in vitro against S.  pneumoniae resistant  to  the  macrolides  via  an  efflux  mechanism  ( mef (A))  or  via methylation  ( erm (B)),  including  strains  with  multiple  mechanisms  of  resistance  to  macrolides,  ie, erm (B) + mef (A). The compound demonstrates concentration-dependent bactericidal activity against S.  pneumoniae unlike most macrolides. The  activity  of  telithromycin  against S.  pneumoniae is  regularly  monitored  by  the  worldwide PROTEKT program. The in vitro activity of telithromycin and other antibiotics commonly prescribed for RTIs on S. pneumoniae of various phenotypes of resistance is described in Table 2.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2 - PROTEKT Global: Antibiotic activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae , 2003-2004

|                   | all SP   | PEN-R SP   | ERY-R SP   | MDRSP   | XDR SP     |
|-------------------|----------|------------|------------|---------|------------|
| Number of strains | 7083     | 1696       | 2638       | 2833    | 727        |
| TEL               |          |            |            |         | authorised |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)     | 0.25     | 0.5        | 0.5        | 0.5     | 0.5        |
| TEL-R,%           | 0.1      | 0.4        | 0.3        | 0.3     | 0.6        |
| AZI               |          |            |            |         |            |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)     | ≥ 128    | ≥ 128      | ≥ 128      | ≥ 128   | ≥ 128      |
| AZI-R,%           | 37.1     | 77.7       | 99.3       | 82.6    | 99.3       |
| AMC               |          |            |            |         |            |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)     | 2        | ≥ 8        | 4          | ≥ 8     | ≥ 8        |
| AMC-R,%           | 4        | 16.9       | 8.4        | 10.1    | 25.4       |
| CEF               |          |            |            |         |            |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)     | 8        | ≥ 16       | 8          | 8       | ≥ 16       |
| CEF-R, %          | 28.7     | 99.9       | 60.2       | 70.5    | 100        |
| LEV               |          |            | longer     |         |            |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)     | 1        | 1          | 1          | 1       | 1          |
| LEV-R,%           | 0.9      | 1.7        | 1.6        | 1.8     | 3.9        |

|                               |   Year 1 |   Year 2 |   Year 3 |   Year 4 |   Year 5 |
|-------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| No. of Haemophilus influenzae | 2986     | 3133     | 4294     |  4457    |  2834    |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)                 |    2     |    2     |    2     |     2    |     2    |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)                 |    2     |    2     |    2     |     2    |     2    |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)                 |    1     |    1     |    1     |     2    |     2    |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)                 |    2     |    2     |    2     |     2    |     4    |
| MIC 90 (mg/L)                 |    0.015 |    0.015 |    0.015 |     0.03 |     0.03 |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised SP= Streptococcus pneumoniae ; PEN-I=penicillin intermediately-resistant; PEN-R=penicillin-resistant; ERY-R=erythromycin-resistant; TELR=telithromycin-resistant; AZI-R=azithromycin-resistant; AMC-R=amoxicillin-clavulanic acid-resistant; CEF-R=cefuroxime-resistant; LEVR=levofloxacin-resistant. MDRSP=multidrug-resistant S. pneumoniae (resistance to ≥ antibacterial classes, with penicillin, cefuroxime, erythromycin, tetracycline, cotrimoxazole, and levofloxacin being the class representatives); XDR=extended drug resistance (ie, S. pneumoniae isolates that are resistant to 5  or 6 classes of antibacterials). Haemophilus influenzae Telithromycin has been shown to have moderate activity against H. influenzae .  There is no signal of an increase in the prevalence of strains with high-level resistance. Telithromycin activity is not affected by β -lactamase production or other resistance mechanisms of resistance to β -lactams. Table 2 - PROTEKT Global: Antibiotic activity against Haemophilus influenzae , Year 5

Year 5=2003-2004.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Streptococcus pyogenes

Telithromycin has been shown to have a good activity against S. pyogenes. Cross-resistance occurs between telithromycin and high-level erythromycin A resistant strains carrying the erm (B) gene, which represents 0 to 14% of the macrolide resistant genotypes in Europe.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Telithromycin's weak in  vitro activity  against  enteric  Gram-negative  flora  makes  it  less  likely  than fluoroquinolones  or β -lactams  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  clinically  significant  antibiotic resistance among enteric pathogens of concern. Discussion: Decreased susceptibility to beta-lactam and macrolide agents in S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae may complicate  the  treatment  of  CAP,  AECB  and  ABS,  although  resistance  rates  vary  substantially between different European countries. This is of particular importance in the indication CAP, where the benefit of antibiotic treatment is undoubtedly demonstrated, and in countries and regions where resistance rates are high. Notably, although susceptibility rates among clinical S. pneumoniae strains to telithromycin remain very high in the European countries and that in vitro and clinical data indicate that  telithromycin  should  overcome  erythromycin  resistance  in S.  pneumoniae ,  there  seems  to  be  a significant although week cross-resistance with the macrolides. MIC90 for the EryS phenotypes have previously been estimated to 0.03 mg/l, compared to 0.5 mg/l for the EryM and MLSB phenotypes, indicating a mechanism of cross-resistance, although additional genetic events seem to be required for clinically significant resistance to telithromycin to occur. In vitro results have shown  that telithromycin is affected by the erythromycin erm (B) and mef A related resistance mechanisms but to lesser extent than erythromycin. While exposure to telithromycin can select for pneumococcal mutants with increased MICs, the MICs seem to remain within the proposed susceptibility range. There is no crossor co-resistance between telithromycin and beta-lactam resistance in Streptococcus pneumoniae .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Telithromycin exhibits a natural intermediate in  vitro activity  against  clinical H. influenzae strains, and  clinical  efficacy  has  been  demonstrated  for  susceptible  strains  in  the  approved  indications.    A certain  degree  of  cross-resistance  between  telithromycin  and  erythromycin  has  been  shown,  as telithromycin resistant strains are most often also resistant to erythromycin. Beta-lactamase production or ampicillin resistance per se in H. influenzae clinical strains has no impact on the telithromycin MIC distribution.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Tonsillitis/pharyngitis  is  commonly  treated  with  penicillin,  due  to  100%  susceptibility  among S. pyogenes , unless beta-lactams are considered inappropriate due to hypersensitivity. For S. pyogenes ,  cross-resistance  occurs  between  telithromycin  and  high-level  erythromycin  A  resistant strains carrying the erm (B) gene . Many antimicrobial agents, including telithromycin, macrolides and several beta-lactam agents, reach significantly  concentrations  in  the  intestines  and  may  consequently  have  an  impact  on  the  normal microflora and select for resistant strains and resistance genes. Telithromycin has been shown to cause moderate quantitative disturbances and selection of resistant Bacteroides spp in the normal intestinal microflora comparable  to those associated with clarithromycin administration. In contrast to clarithromycin, telithromycin was not associated with selection of highly resistant oral streptococci, intestinal Enterobacteriaceae or Enterococcus spp. during the administration period, indicating a more favourable  ecological  profile  of  telithromycin,  most  probable  associated  with  its  more  narrow antibacterial spectrum. According to in  vitro susceptibility  data  and  current  knowledge  about  resistance  rates  and  resistant mechanisms,  telithromycin  may  offer  an  advantage  to  conventional  macrolides  in  the  treatment  of respiratory  tract  infections  when  resistance  against  conventional  macrolides  in S.  pneumoniae is suspected and when beta-lactams are not the drugs of choice due to resistance or hypersensitivity. 1.2.3 Summary of clinical efficacy data of telithromycin supporting the benefits of the agent Sixteen Phase III studies were conducted world-wide which supported the 4 EU-approved indications; 12  double-blind  comparative  trials  and  4  open  label  noncomparative  trials.  The  pivotal  activecomparator, noninferiority study designs were consistent with regulatory guidelines. For all comparative studies the primary efficacy analysis was based on clinical outcome (cure) at the posttherapy/test  of  cure  visit  (TOC,  Visit  3)  in  the  per  protocol  (PPc)  population,  except  in  tonsillitispharyngitis where the main analyses were the bacteriological outcome at TOC. In all Phase III studies, telithromycin was administered as an oral dose of 800 mg once daily. The prespecified noninferiority margins  were  consistent  with  the  available  FDA  guidances,  accepting  a  delta  of  15  %  in  the comparative  studies  for  CAP,  AECB,  ABS,  and  T/P.  In  addition,  the  guidance  for  T/P  included  a minimal cure rate of 85 % for success. The final data for all studies, except two, had a lower bound of the  confidence  interval  above  -10  %.  The  two  exceptions  were  Study  3009  for  CAP,  which  was terminated early due to safety considerations for the comparator (trovafloxacin) and Study 3004 for T/P that was intended to be supportive to the larger study 3008 for the T/P indication.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Community-Acquired Pneumonia (CAP)

The effectiveness of 800 mg of telithromycin administered once daily for 7-10 days in the treatment of CAP, evaluated in 4 Phase III double blind and 4 Phase III open label clinical studies, are summarised in Table 3:

|                               | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparator(s)   | Comparator(s)   | Comparator(s)   | Difference95%   | CI a           |
|-------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|
| N                             |                 | n               | (%)             | N               | n               | (%)             |                 |                |
| PPc population                |                 |                 |                 |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |
| Study A3001                   | 149             | 141             | (94.6)          | 152             | 137             | (90.1)          | 4.50%           | [-2.1; 11.1]   |
| Study A3006                   | 162             | 143             | (88.3)          | 156             | 138             | (88.5)          | -0.19%          | [-7.8; 7. 5]   |
| A3009 *                       | 80              | 72              | (90.0)          | 86              | 81              | (94.2)          | -4.19%          | [-13.9; 5.2]   |
| Study A4003 TEL 7 d           | 159             | 142             | (89.3)          | 146             | 134             | (91.8)          | -2.47%          | [-9.7; 4.7]    |
| Study A4003 TEL 5 d           | 161             | 143             | (88.8)          | 146             | 134             | (91.8)          | -2.96%          | [-10.18; 4.26] |
| Comparative CAP pooled b      | 552             | 499             | (90.4)          | 540             | 490             | longer (90.7)   | -0.34%          | [-4.0; 3.3]    |
| Study A3000                   | 197             | 183             | (92.9)          |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |
| Study A3009OL                 | 187             | 175             | (93.6)          |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |
| Study A3010                   | 357             | 332             | (93.0)          |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |
| Study A3012                   | 723             | 646             | (89.3)          |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |
| All CAP studies TEL 7 to 10 d | 2016            | 1835            | (91.0)          |                 |                 |                 |                 |                |

| mITT population   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparator group (usual care)   | Comparator group (usual care)   | Comparator group (usual care)   | 95% CI a       |
|-------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------|
|                   | N               | n               | (%)             | N                               | n                               | (%)                             |                |
| CAP Study A4015   | 242             | 208             | 86.0%           | 240                             | 189                             | 78.8%                           | [0.4; 14.0]* f |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 3 - CAP: Clinical cure rates by study for telithromycin and comparator(s) at posttherapy/test of cure Population definitions: mITT=modified intent-to-treat; PPc=clinically evaluable per protocol; bmITT=bacteriologically evaluable modified intent-to-treat; PPb=bacteriologically evaluable per protocol; N=number of subjects; n=number clinically cured. a 95% confidence interval of the difference in cure rates between the treatment groups. b Excluding the 5-day treatment group. * Study terminated early. Comparators: A3001 amoxicillin, A3006 clarithromycin, A3009 trovafloxacin, A4003 clarithromycin. In addition, 3 Phase IV studies confirmed the high clinical efficacy of telithromycin in CAP, with a trend for superior efficacy in one study, where telithromycin was tested against the locally prescribed regimen in countries with high levels of antibiotic resistance: Table 4 - Clinical cure rates at posttherapy/test of cure - Superiority study A4015 a 95% confidence interval of the difference in cure rates between the treatment groups; * statistically significant difference Chi2=4.301 p=0.0381

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis

The result  of  3  Phase  III  studies  on  clinical  effectiveness  of  800  mg  of  telithromycin  administered once daily for 5 days in the treatment of AECB are shown in Table 5:

|                | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparators   | Comparators   | Comparators   | 95% CI a     |
|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|
|                | N               | n               | (%)             | N             | n             | (%)           |              |
| PPc population |                 |                 |                 |               |               |               |              |
| Study A3003    | 115             | 99              | (86.1)          | 112           | 92            | (82.1)        | [-6.4; 14.3] |
| Study A3007    | 140             | 121             | (86.4)          | 142           | 118           | (81.1)        | [-5.8; 12.4] |
| Study A3013    | 225             | 193             | (85.8)          | 231           | 206           | (89.2)        | [-9.9; 1.1]  |
| All AECB       | 480             | 413             | (86.0)          | 485           | 416           | (85.8)        | [-4.3; 4.9]  |

| Stringent Sp mITT populatio n   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Product Azithromycin   | Product Azithromycin   | Product Azithromycin   | Cefuroxime   | Cefuroxime   | Cefuroxime   | Telithromycin versus Azithromycin             | Telithromycin versus Cefuroxime   |
|---------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Stringent Sp mITT populatio n   | N               | n               | (%)             | N                      | n                      | (%)                    | N            | n            | (%)          | Telithromycin versus Azithromycin             | Telithromycin versus Cefuroxime   |
| PERSp at test of cure           | 177             | 23              | 12.99%          | 106                    | 30                     | 28.30%                 | 130          | 17           | 13.08%       | Adjusted test = 0,0142 Significant difference | Adjusted test = 0,6117            |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 5 - AECB: Clinical cure rates by study for telithromycin and comparator(s) at posttherapy/TOC, PPc population N=number of subjects; n=number clinically cured a 95% confidence interval of the difference in cure rates between the treatment groups. Comparators: A3003 amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, A3007 cefuroxime, A3013 clarithromycin In addition, four controlled Phase IV studies confirmed the clinical efficacy of telithromycin for the treatment of AECB in adults. In one of these, the results showed that the rate of patients who were carriers of a penicillin or macrolide-resistant S.  pneumoniae (penicillin- or erythromycin-resistant S. pneumoniae [PERSp]) at the TOC visit was significantly lower in the telithromycin group than in the azithromycin group but not different from cefuroxime. Table 6 - Primary endpoint: Percentage of patients harboring a PERSp at test of cure visit among patients with Streptococcus pneumoniae at inclusion - Stringent Sp mITT population Furthermore,  it  was  also  shown  that  in  vitro  resistance  to  macrolides  was  associated  with  a  worse clinical outcome in AECB patients treated with a macrolide (azithromycin).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Acute bacterial sinusitis

The clinical and bacteriologic effectiveness of 800 mg oral telithromycin administered once daily for 5 or 10 days in the treatment of ABS was evaluated in 3 comparative studies.

Table 7 - ABS: Clinical cure rates by study at posttherapy/ test of cure, PPc population

|                                       | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparators   | Comparators   | Comparators   | Difference   | 95% CI a      |
|---------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|---------------|
|                                       | 5-day           | 5-day           | 5-day           | 10-day          | 10-day          | 10-day          | 10-day        | 10-day        | 10-day        |              |               |
|                                       | N               | n               | (%)             | N               | n               | (%)             | N             | n             | (%)           | authorised   | authorised    |
| PPc population                        |                 |                 |                 |                 |                 |                 |               |               |               |              |               |
| Study A3005                           | 146             | 110             | (75.3)          | 140             | 102             | (72.9)          | 137           | 102           | (74.5)        | 0.89%        | [-9,9;11.7] a |
| Study A3011                           | 189             | 161             | (85.2)          | NA              |                 |                 | 89            | 73            | (82.0)        | 1.16%        | [-7.1;13.4]   |
| All ABS randomized controlled studies | 335             | 271             | (80.9)          |                 |                 |                 | 226           | 175           | (77.4)        | 3.46%        | [-3.8; 0.7]   |
| Study A3002                           | 123             | 112             | (91.1) 133      |                 | 121             | (91.0)          | NA            |               |               |              |               |

| Study                    | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparators   | Comparators   | Comparators   | 95% CI a     |
|--------------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|
|                          | N               | n               | (%)             | N             | n             | (%)           |              |
| PP population Study 3004 | 115             | 97              | (84.3)          | 119           | 106           | (89.1)        | [-14.3; 4.8] |
| Study 3008               | 150             | 137             | (91.3)          | 135           | 119           | (88.1)        | [-4.6; 11.0] |
| Combined                 | 265             | 234             | (88.3)          | 254           | 225           | (88.6)        | [-6.2; 5.6]  |

Very limited data have been obtained in subjects with S. pyogenes resistant to erythromycin in these studies.  The  limited  data  do  not  allow  correlation  between  bacteriological  outcome  and  a  particular type of resistance gene at TOC, 3 subjects treated with telithromycin were bacteriologically eradicated and  8  persisted,  presumed  persisted  or  recurred.  At  Late  Posttherapy  Visit  (LPTV)  6/11  were eradicated.  This  compared  to  8/9  eradicated  at  TOC  and  LPTV  for  penicillin  and  0/4  at  TOC  and LPTV for clarithromycin.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Comparators= 5- vs. 10-days duration of telithromycin (A3002), amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (Study A3005), and cefuroxime axetil (Study A3011). NA=not applicable; ABS=acute sinusitis; N=number of subjects; n=number of clinically cured. a  Pair wise comparison between 5-day telithromycin regimen and 10-day comparator regimen. In 3 Phase IV randomized controlled studies performed in the ABS indication in adults, it was shown that telithromycin was non-inferior to moxifloxacin, high dosage amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (875/125 mg bid)  and  amoxicillin-clavulanic  acid  (500/125mg  tid).  Time  to  symptom  resolution,  which  was evaluated  in  two  of  the  studies  using  a  5-item  symptom  score,  was  shown  to  be  similar  between telithromycin and moxifloxacin, and shorter with telithromycin than high-dose amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (median time 4.0 vs. 5.0 days). Tonsillitis/Pharyngitis in adults and adolescents Two Phase III studies demonstrated the effectiveness of oral telithromycin 800 mg administered once daily for 5 days for the treatment of Group A β -hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS) T/P infection in adults, relative to 10 days of therapy with penicillin or clarithromycin. Table 8 - Tonsillitis/pharyngitis: Satisfactory bacteriological outcome by study for telithromycin and comparator(s) at posttherapy/test of cure Comparators= 10-days duration of penicillin  (A3004) or  clarithromycin (Study A3008). a95% confidence interval of the difference in cure rates between the treatment groups

No phase IV clinical trial has been conducted in T/P.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion:

The clinical efficacy of telithromycin in the treatment of mild to moderate CAP, AECB and ABS in adults has been clearly demonstrated in a number of Phase III clinical trials. These studies were the basis for the original approval of these indications. Efficacy was  also observed in limited subpopulations at risk, such as elderly adults, patients with pneumococcal bacteremia in CAP, as well as in subjects with penicillinor macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae or multidrug-resistant S.  pneumoniae (ie,  resistant  to ≥ 2  or  more  classes  of  antibacterial  agents).  In  addition,  the  clinical efficacy of telithromycin for the treatment of CAP was confirmed in 3 Phase IV studies. One of these demonstrated a trend for superior efficacy of telithromycin, where the study drug was tested against the locally prescribed regimen in countries with high levels of antibiotic resistance. In addition, the efficacy of telithromycin, as a second line treatment, for T/P in adolescents and adults was sufficiently demonstrated in one pivotal study (vs. clarithromycin) and in one supportive study (vs. penicillin).

Evaluation of  hepatic  effects  in  all  Phase  III  studies  included  detailed  review  of  hepatic  laboratory values  and  hepatic  AEs.    Hepatic  laboratory  values  (such  as  combined  total  bilirubin  and  ALT increases  and  clinically  noteworthy  abnormal  laboratory  values  for  ALT  and  AST)  were  balanced between  telithromycin  and  comparators,  and  the  incidence  of  hepatic  AEs  was  similar  between treatment  groups.  No  cases  of  drug-related  fulminant  hepatitis,  hepatic  failure,  liver  transplant,  or primary hepatic death were observed in Phase III investigations.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1.2.4 An overall and by indication summary of the risks associated with telithromycin The estimated worldwide-marketed exposure to telithromycin through December 2006 is approximately 30.05 million courses of treatment. The risk  profile  of  telithromycin,  including  rare  events  of  concern  with  antibiotics  approved  in  the same  indications,  has  been  thoroughly  examined  with  clinical  trials,  intensified  monitoring,  and postmarketing  surveillance.  Changes  have  been  made  to  the  safety  sections  of  Levviax labelling  in Europe in 2006. They were either  proposed by Sanofi-Aventis or requested by the EMEA/CHMP in the  course  of  reviewing  the  5-year  renewal  application  and/or  other  procedures  (eg,  labelling variations, Periodic Safety Update Reports, Follow-up Measures, requests for additional information). Changes  to  the  safety  parts  of  the  European  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  (SmPC)  made  in 2006 included information related to hepatic adverse events (AEs), exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, vertigo, and QT/QTc prolongation. During the course of clinical development, several safety topics were identified as potential adverse events of special interest (AESIs) based upon consideration of known effects of the related macrolide class of drugs and review of preclinical, clinical pharmacology and/or clinical data.  The combination of recognized macrolide class drug effects and preclinical findings led to close monitoring of hepatic and cardiac adverse events during clinical trials and the execution of specific clinical pharmacology investigations.    Visual  effects  were  identified  during  the  comparative  clinical  trials,  leading  to  the subsequent performance of targeted preclinical and clinical pharmacology investigations.  In addition, in the postmarketing phase, association of telithromycin with exacerbation of myasthenia Gravis and syncope were reported. 1.2.4.1 Pooled Phase III studies The  adverse  event  (AE)  profile  of  telithromycin  has  been  examined  in  4780  telithromycin-treated (2702  from  comparative  studies  and  2078  from  open  label  studies)  and  2139  comparator-treated subjects  in  Phase  III  pivotal  efficacy  and  safety  studies.    In  addition,  12,159  subjects  in  the telithromycin treatment group of Study A3014 were evaluated for safely. Study A3014 was submitted and reviewed by the CHMP in 2002 in the context of a clinical Follow-Up Measure. The vast majority of treatment emergent adverse events (TEAEs) associated with telithromycin were of mild to moderate intensity and are related to the gastrointestinal tract, with diarrhoea being the most common AE.  The incidence of serious adverse events (SAEs) was similar in both telithromycin and comparator treated groups. Hepatic adverse events

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Cardiac adverse events

Extensive  ECG  and  AE  analyses  in  Phase  I  and  Phase  III  studies  demonstrated  no  significant difference  from  comparators.    At  therapeutic  dose,  electrocardiographic  analyses  in  the  clinical development program revealed a minimal increase of 1.5 milliseconds in the QTc interval (corrected for heart rate by the Bazett formula).  QTc outlier values were uncommon and similar in frequency to those seen with clarithromycin and non-macrolide antibiotics. No excess in risk for significant QTc interval prolongation was noted, including at-risk populations. Similarly, cardiac AEs and death rates are also comparable between telithromycin and comparators.

|      | Product TEAEs   | Product TEAEs   | Product TEAEs   | SAEs     | SAEs     | SAEs     |
|------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------|----------|----------|
|      | TEL             | Comp            | Open label      | TEL      | Comp     | Open     |
|      | n (%)           | n(%)            | n (%)           | n (%)    | n (%)    | Label    |
| CAP  | 484 (52.8)      | 352 (48.7)      | 624 (35.8)      | 34 (3.7) | 38 (5.3) | 65 (3.7) |
| AECB | 248 (40.7)      | 301 (48.1)      | 0               | 13 (2.1) | 16 (2.6) | 0        |
| AS   | 392 (52.3)      | 182 (49.7)      | 114 (34.2)      | 7 (0.9)  | 2 (0.5)  | 4 (1.2)  |
| T/P  | 224 (52.5)      | 200 (47.2)      | 0               | 5 (1.2)  | 5 (1.2)  | 0        |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Visual adverse events During clinical trials, the  review of  clinical AE data in controlled studies revealed the incidence of visual TEAEs was higher in the telithromycin-treated than in the comparator-treated groups (1.1% vs. 0.4%).    Blurred  vision  was  the  most  commonly  reported  visual  AE  and  was  generally  mild  or moderate in severity, transient, and reversible.  The effect typically had a short duration (2 to 3 hours). This  AE  was  further  evaluated  through  2  clinical  pharmacology  studies  to  investigate  potential mechanisms.  These  2  clinical  trials  were  reported  in  the  initial  MAA.  Based  on  the  clinical descriptions and objective findings from these 2 studies, the mechanism for the reported blurred vision is most consistent with a transient effect on the ciliary body delaying relaxation of the lens and hence accommodation.  Importantly, potentially more serious and irreversible causes, such as retinal toxicity or angle closure glaucoma, have been excluded. Syncope There  were  6  syncope  cases  in  Phase  III  studies  which  were  balanced  between  telithromycin  and comparator groups. None was considered related by the Investigator. 1.2.4.2 Pooled Phase III studies by indication Treatment  emergent  adverse  events  (TEAEs)  and  serious  adverse  events  (SAEs)  derived  from  12 controlled Phase III studies as well as open label studies are shown by indication in the table 9 below. Table 9 - Treatment-emergent adverse events and serious adverse events by indication Adverse effects of special interests (AESI) (hepatic, cardiac, visual events and syncope) were collected and pooled by indication and are outlined in the following tables 10 and 11. Hepatic events occurred more frequently (in both treatment groups) in patients treated for CAP vs. other indications. Of note, there was a slightly higher incidence of hepatic events in the telithromycin group for the AS indication (1.7% vs. 0.5%). A majority of these events were reported as liver function abnormalities and none were serious.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 10 - Adverse events of special interest by indication: Hepatic adverse events

|      | TEL N n (%) 45 (4.9)   | Comparators N n (%) 33 (4.6)   | authorised Open label N n (%) 50 (2.9)   |
|------|------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| CAP  | N: 916                 | N: 723                         | N: 1745                                  |
| AECB | N: 609                 | N: 626                         | 0                                        |
|      | 9 (1.5)                | 12 (1.9)                       |                                          |
| AS   | N: 750                 | N: 366                         | N: 333                                   |
|      | 13 (1.7)               | 2 (0.5)                        | 14 (4.2)                                 |
| T/P  | N: 427                 | N; 424                         | 0                                        |
|      | 7 (1.6)                | 12 (2.8)                       |                                          |

|      | no Comparators N   | Open label N   |
|------|--------------------|----------------|
|      | n (%)              | n (%)          |
| CAP  | N: 723             | N: 1745        |
|      | 3 (0.4)            | 1 (0.1)        |
| AECB | N: 626             | 0              |
|      | 3 (0.5)            |                |
| AS   | Product N: 366     | N: 333         |
|      | 1 (0.3)            | 2 (0.6)        |
| T/P  | N: 424             | N: 0           |
|      | 0                  | 0              |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Cardiac AESIs were balanced between telithromycin and comparators within each indication. There was no cardiac AE case in the T/P indication. Table 11 - Adverse events of special interest by indication: Cardiac adverse events The incidence of visual AEs was generally higher in the telithromycin treated groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 12 - Adverse events of special interest by indication: Visual adverse events

|      | TEL N n (%) 11 (1.2)   | Comparators N n (%) 4 (0.6)   | authorised Open label N n (%) 9 (0.5)   |
|------|------------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| CAP  | N: 916                 | N: 723                        | N: 1745                                 |
| AECB | N: 609                 | N: 626                        | 0                                       |
|      | 1 (0.2)                | 2 (0.3)                       |                                         |
| AS   | N: 750                 | N: 366                        | N: 333                                  |
|      | 9 (1.2)                | 3 (0.8) N:424                 | 1 (0.3)                                 |
| T/P  | N: 427                 |                               | 0                                       |
|      | 9 (2.1)                | 0                             |                                         |

|      | no TEL N n (%)   | Comparators N n (%)   |
|------|------------------|-----------------------|
| CAP  | N: 916           | N: 723                |
|      | 2 (0.2)          | 2 (0.3)               |
| AECB | Product N: 609   | N: 626                |
|      | 1 (0.2)          | 0                     |
| AS   | N: 750           | N: 366                |
|      | 0                | 1 (0.3)               |
| T/P  | N: 427           | N: 424                |
|      | 0                | 0                     |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised None of the syncope AE cases in Phase III studies was considered related to study drug by the Investigator. Table 13 - Adverse events of special interest by indication: Syncope/loss of consciousness 1.2.4.3 Pooled Phase IV studies by indication Overall, Phase IV safety data did not reveal any new safety signals as compared to Phase III studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 14 - Treatment-emergent adverse events and serious adverse events by indication in 10 Phase IV controlled studies

|            | TEAEs           | TEAEs         | TEAEs           | TEAEs      | SAEs            | SAEs          | SAEs            | SAEs       |
|------------|-----------------|---------------|-----------------|------------|-----------------|---------------|-----------------|------------|
|            | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin | Comparator      | Comparator | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin | Comparator      | Comparator |
| indication | n/N of patients | %             | n/N of patients | %          | n/N of patients | %             | n/N of patients | %          |
| CAP        | 168/404         | 41.6          | 179/398         | 45.0       | 27/404          | 6.7           | 33/398          | 8.3        |
| AECB       | 323/2132        | 15.2          | 321/2802        | 11.5       | 34/2132         | 1.6           | 28/2802         | 1.0        |
| ABS        | 149/565         | 26.4          | 145/579         | 25.0       | 2/565           | 0.4           | 2/579           | 0.3        |

|            | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparator      | Comparator   |
|------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|
| indication | n/N of patients | no %            | n/N of patients | %            |
| CAP        | 12/404          | 3.0             | 13/398          | 3.3          |
| AECB       | 1/2132          | 0.0             | 0/2802          | 0.0          |
| ABS        | 0/565           | 0.0             | 1/579           | 0.2          |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Comparator: amoxicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, azithromycin, cefaclor, cefixime, cefpodoxime, cefuroxime, clarithromycin, gatifloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, roxithromycin, sultamycillin/tosylate The incidence of hepatic AEs was similar between treatment groups and more frequent in the CAP studies, as expected. No cases of drug-related fulminant hepatitis, hepatic failure, liver transplant, or primary hepatic death were observed in Phase IV studies. Table 15 - Adverse events of special interest by indication in phase IV controlled studies: Hepatic adverse events Five cardiac  AEs were  recorded  in  Phase  IV  studies,  4  in  telithromycin  treated  patients,  evenly distributed  among  indications  (CAP  n=2;  AECB  n=1;  ABS  n=1)  and  1  in  a  CAP  patient  in  the comparator group. As in phase III, visual AEs were more frequently reported in the telithromycin group. Blurred vision was  the  most  commonly  reported  visual  AE  and  was  reversible,  transient  and  generally  mild  or moderate in severity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 16 - Adverse events of special interest by indication in phase IV controlled studies: Visual adverse events

|            | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparator      | Comparator   |
|------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|
| indication | n/N of patients | %               | n/N of patients | %            |
| CAP        | 3/404           | 0.7             | 0/398           | 0.0          |
| AECB       | 9/2132          | 0.4             | 4/2802          | 0.1          |
| ABS        | 7/565           | 1.2             | 1/579           | 0.2          |

|            | Telithromycin   | Telithromycin   | Comparator      | Comparator   |
|------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|
| indication | n/N of patients | %               | n/N of patients | %            |
| CAP        | 0/404           | 0.0             | 1/398 a         | 0.2          |
| AECB       | 4/2132 b        | no 0.1          | 1/2802 c        | 0.0          |
| ABS        | 0/565           | 0.0             | 0/579           | 0.0          |

The postmarketing data identified exacerbation of myasthenia gravis as an important and rare AE in patients  treated  with  telithromycin.  Exacerbations  of  myasthenia  gravis  have  also  been  reported  in association with several other classes of drugs, including the macrolides, β -lactams, fluoroquinolones, and aminoglycosides. Given the severity of some of the exacerbation reported, a warning was added to the telithromycin labelling in April 2003 in the context of an urgent safety restriction procedure. The MAH proposed to contra-indicate telithromycin in this patient population (see 3.2 Proposals for Risk Minimisation Measures).

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The number of syncopal events reported in Phase IV was numerically higher for telithromycin than the number reported for the comparators, although few in number. Syncopes were all of mild or moderate intensity and all subjects recovered without sequelae. Table 17 - Adverse events of special interest by indication in phase IV controlled studies: Syncope/Loss of consciousness a  mild syncope not related to ciprofloxacin b  2 were moderate lipothymia possibly related to telithromycin and 2 were mild syncopes considered not related to telithromycin by the investigtor, of which one occured in a context of sub acute-bacterial endocarditis of aortic valve &amp; microemboli c severe vasovagual syncope possibly related to azithromycin 1.2.4.4 Postmarketing safety data Postmarketing  safety  data  from  an  estimated  marketed  exposure  to  telithromycin  of  30.05  million courses of treatment (as of December 31, 2006), including approximately 14 million courses in Europe support the safety profile observed in clinical trials and have detected very rare or rare adverse events. Particular attention has been given to the evaluation of postmarketing reports of hepatic, cardiac, and visual  AEs  throughout  the  post-marketing  period.  Among  the  most  commonly  reported  AEs  were gastrointestinal symptoms (eg, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain), visual events, headache, dizziness, and allergic events (eg, rash, urticaria). Exacerbations of myasthenia gravis

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion:

The CHMP endorses the proposed contraindication of patients with myasthenia gravis. Consequentially, the statement concerning this population in section 4.4 should be revised accordingly.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Syncope Reports of syncope (reported primarily in Japan) led to another product information update.  Detailed analysis of the reports suggested that some of the reports could be linked to a secondary vasovagal mechanism  occurring  in  conjunction  with  gastrointestinal  AEs,  which  were  the  most  common  AE noted  in  clinical  trials.  There  was  no  evidence  for  a  cardiac  arrhythmic  aetiology  for  syncope, consistent with prior clinical study QTc analyses. Discussion: The MAH proposed to update sections 4.4 and 4.7 regarding the risks for loss of consciousness. This updated is endorsed by the CHMP. Other rare events added to the labelling in the post-marketing period Other adverse drug reactions (ie, angioedema, anaphylaxis, pancreatitis, and palpitations) have been reported and have been added to the labelling for telithromycin. Hepatic adverse events There  have  been  several  changes  made  to  the  SPC  regarding  the  hepatic  safety  of  telithromycin, including multiple revisions in 2006. Among the 16 cases of acute liver failure reported worldwide (as of 15 September 2006): 12 cases have been reported in the US (most of them in 2006), 2 in France (one in 2002 and one in 2005, both unlikely/unrelated to the use of Levviax) and 2 in Japan (both in 2004, unlikely related to the use of Levviax) raising the question of causality and the stimulating effect of the publication in Annals of Internal Medicine of January 20, 2006 on the reporting rates especially in the US. Notably, no new cases of acute liver failure (ALF) have been reported in neither Europe nor Japan since the date of this article.  In the vast majority of the cases, when the relevant information was  available,  it  was  not  possible  to  establish  a  causal  relationship  between  the  ALF  and  the administration of telithromycin, the cases being confounded by an underlying disease involving the liver, like sepsis, severe circulatory failure, or cardiac failure. A spontaneous reporting rate analysis was also conducted using the FDA AERS database via Freedom of  Information  (FOI).    The  reporting  rate  of  hepatic  events  appeared  to  be  higher  following telithromycin  use  than  those  following  other  antibiotics  use.  These  differences  might  be  partly explained  by  secular  trend  of  increased  spontaneous  AE  reporting  in  recent  years,  the  inherent limitations of the AERS database, and the known Weber effect following the publication in Annals of Internal Medicine in early 2006. Nonetheless, this analysis generated a hypothesis that required further evaluation.  Therefore,  2  epidemiologic  studies  were  proposed  and  performed  in  order  to  better evaluate the risk of severe hepatic injury among telithromycin users comparing to those following use of comparator antibiotics with similar indications. These 2 epidemiologic studies were based on the independent data sources, the PHARMetrics Integrated Outcome Database and the Ingenix proprietary research  database,  representing  data  from  over  24  million  individual  subscribers  enrolled  in  the respective health plans. Each study included more than 100,000 telithromycin patients with a total of more than 227,000 patients. The results of the two independent epidemiologic studies indicate that the risk of severe hepatic injury associated with telithromycin use is comparable with that experienced by other  antibiotics  with  similar  indications.  The  cases  of  severe  hepatic  injury  identified  from  the Ingenix database were further validated by medical record review.  Following validation, the study confirmed  that  the  risk  of  severe  liver  injury  is  very  rare,  with  no  case  of  ALF  identified  within 60 days  following  prescription  of  telithromycin,  whereas  there  were  two  cases  of  ALF  following clarithromycin  use.  Based  on  the  review  of  currently  available  clinical  and  epidemiologic  data, including  the  2  epidemiologic  studies,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  risk  of  hepatotoxicity  with telithromycin is more frequent or more severe than that with other marketed antibiotics used in the treatment of RTIs, including macrolides.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion:

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The CHMP considered that these statements are in line with the assessment of FUM 026.6 on hepatic safety, November 2006, in which data on hepatic related adverse events from 11 Phase III studies, one additional  large  safety  study,  six  post  marketing  randomized  controlled  trials,  and  preliminary  data from  four  ongoing  studies,  were  assayed  for  each  individual  comparator.  Safety  data  concerning treatment  emerging  adverse  events  in  the  MedDRA  primary  SOC  'Hepatobiliary  disorders,'  High Level Term (HLT) 'Liver function analyses,' and Preferred terms (PTs) 'Blood alkaline phosphatase increased,'  and  'Blood  lactate  dehydrogenase  increased'  were  identified  and  reported.  Two  SAEs were identified for telithromycin in phase III studies, both recorded as 'Hepatocellular damage'. Both events  were  judged  to  be  possibly  related  to  study  medication  and  subjects  recovered  without sequaelae.  There  was  a  numerically  higher  rate  of  Hepatocellular  disorders  SOC  adverse  events reported for telithromycin compared to comparators, 8 (0.3%) vs. 2 (0.1%), but the numerators were very  small.  Events  related  to  liver  related  events  in  Laboratory  Investigation  SOC  were  similar between telithromycin and comparators 54/2 702 (2.0%) vs. 41/2 139 (1.9%). No specific liver-related AEs  that  were  markedly  more  common  for  telithromycin  treated  subjects  compared  to  comparator treated subjects could be identified. The CHMP came to the conclusion for this clinical FUM that the submitted data indicated that the risk for liver related adverse events for telithromycin is comparable to  that  of  other  macrolides,  like  clarithromycin.  According  to  pooled  data  from  the  double-blinded phase  III  studies,  hepatic  safety  profile  could  be  graded  regarding  liver-related  TEAEs  as  follows: cefuroxime (0.3%), amoxi-clavulanate (1.0%), trovafloxacin (1.8%), clarithromycin (2.0%), telithromycin  (2.0%),  penicillin  (4.6%)  and  amoxicillin  (7.3%).  Caution  should  be  exercised  when interpreting these figures due to relatively small numerators and denumerators in some of the studies. Notably, there was a numerical difference concerning serious liver related adverse events in total. Cardiac adverse events 'QT/QTc interval prolongation' was added to the post-marketing subsection of the undesirable effects in  the  European  SPC  in  the  context  of  a  type  II  variation  (II/39)  adopted  in  2006  for  sake  of consistency with Warnings and Precaution section and not due to a new post-marketing safety signal. Discussion: No new signals for cardiac adverse events, requiring an update in the SPC, were identified. This issue should continue to be monitored within the PSURs. Visual adverse events Postmarketing  surveillance  has  identified  isolated  reports  of  transient  blindness  or  amaurosis; however, with the exception of an unrelated temporal arteritis case, these reports were not confirmed on expert ophthalmology examination, and all of these unconfirmed reports were fully reversible. Discussion: The  MAH  proposed  to  update  sections  4.4  and  4.7  of  the  SPC  regarding  the  risks  for  visual disturbances. This proposal is endorsed by the CHMP. 1.2.5 CHMP's overall assessment on possible risks associated with telithromycin:

The MAH has submitted an analysis of adverse events in general and of adverse events of special interest (hepatic, cardiac and visual adverse events and syncope) by indication, collected in Phase III studies.  The  safety  profile  of  Levviax,  based  on  adverse  events  recorded  from  study  data,  has previously been assessed by the CHMP, in connection with the renewal, type II variations (35, 36, 39 and 40) and clinical follow-up measures (FUM 026) during 2006 and earlier. In all these procedures, the  benefit-risk  balance  of  Levviax  has  been  judged  positive  by  the  CHMP  in  the  approved indications.  According  to  the  presently  submitted  analyses  of  Phase  III  studies,  treatment  emergent hepatic  adverse  events  in  general  were  similar  between  telithromycin  treated  patients  and  the comparator group 2.74% vs. 2.76%. Cardiac adverse events and syncope were well balanced between the  treatment  groups.  Notably,  the  incidence  of  visual  adverse  events,  mainly  blurred  vision,  was higher in the telithromycin treated groups in pooled Phase III studies, most evident for patients with T/P, where it was recorded in 9 of 427 patients (2.1%) vs. 0 of 424 in the comparator treated group. Analyses of pooled Phase IV studies mainly confirmed the findings in Phase III studies. No case of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

drug-related fulminant hepatitis, hepatic failure, liver transplant or primary hepatic death was observed in  the  Phase  IV  studies.  In  accordance  with  the  Phase  III  studies,  visual  adverse  events  were  more common among telithromycin treated patients, most prominent for the indications ABS (1.2%) and CAP  (0.7%).  Two  reports  of  possible  related  syncope/loss  of  consciousness  were  reported  for telithromycin patients with AECB, vs. in one azithromycin treated patient with AECB.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Post-marketing safety data identified new important safety information. Exacerbation of myasthenia gravis,  also  including  fatal  outcomes,  was  reported  for  patients  treated  with  telithromycin.  This information has previously been added to section 4.4 of the SPC, and the MAH now proposes that telithromycin  should  be  contraindicated  in  this  patient  population.  In  light  of  the  severity  of  this condition, this addition to section 4.3 is endorsed. Syncope/loss of consciousness is currently listed as a  rare  adverse  event  in  section  4.8.  However,  no  additional  warning,  except  for  in  section  4.7  is currently  stated  in  the  SPC.  Concerning  post-marketing  data  on  hepatic  adverse  events,  these  have been continuously assessed during FUM26 (1-6) and the type II variation no. 40, resulting in SPC changes  in  sections  4.3,  4.4  and  4.8.  The  two  epidemiological  studies  based  on  the  PHARMetrics Integrated Outcome Database and the Ingenix proprietary research database, focusing hepatic safety do  not  indicate  that  telithromycin  is  more  associated  with  severe  hepatic  injury  compared  to  other agents used for the corresponding indications. No new signals regarding severe liver injury have been identified  since  the  beginning  of2007.  Post-marketing  data  concerning  cardiac  safety  and  visual adverse events do not add any additional concerns not already identified in clinical studies. The  analyses  of  adverse  events  reported  during  Phase  III  and  Phase  IV  studies,  and  additional information  of  post-marketing  safety  data  from  an  estimated  marketed  exposure  of  more  that 30 million courses of telithromycin treatment reveals important safety information that must be taken into  consideration.  Although  the  incidence  of  adverse  events  in  general  does  not  seem  to  differ significantly to the commonly used agents in RTIs, the reports of exacerbations of myasthenia gravis including fatal cases, severe hepatic events, and an imbalance in incidences of visual disturbances and cases of syncope are of concern. Several of these issues are already implemented in sections 4.3, 4.4 and  4.8  of  the  SPC  but  additional  restrictions  in  the  SPC  are  recommended.    The  available  data indicate  that  the  use  of  telithromycin  is  associated  with  increased  risks  compared  to  conventional macrolides  and  beta-lactam  agents.  A  restriction  in  the  recommended  use  of  Levviax  is  therefore suggested,  particular  for  the  indications  AECB,  ABS  and  T/P  were  the  anticipated  benefits  of telithromycin in terms of extended activity is not considered outweigh the risks in patients infected with pathogens susceptible to macrolides and/or beta-lactams. 1.2.6 Benefit-risk profile of telithromycin compared to other antibiotics 1.2.6.1 Risks associated with other groups of antibiotics According  to  a  recent  study,  antibiotics  represent  18.2%  of  the  adverse  drug  events  treated  in emergency departments in the US.  Beta-lactams, particularly amoxicillin-containing agents are the most  frequently  involved,  followed  by  quinolones,  sulfonamide-containing  agents  and  macrolides (Budnitz, 2006), not adjusted for the consumption of these agents. Similarly, a review of the product information for other antibiotics used in the same indications in the EU  and  of  available  information  from  the  FDA  AERS  database  shows  that  each  antibiotic  has  a specific benefit-risk profile with specific rare and serious associated AEs. Beta-lactams are  known  to  be  associated  with  serious  anaphylactic  shocks,  hepatotoxocity  with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, and C. difficile infections for the cephalosporins. Quinolones have  been  associated  with  serious  anaphylaxis,  QTc  prolongation,  tendon  rupture, seizures and pseudomembranous colitis.

Macrolides with  QTc  prolongation,  serious  liver  injury,  ear  toxicity;  adverse  effects  linked  to CYP3A4-related drug-drug interactions (clarithromycin and erythromycin).

Besides treatment emergent adverse events, there are other risks to take into account when comparing antibiotics indicated for similar types of infections. The risks of infection-related complications due to lack of efficacy against respiratory tract pathogens, may be important, especially in regions where the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

levels  of  resistance  among  RTI  pathogens  is  significant.  Furthermore,  the  risk  for  selection  and enrichment  of  antibiotic  resistance  strains,  both  target  pathogens  and  non-respiratory  tract  potential pathogens  such  as  members  of  the  normal  microbiota.  Overall,  it  is  currently  stated  by  several scientific  bodies  that  shorter  antibiotic  regimens  is  recommended,  in  order  to  minimize  the  risk  for selection of resistance.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1.2.6.2 Comparative benefit-risk profile by indication The  use  of  antibiotics  in  the  various  EU  countries  is  directed  by  local  medical  practices,  countryspecific clinical practices guidelines for antibiotic use, often guided by the local levels of antibiotic resistance.  A  benefit-risk  evaluation  of  telithromycin  was  provided  for  each  of  the  approved indications with respect to the RTI itself and to other antibiotics approved for the treatment of these RTIs. Community-acquired pneumonia Community-acquired  pneumonia  is  a  RTI  associated  with  a  significant  morbidity  and  mortality. Approximately 1 out of every 5 cases requires hospitalisation [American Thoracic Society, 2001]. The mortality rate in patients with CAP varies with the severity of disease.  In the US, the mortality rate in patients  with  CAP  is  &lt;1%  in  outpatients,  reaching  10%  in  the  most  severe  cases  requiring hospitalisation. Clinical trials have provided evidence for the efficacy of telithromycin in CAP in the adult  population  including  in  a  limited  number  of  patients  with  risk  factors  such  as  pneumococcal bacteraemia  or  age  over  65  years.  Telithromycin  is  effective  against  the  most  frequent  pathogens encountered  in  this  indication,  in  particular S.  pneumoniae including  resistant  strains  and  atypical pathogens. According to the MAH, telithromycin offers an advantage versus: Beta-lactams ,  by exerting activity against atypicals, Legionella pneumophila and multidrug resistant S. pneumoniae . The overall risk of telithromycin is considered to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against atypical pathogens and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above (anaphylaxis, hepatotoxicity, antibiotic associated diarrhoea). Macrolides ,  by  efficacy  against S.  pneumoniae resistant  to  macrolides,  whatever  the  mechanism  of resistance. The overall risk of telithromycin is considered to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against S. pneumoniae , the pathogen most frequently associated with morbidity and mortality and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above (QTcprolongation, severe liver injury, ear toxicity and drug-drug interactions). Quinolone s by having a similar effect against antibiotic-resistant S. pneumoniae .  The overall risk of telithromycin is  considered to be balanced by the safety risk of quinolones. In addition, overuse of quinolones  in  the  outpatients  setting  carries  the  risk  of  increase  resistance  of  gram  negatives  to quinolones ( E. coli , Klebsiella spp. )  and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above (QTc-prolongation, tendon rupture, seizures and possible C. difficile infection). Resistance of S. pneumoniae to tetracyclines and co-trimoxazole parallel the resistance to macrolides. Discussion: Community-acquired  pneumonia  is  associated  with  a  significant  morbidity  and  mortality,  thus  the importance of appropriate treatment is evident since the risk for clinical failure may seriously affect the  outcome  for  the  patient.  In  light  of  the  enhanced  activity  of  telithromycin  compared  to conventional  macrolides  and  the  increasing  prevalence  of  decreased  susceptibility  in  the  primary pathogen S. pneumoniae , especially to macrolides and beta-lactams, the CHMP considers that no new safety concern have been identified supporting a restriction of the current wording of this indication. Thus, telithromycin should generally remain an equal alternative to macrolides, beta-lactam agents and quinolones in CAP which do not require IV route treatment, and national official guidelines should be considered when prescribing Levviax for this indication.

The  CHMP  discussed  the  restriction  of  telithromycin  for  CAP  to  situations  in  which  penicillin  is contraindicated,  penicillin  and/or  macrolide  resistance  is  likely  or  atypical  organisms  may  be  the cause. Since the majority of the CHMP members considered sufficient to refer to the application of national  or  regional  guidelines  to  inform  the  use  of  telithromycin  in  CAP  this  indication  was  not

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

restricted. The CHMP members that do not considered sufficient to refer to the application of national or regional guidelines to inform the use of telithromycin in CAP expressed their divergent position.

## Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The curative role of antibiotics in this indication has been a matter of scientific debate.  A Cochrane review  of  antibiotics  in  acute  exacerbation  of  COPD  concludes  to  a  reduction  of  the  short-term mortality of 77%, and a decrease of treatment failure by 53%. However, the authors mentioned that the  results  of  the  analysis  should  be  interpreted  with  caution,  given  the  lack  of  homogeneity  of  the material  reviewed  principally  [Ram,  2006]. S.  pneumoniae is  among  the  most  frequent  pathogens observed  in  the  early  stage  of  this  disease,  compared  to  Gram  negative  bacilli (Pseudomonas, Enterobacteriaceae) more  frequently  observed  at  a  later  stage  in  patients  with  severe  bronchial obstruction. Clinical  trials  have  provided  evidence  of  the  clinical  efficacy  of  telithromycin  in  AECB,  including efficacy  in  the  most  vulnerable  outpatients  (patients  with  risk  factors,  patients  with  significant bronchial obstruction). According to the MAH, telithromycin offers an advantage versus: Beta-lactams by exerting activity against S. pneumoniae resistant to penicillin and H. influenzae betalactamase producing strains (resistant to amoxicillin). The overall risk of telithromycin appears to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against these pathogens and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above. Macrolides through efficacy against S. pneumoniae resistant to macrolides. Preliminary data obtained in  this  indication  documents  that  resistance  of S.  pneumoniae has  a  clear  impact  on  the  clinical efficacy of a macrolide, azithromycin. The overall risk of telithromycin appears to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against S. pneumoniae , and the safety risks associated  with  this  class  of  compounds.  This  is  particularly  true  in  patients  with  risk  factors  for infection due to antibiotic-resistant S. pneumoniae , which is common in countries with high levels of resistance to macrolides. Telithromycin has not been compared to quinolones in AECB. Quinolones are highly effective drugs in this disease, but should be reserved to patients at risk for severe Gram negative infections such as patients with high degree of obstruction.  Indeed, since quinolones have broad antibacterial spectrum, overuse of quinolones in the outpatients setting may promote quinolone resistance in Gram negatives and perhaps a higher risk for severe C. difficile infection. Discussion: The role  of  antibiotic  treatment  in  the  indication  acute  exacerbation  of  chronic  bronchitis  is  not  as evident as for the indication CAP. Several studies support the use of antibiotics for this indication but diagnosis  criteria  and  thus  the  external  validity  in  these  studies  are  not  always  clear.  Nevertheless CHMP can not exclude a satisfactory action of antibiotics. Telithromycin efficacy is not in question where microbiology is a concern. Considering the identified risks for telithromycin compared to those of  conventional  macrolides,  of  which  the  risks  for  serious  exacerbation  of  myasthenia  gravis  and visual  disturbances  and  possible  loss  of  consciousness  seem  to  be  associated  with  an  imbalance  in disadvantage of telithromycin, while an increased risk for serious hepatic injury can not be excluded, a restriction in this indication is recommended. The CHMP considers that the benefit of using telithromycin in this indication only outweighs the risks when treating infections caused by known or suspected beta-lactam and/or macrolide resistant strains covered by the antibacterial spectrum of telithromycin.

Furthermore, the CHMP considers that the prescription of this antibiotic in AECB remains of interest but should be further guided to help Healthcare Professionals to use telithromycin in situations where the  benefit-risk  balance  is  optimal.  Therefore,  the  'history  of  patients'  is  important  to  consider especially regarding the recent administration of antibiotics. In fact there are several predictive factors to  acquire  infections  due  to S.  pneumoniae with  a  decreased  susceptibility  to  penicillin,  specifically described  for  lower  respiratory  tract  infections:  prescription  of  beta-lactams  and/or  hospitalisation within  three  previous  month  period,  chronic  diseases  (eg  chronic  pulmonary  disease),  previous medical history  in  respiratory  disease.  Moreover,  the  mention  of  'national/regional  resistance  data' should be added in the therapeutic indication wording, to indicate that the conditions of prescription

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

are  related  to  local  epidemiology.  Even  if  AECB  infections  are  not  generally  microbiological documented  in  clinical  practice,  it  should  be  of  interest  to  underline  the  reasons  of  the  restricted therapeutic indications.

## Acute bacterial sinusitis

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Complications  of  acute  sinusitis  are  considered  to  be  rare,  but  can  be  serious  (eg,  brain  abscess, meningitis). Two recent reviews have been performed evaluating the effects of antibiotics vs. placebo in ABS, both showing some trends of better  efficacy  in  antibiotic-treated  patients,  but  also  concluding  that  other studies  were  needed,  given  the  insufficient  documentation  of  the  diagnosis  used  to  enroll  patients [Gwaltney  et  al.,  2004;  Williams,  2003].  The  information  in  patients  with  documented  bacterial infection, patients with at least 7 days of symptoms, and patients diagnosed with severe infections is scarce.  Antibiotic  treatment  is  still  currently  indicated  in  most  of  the  ABS  guidelines  worldwide  to prevent complications [Klossek JM, 2005]. Clinical  trials  have  provided  evidence  of  the  clinical  efficacy  of  telithromycin  in  ABS  including efficacy  in  5  days  compared  to  10  days  of  treatment  with  a  variety  of  antibiotics  -  including cephalosporins, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (normal and high-dose), and fluoroquinolone (moxifloxacin)  -  in  the  most  vulnerable  outpatients  (subjects  with  documented  pathogens  at  entry, subjects  with  at  least  7  days  of  symptoms,  and  subjects  with  severe  disease  as  per  Investigators' assessment).  By  using  a  patient-related  outcome  (time  to  symptom  resolution),  telithromycin  was shown to be non-inferior to moxifloxacin, and yielded better results than amoxicillin-clavulanic acid in 1 study. In addition, telithromycin showed a good diffusion in sinus tissue. According to the MAH, telithromycin offers an advantage in the treatment of ABS versus: Beta-lactams by  exerting  activity  against S.  pneumoniae ,  highly  prevalent  in  ABS  due  to  bacteria including  those  resistant  to  penicillin  and  against  beta-lactamase  producing H.  influenzae strains (which are resistant to amoxicillin). The overall risk of telithromycin appears to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against these pathogens and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above. M acrolides by activity against S. pneumoniae resistant to macrolides. The overall risk of telithromycin appears  to  be  balanced  by  the  potential  risk  of  lack  of  efficacy  of  this  class  of  compounds  against S. pneumoniae and the safety risk of this class of compound mentioned above. This is particularly true in patients with risk factors of infection due to resistant S. pneumoniae , which is common in countries with high level of resistance to macrolides. Q uinolone s by showing similar efficacy as a quinolone, moxifloxacin in clinical trial. Quinolones are highly effective drugs in this disease. However, they should be reserved to patients in case of failure of other  antibiotics  or  in  patients  with  risk  factors  of  complications  to  avoid  their  overuse  which  may promote  increased  resistance.    Therefore,  telithromycin  may  play  a  role  in  sparing  the  overuse  of quinolones in  patients  with  ABS,  particularly  in  those  countries  with  high  levels  of S.  pneumoniae resistance, where macrolides are not recommended by clinical practice guidelines for antibiotic use, and  where  alternatives  to β -lactams  and  telithromycin  are  limited  to  fluoroquinolones  (the  use  of which would increase in use if only β -lactams were available). Discussion:

As  for  AECB,  the  role  of  antibiotic  treatment  in  the  indication  acute  bacterial  sinusitis  is  not uncontroversial,  since  information  in  patients  with  documented  bacterial  infection,  patients  with  at least  7  days  of  symptoms,  and  patients  diagnosed  with  severe  infections  is  scarce.  Considering  the identified  risks  for  telithromycin  compared  to  those  of  beta-lactam  agents  and  of  conventional macrolides, of which the risks for serious exacerbation of myasthenia gravis and visual disturbances and  possible  loss  of  consciousness  seem  to  be  associated  with  an  imbalance  in  disadvantage  of telithromycin, while an increased risk for serious hepatic injury can not be excluded, a restriction of this indication is recommended. The CHMP considers that the benefit of using telithromycin in ABS only outweigh the risks when treating patients where beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate, due to hypersensitivity or suspected beta-lactam resistance,  with infections caused by known or suspected macrolide  resistant  strains  covered  by  the  antibacterial  spectrum  of  telithromycin.    The  same considerations from AECB to introduce the 'history of patients' and to mention of 'national/regional resistance data' also apply.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Tonsillitis/pharyngitis

Complication of T/P due to Streptococcus  pyogenes can  be  extremely  serious,  but  are  very  rare  in developed countries, because of the use of appropriate antibiotic treatment leading to eradication of S. pyogenes . Therefore it is agreed that T/P due to S. pyogenes should be treated with antibiotics.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised In  vitro, telithromycin  has  a  better  efficacy  against S.  pyogenes than  conventional  macrolides. Contrary to macrolides, it is active against some strains of S. pyogenes resistant to erythromycin, with high in  vitro efficacy  against erm (TR)  and mef( A)  genotypes  (approximately  10%  and  40%  of  all erythromycin resistant strains in EU, respectively), but lacks activity against erm (B) positive strains (2004 study report). Telithromycin  has  shown  efficacy  in  clinical  trials  in  5  days  of  treatment  vs  10  days  for  the comparator used. In the EU trials vs. penicillin, telithromycin was numerically inferior to penicillin (but  within  a  15%  delta  in  PPP,  10%  delta  in  mITT),  essentially  due  to  lack  of  eradication  of erythromycin resistant strains with erm (B) genotype. In clinical trials telithromycin appears to have a potential advantage over clarithromycin for the eradication of some strains of S. pyogenes resistant to macrolides although the numbers are to low to draw definitive conclusion. This is in line with a much better in vitro efficacy for telithromycin versus clarithromycin or azithromycin mostly on erm (TR) and to a lesser extend mef (A) erythromycin resistant strains. Telithromycin is approved for the indication tonsillitis/pharyngitis, as an alternative, when beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate, such as in patients with allergy to beta-lactams. The only antibiotics used in this latter case are currently macrolides, clindamycin or telithromycin. According to the MAH, telithromycin offers an advantage in the treatment of T/P versus: Macrolides by offering an advantage of in vitro efficacy against approximately half of the strains of S. pyogenes resistant  to  macrolides    with erm (TR),  and mef (A)  genotype  representing  respectively 10%  and  41%  of  macrolide  resistant  strains  in  EU  (PROTEKT  GLOBAL  year  5).  Against clarithromycin, telithromycin has the additional advantage of being effective in 5 days, which could result in a better compliance, critical to consider in young patients. The overall risk of telithromycin appears to be balanced by the potential risk of lack of efficacy of this class of compounds against S. pyogenes in  countries  with  significant  prevalence  of erm (TR),  and    the  safety  risk  of  this  class  of compound  mentioned  above.  Telithromycin  has  not  been  associated  with  a  lower  eradication  rate compared to azithromycin used in 3 days treatment duration. Telithromycin is less active than clindamycin against mef (A) strains, but has documented efficacy in 5 days and should carry less risk of C. difficile infections, classically linked to the use of clindamycin. Discussion: The  rationale  to  use  antibiotics  in  tonsillitis/pharyngitis  is  quite  clear:  rapid  disappearance  of symptoms,  eradication  and  decrease  of S.  pyogenes spreading  to  the  entourage,  prophylaxis  of rheumatic fever. Telithromycin is currently only indicated for the treatment of T/P when beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate. Telithromycin efficacy though clinical trials is always considered as acceptable. In the EU trial vs. penicillin, telithromycin was numerically inferior to penicillin (but within a 15% delta in PPP, 10% delta in mITT), essentially due to lack of eradication of erythromycin resistant strains with the erm (B) genotype. Considering the identified risks for telithromycin compared to those of conventional macrolides, of which the risks for serious exacerbation of myasthenia gravis and visual disturbances and possible loss of consciousness, seem to be associated with an imbalance in disadvantage of telithromycin, while an increased risk for serious hepatic injury can not be excluded, a further restriction in this indication is recommended in countries/ regions with a significant prevalence of macrolide resistance. Furthermore, telithromycin is always active against mefA and ermTR S. pyogenes although conventional macrolides can be ineffective in infections due to these bacteria.

Other  antibiotic  such  as  oral  clindamycin  can  be  active  in  tonsillitis  due  to  macrolide  resistant S. pyogenes when resistance is mediated by mefA ,  but  this  antibiotic  is  not  commonly  used  for  this indication  in  European  countries,  due  to  the  risk  for C.  difficile infections.  Consequently  keeping telithromycin in this therapeutic indication is considered relevant. Thus accurate information regarding resistance data, included in the therapeutic section, should be of interest.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP considers that the benefit of using telithromycin in T/P only outweighs the risks when treating  patients  where  beta-lactam  antibiotics  are  not  appropriate,  in  countries  with  a  significant prevalence of macrolide resistant S. pyogenes , when mediated by erm (TR) or mef A.

## 1.2.7 CHMP's comments and conclusions of overall benefit-risk evaluation

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  MAH  has  submitted  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the  benefits  and  risks  of  telithromycin compared  to  relevant  alternative  classes  of  antibiotics,  and  discussed  these  issues  for  each  of  the currently approved indications. Efficacy and safety data from clinical trials (Phase III and Phase IV) and  additional  safety  data  from  two  epidemiologic  studies  and  post-marketing  data,  based  on approximately 30 million courses of treatment through December 2006, were reviewed. A clear benefit of telithromycin over conventional macrolides is that according to recent in vitro data from  European  surveillance  studies,  telithromycin  still  displays  a  high in  vitro efficacy  against S. pneumoniae including  activity  against  bacteria  that  harbour  a  macrolide-lincosamide-streptograminB (MLSB)-inducible  type  of  resistance  and  does  not  induce  MLSB  resistance in  vitro .  Telithromycin exerts  clinical  relevant  activity  against  bacteria  resistant  to  the  macrolides  via  an  efflux  mechanism ( mef A) or via methylation ( erm (B)), as well as against strains with multiple mechanisms of resistance to macrolides, ie, erm (B) + mef A. The compound demonstrates concentration-dependent bactericidal activity  against S.  pneumoniae unlike  most  macrolides.  According  to  EARSS  data  from  2005, macrolide resistance in S. pneumoniae exceeds 20% in 10 European countries, up to 41% in France. Thus  the  expanded  activity  of  telithromycin  is  a  clear  advantage  in  regions/countries  with  high resistance  levels,  when  macrolide-related  compounds  are  considered  appropriate.  Like  conventional macrolides, telithromycin only exerts a moderate activity against H. influenzae .  There is no signal of an  increase  in  the  prevalence  of  strains  with  high-level  resistance.  Telithromycin  activity  is  not affected by beta-lactamase production or other resistance mechanisms of resistance to beta-lactams. Although not as active as penicillin against S. pyogenes , telithromycin displays a good activity against these species (susceptibility rate 96% according to the PROTECT surveillance study 2003-2004, vs 86% macrolide susceptibility).  Telithromycin shows activity against low-level macrolide resistant S. pyogenes isolates, mediated by mef A, erm (A), and erm (TR), while the majority (90%) of high-level macrolide resistant strains positive for erm (B) (incidence 4.3%) are resistant to telithromycin. Thus,  according  to in  vitro susceptibility  data  and  current  knowledge  about  resistance  rates  and resistant  mechanisms,  telithromycin  may  offer  an  advantage  to  conventional  macrolides  in  the treatment of respiratory tract infections when resistance against conventional macrolides is suspected and when beta-lactams are not the drugs of choice. The clinical efficacy of telithromycin in the treatment of mild to moderate CAP, AECB and ABS in adults has been clearly demonstrated in a number of Phase III clinical trials. These studies were the basis for the original approval of these indications. Efficacy was  also observed in limited subpopulations at risk, such as elderly adults, patients with pneumococcal bacteremia in CAP, as well as in subjects with penicillinor macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae or multidrug-resistant S. pneumoniae .  In  addition,  one  Phase  IV  study  in  CAP  patients  demonstrated  a  marginal  superior efficacy of telithromycin, where the study drug was tested against the locally prescribed regimen in countries with high levels of antibiotic resistance, whereas the results of one Phase IV study in AECB patients  showed  that  the  rate  of  patients  who  were  carriers  of  a  penicillin  or  macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae at  the  TOC  visit  was  significantly  lower  in  the  telithromycin  group  than  in  the azithromycin group, but not different from cefuroxime. In addition, the efficacy of telithromycin, as a second  line  treatment,  for  T/P  in  adolescents  and  adults  has  been  sufficiently  demonstrated  in  one pivotal study (vs. clarithromycin) and in one supportive study (vs. penicillin). However, in the latter study there was a trend towards inferiority of telithromycin to penicillin.

The  safety profile of Levviax, based on adverse events recorded  from clinical study data, epidemiological studies and post-marketing reports, has previously been assessed by the CHMP, in connection with the 5 year renewal as well as during several type II variations and follow-up measures during 2006 and earlier. In Phase III trials, overall  AE rates, serious AEs and discontinuation rates were similar to those observed with comparators. Most side effects are related to the gastrointestinal tract.  However, the analyses of adverse events reported during Phase III and Phase IV studies, and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

additional  information  of  post-marketing  safety  data  from  an  estimated  marketed  exposure  of  more than 30 million courses of telithromycin treatment reveal important safety information that must be taken into consideration. Specific adverse events have been reported with the use of telithromycin of which some may be serious: exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, which may be life-threatening, severe hepatic events reported during the post-marketing period, rare syncope, uncommon mild to moderate reversible  visual  events,  rarely  severe,  and  minor  QTc  prolongation,  with  no  evidence  of  increased cardiac  risk,  as  well  as  adverse  effects  linked  to  drug-drug  interactions.  Although  the  incidence  of adverse events in general does not seem to differ significantly to the commonly used agents in RTIs, the reports of exacerbations of myasthenia gravis including fatal cases, severe hepatic events, and an imbalance in incidences of visual disturbances and cases of syncope are of concern. Several of these issues are already implemented in sections 4.3, 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC but additional restrictions in the SPC are recommended.  Available data indicate that the use of telithromycin may be associated with increased  risks  compared  to  conventional  macrolides  and  beta-lactam  agents,  and  a  thorough assessment of the benefit-risk balance for each of the approved indications is justified.

In  conclusion,  the  benefit-risk  profile  of  telithromycin  is  still  considered  positive  for  the  indication CAP, due to increasing resistance rates to macrolides which may lead to serious complications for this population.  However,  the  anticipated  benefits  of  telithromycin  in  terms  of  extended  antibacterial activity is not considered to outweigh the risks in the commonly non-complicated indications AECB, ABS and T/P, unless used only in patients infected with pathogens with known or suspected resistance against macrolides and/or beta-lactams. Thus restrictions in these indications are recommended.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Assessment per indication: Community-acquired  pneumonia  is  associated  with  a  significant  morbidity  and  mortality,  thus  the importance of appropriate treatment is evident since the risk for clinical failure may seriously affect the  outcome  for  the  patient.  In  light  of  the  enhanced  activity  of  telithromycin  compared  to conventional  macrolides  and  the  increasing  prevalence  of  decreased  susceptibility  in  the  primary pathogen S. pneumoniae , especially to macrolides and beta-lactams, the CHMP considers that no new safety concern has been identified supporting a restriction of the current wording of this indication. Thus, the indication community-acquired pneumonia is not suggested to be restricted. Treatment should be guided by national official guidelines as already stated in section 4.1. Regarding the indications  acute  exacerbation  of  chronic  bronchitis  and  acute  bacterial  sinusitis,  the role of antibiotic treatment is not as evident as for the indication CAP. Several studies support the use of antibiotics for these indications but diagnosis and inclusion criteria and thus the external validity in the studies are not always clear. The identified risks associated with telithromycin compared to those of  conventional  macrolides,  of  which  the  risks  for  serious  adverse  events  such  as  exacerbation  of myasthenia gravis, risk for visual disturbances and loss of consciousness, while an increased risk for serious  hepatic  injury  can  not  be  excluded,  indicate  an  imbalance  in  disadvantage  of  telithromycin, thus a restriction in these indications is recommended. The CHMP considers that the benefit of using telithromycin  in  the  indications  acute  exacerbation  of  chronic  bronchitis  and  acute  bacterial sinusitis only outweigh the risks when treating infections caused by known or suspected betalactam and/or macrolide resistant strains covered by the antibacterial spectrum of telithromycin .  Furthermore, prescription should be guided and 'history of patients' and mention of national/regional resistance data is considered important. Telithromycin is currently only indicated for the treatment of tonsillitis/pharyngitis when beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate. In the EU trial vs. penicillin, telithromycin was numerically inferior to penicillin  but  non-inferior  to  clarithromycin,  essentially  due  to  lack  of  eradication  of  erythromycin resistant S.  pyogenes strains with the erm (B) genotype.  The  identified risks associated  with telithromycin compared to those of conventional macrolides, of which the risks for serious adverse events such as exacerbation of myasthenia gravis, as well as an increased risk for visual disturbances and  loss  of  consciousness,  while  an  increased  risk  for  serious  hepatic  injury  can  not  be  excluded, indicate  a  disadvantage  of  telithromycin,  thus  a  restriction  in  this  indication  is  recommended.  The CHMP considers that the benefit of using telithromycin in tonsillitis/pharyngitis only outweigh the risks when treating patients where beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate, in countries/regions  with  a  significant  prevalence  of  macrolide  resistant S.  pyogenes ,  when mediated by erm (TR) or mef A.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.3 Question 2 on risk minimisation measures

## MAH proposal for risk minimisation measures

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The MAH proposes the following Risk Minimisation Measures that will be included in a revised Risk Management Plan. These Risk Minimisation Measures are focused on: 1) Strengthening specific safety sections of the approved SPC a. Upgrade of the Warning for exacerbation of myasthenia gravis to a contraindication for patients with myasthenia gravis. b. Revision of the \"Warning and Precautions\" section with addition of the following AEs (currently  described  in  the  Undesirable  effects  section):  loss  of  consciousness  and visual disturbances and proposal could be considered to take telithromycin at bedtime to try and minimise the risk of the possible consequences of these adverse events. c. Strengthening of driving precaution for patients who experience visual disturbances or loss of consciousness. 2) Further highlight in the Product information the importance of the appropriate use of antibiotic for bacterial infections and the importance of considering guidelines and local resistance rates when prescribing telithromycin. 3) Establishing  a  communication  strategy  of  these  changes  in  Europe  to  inform  Healthcare Professionals  and  specific  group  of  patients  (i.e.,  those  with  myasthenia  gravis)  wherever possible. Discussion and conclusions for risk minimisation measures The CHMP agrees with the proposals from the MAH on the above changes proposed to the SPC and PL together with the restriction of the indications as mentioned above. Concerning the communication plan the MAH committed (see letter of undertaking - attachment 5) to prepare  a  Direct  Healthcare  Professional  Communication  including  relevant  changes  to  the  product information,  to  inform  myasthenia  gravis  patient  associations  and  to  revise  the  communication material. A comprehensive RMP according to guidelines was submitted by the MAH and is under evaluation. The RMP may need further revision after the ongoing evaluation of the benefit risk balance requested by  the  CHMP.  This  revision  should  be  done  within  the  scope  of  a  pharmacovigilance  follow-up measure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. CHANGES TO THE PRODUCT INFORMATION

## Summary of the Product Characteristics

Introduction of a sentence

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Section 4.1 'Therapeutic indications' The indications AECB and ABS were restricted for treating infections caused by known or suspected beta-lactam and/or macrolide resistant strains. The  indication  T/P  was  further  restricted  in  countries/regions  with  a  significant  prevalence  of macrolide resistant S. pyogenes , when mediated by erm TR or mef A In addition the importance of appropriate use of antibiotic and considering guidelines / local resistance rates when prescribing telithromycin was further highlighted. This section is updated as follows: 'When prescribing Levviax, consideration should be given to official guidance on the appropriate use of antibacterial agents and the local prevalence of resistance (see also sections 4.4 and 5.1). Levviax is indicated for the treatment of the following infections: In patients of 18 years and older: Community-acquired pneumonia, mild or moderate (see section 4.4). When treating infections caused by known or suspected beta-lactam and/or macrolide resistant strains (according to history of patients or national and/or regional resistance data) covered by the antibacterial spectrum of telithromycin (see sections 4.4 and 5.1): -Acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, -Acute sinusitis In patients of 12 years and older: Tonsillitis/pharyngitis caused by S treptococcus pyogenes, as an alternative when beta-lactam antibiotics are not appropriate in countries/regions with a significant prevalence of macrolide resistant S. pyogenes, when mediated by ermTR or mefA (see sections 4.4 and 5.1). ' Section 4.2 'Posology and method of administration' to consider taking Levviax at bedtime, to reduce the potential impact of visual disturbances and loss of consciousness Section 4.3 'Contraindications' Introduction of a contraindication for patients with myasthenia gravis. This was previously introduced as a warning. Section 4.4 'Special warnings and precautions for use' Introduction of warnings regarding visual disorders, loss of consciousness; and of a recommendation to take telithromycin at bedtime to minimise risk of possible consequences of loss of consciousness and visual disturbances. Revision of the paragraph on myasthenia gravis. Section 4.7 'Effects on ability to drive and use machines' Strengthening  the  recommendations  for  patients  who  experience  visual  disturbances  or  loss  of consciousness.

## Package Leaflet

Sections 2 'Before you take Levviax', 3 'How to take Levviax' and section 4 'Possible side effects' of the Product Leaflet was updated to reflect the SPC amendments

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Annex II

Annex II was updated to reflect the request from CHMP to present every 6 months Periodic Safety Update Reports for telithromycin, following the evaluation of PSUR covering the period 10/07/05 09/07/06 as requested in the Outcome fax dated 22 November 2006.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 3. CONCLUSION On 22 March 2007 the CHMP considered the data submitted to be acceptable and agreed by majority of 22 out of 28 on the amendments to be introduced in the Product Information. The CHMP members divergent position is appended to the Opinion.