---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:15:40
document_pages: 41
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/livensa-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: livensa-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 28.4056282
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 19:25:56.987469
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1 Introduction

LIVENSA is a testosterone transdermal patch (also called a testosterone transdermal system, TTS). This  is a thin, clear,  28cm 2 matrix  patch  which  contains  8.4  mg  testosterone  and  provides 300 micrograms/24 hours testosterone over a 3- to 4-day period when applied to intact abdominal skin.

The  approved  indication  is:  treatment  of  hypoactive  sexual  desire  disorder  (HSDD)  in  bilaterally oophorectomised and hysterectomised (surgically induced menopausal) women receiving concomitant estrogen therapy. Lower free testosterone concentrations are seen in oophorectomised women with low libido compared to  women  with  normal  libido,  but  there  is  a  great  overlap  in  testosterone  concentrations.  At menopause,  the  production  of  oestrogen  declines  and  the  postmenopausal  ovary  secretes  primarily androstenedione  and  testosterone.  Total  testosterone  production  decreases  by  around  25%  after menopause. It has been estimated that oophorectomy in a postmenopausal woman would reduce her total testosterone production by around 50% and her total androstenedione production by around 20%. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) is defined as 'a deficiency or absence of sexual fantasies and desire for sexual activity. The disturbance must cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty and must not be better accounted for by another psychological disorder or medical condition'.  In the International  Statistical  Classification  of  Diseases  and  Related  Health  Problems  10th  Revision (ICD10; 2003) HSDD is listed under 'lack or loss of sexual desire' where 'loss of sexual desire is the principal  problem  and  is  not  secondary  to  other  sexual  difficulties,  such  as  erectile  failure  or dyspareunia'. Estimates  of  the  proportion  of  women  having  low  sexual  desire  range  from  7  to  33%.  Studies conducted by the Applicant enrolling women with surgical menopause found that 46% of women aged 20-49 and 38% of women aged 50-70 reported decreased interest in sex after surgery.  In addition to significant  distress  due  to  low  desire,  affected  women  can  suffer  from  depression  and  anxiety  and sexual dysfunction can significantly impair partner relationships and decrease quality of life. 2 Quality aspects Introduction LIVENSA contains testosterone as the active substance. It is presented as a matrix type transdermal patch with an area of 28 cm 2 . Each patch contains 8.4 mg of testosterone and is designed to release 300µg of testosterone /24 hours over a 3 to 4 day period, when applied to intact abdominal skin. It is a thin flexible patch and consists of three layers: a non-removable polyester protective film (backing layer), the adhesive matrix containing the active substance and a polyester removable protective layer (release liner). The backing layer is made of a translucent polyethylene (LDPE) polymer. The matrix layer contains the active substance, sorbitan oleate as a permeation enhancer and a pressure sensitive acrylic copolymer adhesive. The release liner consists of two overlapped siliconised polyester film liner strips, designed to be peeled off and discarded by the patient prior to applying the patch to the skin. Each transdermal patch is packed in a heat sealed sachet. Active Substance Medicinal product no longer authorised

The chemical name of testosterone is 17 β -hydroxyandrost-4-en-3-one. It is a well-known active substance monographed in the European as well as in the US Pharmacopoeia. Testosterone appears as white to nearly white crystals, or crystalline powder. It is practically insoluble in water and has no pronounced hygroscopic behaviour. The structure of the active substance has been characterised using NMR ( 1 H and 13 C), MS, IR elemental analysis and X-ray diffraction. Testosterone exhibits six chiral carbons, however it has been demonstrated that only one single enantiomer is present in the substance used for the manufacture of the LIVENSA transdermal patches. The IR spectra confirm the existence of only one crystal form.

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  applicant  has  submitted  information  for  two  suppliers  of  testosterone.  One  of  them  has submitted a certificate of suitability to the monographs of the Eur. Pharmacopoeia and for this reason no further assessment except stability was performed. The other has submitted information concerning the details of the manufacture, controls and validation of the active substance in the form of an active substance master file (ASMF). The information mentioned below concerns only the active substance for which an ASMF has been submitted.

## · Manufacture

The  active  substance  is  produced  by  a  three-step  synthesis  starting  from  androstenedione. Androstenedione is a steroidal  material  produced  by  fermentation  from  phytosterols  by  a  subclonal mutant  strain  of  the  wild  type  organism Mycobacterium fortuitum .  It  is  also  an  intermediate  in  the natural degradation pathway of testosterone. Detailed information has been submitted demonstrating that no impurities are present at significant level in the active substance, other than those described in the respective EP monograph for testosterone. A residual solvent evaluation conducted on ten production batches, demonstrates that the levels of all solvents evaluated were below the limits set by ICH guidelines. · Specification The active substance specification includes tests for appearance, identification (IR), assay (UV), related impurities (HPLC, TLC), residual solvents (GC), specific optical rotation (Ph. Eur) and loss on drying  (Ph.  Eur).  The  non-Ph.Eur.  tests  included  in  the  specification  (HPLC,  GC)  have  been adequately described and validated in accordance with the ICH requirements. Batch  analysis  data  have  been  provided  for  three  non-micronised  and  three  supportive micronised batches. For the manufacture of the LIVENSA patches the non- micronised form is being used. In all cases the results met the pre-determined specifications. · Stability Stability studies have been performed to demonstrate the stability of testosterone, when stored at long-term conditions. Five batches of non-micronised active substance have been stored for up to 60 months at ambient conditions and one for 7 months at 25°C/60% RH. In addition six batches of micronised testosterone have been stored for up to 60 months at ambient conditions. Despite the fact that there are some minor deviations from the ICH requirements, the stability data provided demonstrate that the active substance is stable when stored at room temperature/ambient relative humidity for the proposed shelf life. Since  the  CEP  submitted  for  testosterone  provides  no  information  on  stability  and  no  re-test period, the applicant has performed additional stability studies. Data have been obtained from batches stored at 15 ° C to 25 ° C (three batches) for 60 months, at 25 ° C ± 2 ° C/ 65% RH (two batches) for up to 36  months  and  at  45 ° C  (three  batches)  for  6  months.  In  all  cases  no  significant  change  has  been observed in any specification parameter and for this reason the proposed re-test period was found to be acceptable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Medicinal Product

## · Pharmaceutical Development

LIVENSA is a matrix type transdermal patch. In these types of patches the active substance is dissolved directly in the adhesive, which is kept in contact with intact skin. The objectives in developing this product formulation were threefold:  a) to provide sufficient blood levels of testosterone for effective therapy; b) to provide consistent delivery of testosterone over the dosing period; and c) to ensure acceptable adhesion to allow for continuous wearing over the dosing interval with minimal skin irritation.  The matrix formulation is designed specifically to present a sufficiently high concentration of the active substance to the stratum corneum, which is the primary absorptioncontrolling factor.

The manufacturing process has been described in detail. It comprises of the following steps (1) mixing of adhesive, testosterone and sorbitan oleate to achieve the casting solution, (2) coating of the casting solution on the polyester release liner, drying of the casting solution on the liner, and laminating of a printed backing film onto the dried casting solution, (3) removal of the release liner, laminating of the same release liner or alternatively addition of a new one on the casting solution in an overlapping fashion/way, (4) die cutting and pouching of patches, and finally (5) packaging into a secondary packaging (carton).

Important  factors  in  the  development  of  matrix-type  transdermal  delivery  systems  include adhesive  quality  and  skin  tolerability,  active  ingredient  concentration,  skin  permeability,  skin  flux enhancer concentration and compatibility, as well as stability.  All of these factors were evaluated in the development of the drug product. Since testosterone is dissolved in the adhesive, the particle size and physical form of the active substance were not considered as critical. The selection of the adhesive was based on in-vitro skin permeability studies in human cadaver skin and existing knowledge. The rate and extent of skin permeation is fundamentally associated with the concentration of the active ingredient in the matrix composition. The active substance concentration and patch size have been studied in relation to diffusion through skin both in vitro and in vivo (abdomen  and  buttocks  from  both  men  and  women).  It  was  determined  that  the  selected concentration of testosterone in the matrix formulation is appropriate to provide sufficient skin flux to achieve the desired absorption rate from a patch of a reasonable total surface area.  Special attention was given to the physical stability of the formulations with respect to crystal formation. No crystal formation was seen at any of the  conditions  or  storage  durations  studied  (room  temperature  for  17 months,  and  40  and  45°C  for  6  months).  A  number  of  potential  skin  permeation  enhancers  were examined  for  their  effect  on  steady  state  flux  of  testosterone  from  matrix  formulations.    Based  on preliminary skin flux studies and on its well-known skin tolerance, sorbitan oleate was selected. The polymers used in the release liner and the backing film are suitable for pharmaceutical use and compatible with the adhesive solution. The  composition  of  the  final  formulation  was  selected  based  on  the  results  of in-vitro skin permeability studies, the adhesive characteristics and stability studies.  The proposed formulation has been  found  to  provide  a  nominal  transdermal  delivery  rate  of  testosterone  300 µ g/day  from  a  skin contact surface area of 28 cm 2  over a dosing duration of up to 4 days.  The actual delivery rate is determined directly from human pharmacokinetic studies. Process development has primarily been focused on optimisation of the individual steps and the definition  of  the  critical  ranges  of  the  process  parameters.  Detailed  optimisation  data  have  been provided  for  the  adhesive  solution  mixing  (blade  speed,  mixing  time),  the  coating  process  (line speed/web  speed,  oven  temperatures),  die  cutting  (machine  tension,  rotary  die  pressure)  and  the pouching process (heat seal die pressure, heat seal die temperature, heat seal die dwell time). The patch formulation used in the phase III pivotal clinical trials is identical to the one intended for marketing. In general the excipients of this formulation are commonly used. Sorbitan oleate is tested for compliance to pharmacopoeia monographs. It is stated to be of animal origin and a TSE certificate has been provided. The other excipients are tested for compliance to in-house monographs. · Manufacture of the Product Medicinal product no longer authorised

All critical process parameters have been identified and controlled by appropriate in process controls. The  validation  report  from  several  production  scale  batches  demonstrates  that  the  process  is

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

reproducible  and  provides  a  drug  product  that  complies  with  the  in-process  and  finished  product specifications.

- Product Specification

The product specifications include tests by validated methods for the appearance, content uniformity (HPLC), assay (HPLC), identification (HPLC), degradation products (HPLC), residual solvents (GC), drug release (dissolution testing), adhesion to steel and release liner peel.

The specification and control tests applied for the finished product at time of release and throughout the life of the product, are in compliance with pharmacopoeial standards (including Ph Eur) and ICH guidelines.  The limits for each specification test are supported by stability data.

Specific  studies  have  been  conducted  to  evaluate  skin  tolerability  of  LIVENSA.  The  non-clinical development  programme  has  appropriately  concentrated  on  skin  tolerability  of  LIVENSA  and  the patch adhesive. All local tolerance studies performed or sponsored by the Applicant were conducted in compliance with GLP.

Batch analysis data from nine batches of the finished product have been provided. All batches met the test  limits  as  defined  in  the  release  specification  and  test  methodology  valid  at  the  time  of batch release and indicated that patches of consistent quality are obtained. · Stability of the Product Stability studies were carried out on 11 pilot scale batches of transdermal patches according to the  ICH  requirements.  The  batches  were  manufactured  by  the  commercial  process  using  active substance from both suppliers and stored in the intended primary package.  Samples were stored at 25 o C/60 % RH for up to 39 months, at 30 o C/60 % RH for up to 13 months and in 40 o C/75 % RH for 6 months. The samples were tested according to the release specification (parameters, methods and acceptance criteria). In all cases the stability results presented were satisfactory and support the proposed shelf life for the commercially packaged product under the conditions specified in the SPC. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects. The quality of LIVENSA is adequately established. In general, satisfactory chemical and pharmaceutical documentation has been submitted for marketing authorization. There are no major deviations from EU and ICH requirements. The  active  substance  is  well  characterised  and  documented.  The  excipients  are  commonly  used  in these  types  of  formulations  and  comply  with  Ph.  Eur.  requirements.  The  packaging  material  is commonly used and well documented. The manufacturing process of the finished product is a standard process  that  has  been  adequately  described.  Stability  tests  indicate  that  the  product  under  ICH guidelines conditions is chemically stable for the proposed shelf life. 3 Non-clinical aspects Introduction LIVENSA  is  a  transdermal  patch  containing  the  active  substance  testosterone  (with  a  nominal testosterone release of 300 µ g/day). The non-clinical data on acute toxicity, carcinogenicity, genotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and safety pharmacology were based on the literature. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacology

- Primary and or secondary pharmacology

No data have been submitted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Safety pharmacology

There  is  a  significant  body  of  literature,  both  non-clinical  and  clinical,  evaluating  the  effects  of testosterone on a range of pharmacological endpoints. A range of dose levels and dose routes have been evaluated, and much of the work focuses on pharmacological effects in males.  The doses used were generally much higher (i.e., in the male ranges) when compared to the claimed concentrations in the clinic with the testosterone transdermal system.

In cardiovascular  studies ,  testosterone  has  been  shown  to  have  vasodilatory  properties  in  a  wide variety of vasculature and vascular beds. There are no data on blood pressure effects in animals, but clinical studies have indicated this is not a concern. Testosterone has recently been evaluated for its effects on cardiac electrophysiology. While it does block HERG channel in vitro ,  it  does not show any consistent effect on QT interval prolongation in either animals or humans. It appears to reduce the potential for this effect produced by other drugs. There were no published reports on respiratory effects of testosterone. No specific information about the effects on the central nervous system was submitted. Overall, non-clinical safety pharmacology findings raise no safety concerns for the use of transdermal testosterone in women at the low dose provided by the testosterone transdermal system. · Overall conclusions on pharmacology Testosterone is the predominant, naturally occurring androgenic hormone  in  mammals.  The testosterone  transdermal  patch  provides  a  low  dose  of  testosterone  (300  microgram/day)  and  the concentrations in the clinic are stated to be within the reference range for premenopausal women. Literature  reports  provided  the  basis  for  assessment  of  endpoints  not  deliberately  tested  for  in  the clinic, i.e. safety pharmacology, which was adequately evaluated. This is appropriate in view of the substantial preclinical and clinical data relating to the pharmacodynamics and safety pharmacology of testosterone. The  above  non-clinical  safety  pharmacology  findings  raise  no  safety  concerns  for  the  use  of transdermal testosterone in women at the low dose provided by the testosterone transdermal system. The androgenisation in female animals by administered testosterone is addressed in the reproduction section. Pharmacokinetics No  non-clinical  pharmacokinetic  study  reports  have  been  submitted.    In  addition,  taking  into consideration  the  extensive  pharmacokinetic  assessment  included  in  the  clinical  programme,  no sponsored non-clinical pharmacokinetic studies were conducted for ethical/animal welfare reasons. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The CHMP agreed with the Applicant that no key additional information to support this submission would be obtained from animal pharmacokinetic studies.

## Toxicology

Also provided in this section is a review of toxicological evaluations conducted with the excipients used in the clinical formulation of the transdermal patch. The toxicity profile has been documented in applicant-sponsored studies and scientific literature.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Single dose toxicity

No classical single dose study data are available in the literature. Literature reports involving single doses of testosterone propionate administered to rats did not result in a lethal toxic response.

## · Repeat dose toxicity

Regarding repeat-toxicity the Applicant referred to two studies.

. The effects of repeat administration of testosterone propionate on muscle weight (i.e., to treat/reverse hypertrophy) have been examined in adult female rats, and it was noted that testosterone treatment had no effect on muscle weight or body weight. · Genotoxicity The  genotoxicity  profile  of  testosterone  has  been  evaluated  in  a  wide  range  of  well  designed (including all ICH endpoints) in vivo and in vitro studies reported in the literature. Testosterone  was  reported  as  being  non-mutagenic  in  a  range  of  assays  evaluating  effects  on chromosomes:  in  the  Ames  test  in  bacteria,  in  a  mouse  lymphoma  assay  and  in  chromosomal aberration tests (HeLa cells, human synovial cells, Chinese hamster Don cells) except in the Chinese hamster  lung  cells  where  a  clastogenic  response  in  was  observed  at  the  highest  dose  tested corresponding to cytotoxic dose levels. Three mouse micro nucleus tests were reported from different laboratories, and all were negative. An absence of DNA adducts was further reported. In in  vivo tests  testosterone  was  non-mutagenic  in  two  micronucleus  tests  in  mice  and  in  one chromosomal aberration test (sperm head morphology and chromosomal aberrations bone marrow) in rats. The results of these studies consistently confirm the lack of a genotoxic effect with testosterone. · Carcinogenicity A  substantial  body  of  literature  demonstrate  that  as  expected  for  a  hormonally  active  compound, tumour incidence can be increased in hormonally responsive organs and tissues including endometrium, mammary glands, and liver. In  1987,  the  International  Agency  for  Research  on  Cancer  (IARC  Supplement  7)  concluded  in  the overall evaluation that androgenic (anabolic) steroids are probably carcinogenic in humans. Testosterone is most probably associated with an increased risk for carcinogenicity through epigenetic mechanisms  as  genotoxicity  data  are  overall  negative.  This  would  likely  result  in  proliferative responses in organs with expressed receptors. In females these organs would include mammary tissue, the  uterus,  ovaries,  and  the  liver.  Studies  also  have  shown  that  when  co-administered  with  a carcinogen, testosterone at high doses is a promoter in rodent animal models. Testosterone was also evaluated in SHE cells for its transforming effects, and it was found to be weakly positive with no dose  response.  This  finding  was  consistent  with  an  epigenetic  mechanism,  and  with  promoter properties as the SHE assay can respond to both genotoxic and epigenetic carcinogens. It has been demonstrated that in male mice, hepatocarcinomas are androgen dependent, exemplifying the complex response of rodents to exogenous hormones. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Several  publications  have  presented  experimental  data  associated  with  changes  following  neonatal testosterone exposure. Overall, the exposure of young female animals to testosterone results in lifelong changes characterised by androgenisation.

Consistent with other marketed testosterone products, statements about rodent carcinogenic data are included in the 5.3 section of the SmPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Reproduction Toxicity

Extensive data are available on the reproductive and developmental effects of testosterone. Testosterone is a potent androgenic hormone and its effects on developing foetuses are pronounced and  thus,  developing  foetuses  should  not  be  exposed  to  testosterone.  Across  multiple  species, masculinisation of the foetus anatomically and increases in aggressive behaviour, are the end results of exposure to testosterone during neonatal development.

A  NOEL  of  0.1  mg  testosterone  propionate  per  rat,  administered  sc  is  reported  in  the  literature. Assuming a rat weight of 300 g, this is a dose of 333 µ g/kg/day. For comparison the daily dose of testosterone from the patch is 300 µ g. Thus a 50 kg woman would be exposed to 6 µ g/kg/day, over 50 fold less than the NOEL in rats. No topical reproductive studies are reported in the literature. · Toxicokinetic data Literature data were submitted · Local tolerance Dermal irritation studies (rabbits) and skin sensitisation studies (guinea pigs) were conducted by the Applicant  with  the  active  testosterone  transdermal  system  and  placebo  patches  according  to  GLP principles. Both patches were classified as moderate irritants. However, some of the irritation was attributed to the trauma associated with removal of patches from the skin. No evidence of delayed dermal contact skin sensitisation was seen in either of the performed studies with active testosterone transdermal or placebo patches in female guinea pigs. Other toxicity studies The  components  of  the  patch  that  will  be  in  contact  with  skin  during  administration  consist  of  an adhesive matrix that contains the active ingredient testosterone and the excipients sorbitan monooleate (permeation enhancer) and acrylic adhesive. All of the skin contacting ingredients were evaluated for dermal  irritation  and  sensitization  in  rabbits  and  guinea  pigs  respectively  using  the  clinically formulated patch. In addition, sorbitan monooleate has been evaluated separately in dermal irritation and  sensitization  studies  in  rabbits  and  guinea  pigs  as  well  as  in  single  dose,  repeat  dose,  and carcinogenicity  studies  in  rats  and  rabbits  following  topical,  ocular,  and  oral  administration.  The toxicity of the acrylic adhesive was investigated separately in a battery of studies including an in vitro biocompatibility study in mouse fibroblasts, a dermal irritation study in rabbits, a muscle implantation study in rabbits, and an oral systemic toxicity study in mice. In conclusion sorbitan monooleate is considered to be a minimal skin irritant and did not irritate the eyes. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The applicant has conducted four studies with regard to the safety of the acrylic adhesive. The toxicity of has also been investigated separately in an in vitro biocompatibility study in mouse fibroblasts, in a dermal irritation study in rabbits, in a muscle implantation study in rabbits, and in an oral systemic toxicity study in the mouse.

In conclusion, the acrylic adhesive is considered to be non-toxic and nonclinical data do not raise any safety concerns relevant to clinical use.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Antigenicity

In a GLP dermal sensitization study in female guinea pigs, delayed contact hypersensitivity was not induced by any of the ingredients in the transdermal patch.

## · Immunotoxicity

Hughes et al. (1995) reported in immune response studies that testosterone did not have a significant effect on the production of antibodies in vivo in response to sheep red blood cell (SRBCs), and did not cause human peripheral blood lymphocytes to produce inflammatory cytokines in vitro.

· Dependence The  testosterone transdermal patch delivers a low dose of 300 microgram/day  testosterone, consequently it is not appropriate to perform such studies for this product. · Metabolites Testosterone  and  its  metabolites  are  naturally  occurring  hormones.  It  is  well  recognised  that  both endogenous and exogenous testosterone are metabolised in the same way. There is sufficient clinical data both from the testosterone 300 µ g transdermal patch clinical programme and in the literature to establish the safety profile of testosterone metabolites. Consequently no further non-clinical work was conducted by the Applicant. · Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment The Predicted  Environmental  Concentrations  of  testosterone  in  surface  water  (PEC)  was  calculated and literature was provided and support the applicant's conclusion that risks to the environment are unlikely from use of the patch is endorsed. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects Testosterone  has  been  used  and  is  used  in  several  other  products  indicated  for  use  in  males.  The current application concerns a testosterone 300 microgram transdermal patch, which is indicated for hypoactive  sexual  desire  disorder  (HSDD)  in  surgically  menopausal  women  who  are,  by  nature  of their condition unable to become pregnant. The testosterone transdermal patch provides a low dose of testosterone (300 microgram/day) and the stated concentrations in the clinic are within the reference range for premenopausal women. Published data provide an adequate basis for the assessment of the end-points not deliberately tested for in the clinic, i.e. acute toxicity, genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and reproductive toxicity. Testosterone  is  not  genotoxic,  yet  produces  tumours  in  a  range  of  organs,  including  endometrium, mammary gland, and liver, in rodents when administered at high doses. Consistent with other marketed testosterone products, statements about rodent carcinogenic data are included in the 5.3 section of the SPC. In  addition  it  is  also  clear  that  testosterone  can  have  adverse  effects  on  the  developing  foetus  and should  not  be  used  by  women  who  are,  or  who  are  likely  to  become,  pregnant  or  breast-feeding women. This is taken into account in Sections 4.6 and 5.3 of the SmPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

New specific studies have been conducted to evaluate skin tolerability of the testosterone transdermal system itself and no evidence of delayed dermal contact sensitisation was observed in female guinea pigs.  Primary  skin  irritation  studies  in  rabbits  indicated  that  the  testosterone  transdermal  and  the placebo patches were, at most, moderately irritating. Part of the irritation could have been caused by the fact that the patches were difficult to remove from the skin. However, since sufficient clinical data exist, there are no non-clinical concerns.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 4 Clinical aspects

## Introduction

LIVENSA is a testosterone transdermal patch (also called a testosterone transdermal system, TTS). This  is a thin, clear,  28cm 2 matrix  patch  which  contains  8.4  mg  testosterone  and  provides 300 micrograms/24 hours testosterone over a 3- to 4-day period when applied to intact abdominal skin.

•

Serum  samples  were  analysed  for  free,  total,  and  bioavailable  testosterone;  SHBG;  free  and  total dihydrotestosterone (DHT); free and total estradiol; estrone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS) and androstenedione.

The  approved  indication  is:  treatment  of  hypoactive  sexual  desire  disorder  (HSDD)  in  bilaterally oophorectomized and hysterectomized (surgically induced menopausal) women receiving concomitant oestrogen therapy. For the clinical trials programme of LIVENSA, three patient-based instruments were developed, the Sexual  Activity  Log © (SAL © ),  the  Profile  of  Female  Sexual  Function © (PFSF © )  and  the  Personal Distress Scale © (PDS © ), in order to cover the frequency and quality of sexual activity, psychological aspects of sexuality and personal distress. Final versions of the PFSF, PDS, and SAL were evaluated in  clinical  studies,  enrolling  surgically  menopausal  women  who  met  criteria  for  HSDD  and  agematched control women who had intact ovaries and normal libido. All domains of the PFSF and PDS and all SAL endpoints were found to discriminate between women with low libido and age-matched healthy controls. GCP All Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the Applicant. Pharmacokinetics Testosterone is an endogenous well-known substance, used in several other products indicated for use in  males.  Studies  investigating  basic  pharmacokinetic  properties  of  testosterone  (e.g. metabolism, elimination,  interactions)  have  not  been  submitted.    The  main  purpose  of  this  pharmacokinetic assessment  is  to  document  the  pharmacokinetic  properties  of  LIVENSA  TTS  and  to  describe  the plasma levels of testosterone achieved in females. The testosterone transdermal system (TTS) contains 8.4 mg of testosterone and has been designed to provide systemic delivery of testosterone 300 µ g/day from a 28-cm2-matrix formulation when applied to  the  abdomen for 3 to 4 days. This formulation was used in the majority of pharmacokinetic and safety and efficacy trials. The TTS is a three-layer drug in adhesive matrix design that consists of a translucent backing film, an adhesive matrix, and an overlapped-tab release liner that is removed prior to application. The pharmacokinetics of testosterone from the patch has been evaluated in single and multiple dose studies, in standard pharmacokinetic and population pharmacokinetic studies, for durations of 4 days to  12  months, by application site (abdomen or buttocks), over a range of testosterone doses and by dose and route of concomitant estrogen therapy. Analytical methods Medicinal product no longer authorised

The analyses of total testosterone, total estradiol, and estrone were performed by radioimmunoassay (RIA)  following  sample  extraction  and  column  chromatography.  The  analysis  of  total  DHT  was performed by competitive single antibody RIA following sample extraction and column chromatography.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Percent free testosterone, percent free estradiol, and percent free DHT were determined by equilibrium dialysis  using  radiolabeled  tracer  techniques.  The  serum  concentrations  of  free  testosterone,  free estradiol,  and  free  DHT  were  calculated  using  the  values  for  total  concentration  and  percent  free analyte. The percent bioavailable testosterone assay used ammonium sulfate to precipitate the fraction of  total  testosterone  bound  by  SHBG.  Bioavailable  testosterone  is  the  fraction  of  total  testosterone remaining in the supernatant after the precipitation of SHBG-bound testosterone. The concentration of SHBG was determined using a sandwich immunoassay. Validation results have been presented for all relevant analytes.

<!-- image -->

| Parameter   |   N | Free Testosterone   | Total Testosterone   |
|-------------|-----|---------------------|----------------------|
| C max       |  12 | 3.65 (2.73) pg/mL   | 81.3 (28.4) ng/dL    |
| t max       |  12 | 20.04 (13.52) hours | 27.38 (25.21) hours  |
| t 1/2,Z     |   9 | 2.35 (0.85) hours   | 2.17 (0.84) hours    |

The absolute bioavailability from the patch in comparison with i.v. administration has not been studied and there was no estimation of relative bioavailability in comparison with other administration routes for testosterone. However, data on absolute and relative bioavailability were not deemed necessary.

Conventional non-compartmental methods have been used in most studies. Base-line adjusted levels of testosterone were generally used in the pharmacokinetic analyses. A population pharmacokinetic approach was used on data from two Phase III studies. · Absorption Pharmacokinetic results  after  a  single  dose  were  available  from  a  study  performed  in  30  surgically menopausal healthy women aged 40 to 70 years who were on a stable dose of oral estrogen therapy (Study 2003003). In each subject, a single  28-cm2 patch, designed to systemically deliver approximately 300 µ g/day testosterone, was applied to the abdomen and worn for 96 hours. At the end of 96 hours, the used patch and any adhesive residue was collected for residual content analysis. In a subgroup of 12 subjects, serial serum samples were collected over the 24 hours prior to application of the  patch  and  over  120  hours  (with  patch  removed  at  96  hours)  after  application  of  the  patch.  The samples were analysed for free and total testosterone. The results are shown below: Figure 1. Mean total testosterone serum concentrations over time (Study 2003003) Table 1. Mean (SD) baseline-corrected PK parameters for total and free testosterone (Study 2003003) Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Evaluation of the daily dose from the patch

An  assessment  of  the  daily  dose  of  testosterone  delivered  from  the  patch  has  been  made  by  two methods, by using systemic exposure/clearance principles or by using the depletion method.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

All  relevant  studies  have  been  performed  with  the  product  intended  for  marketing.  Where  the  dose from  the  patch  was  estimated  to  be  higher  using  the  depletion  method  compared  with  the  method based on systemic exposure and clearance several factors can affect the dose delivered to the patient and absorbed in comparison to the amount lost from the patch. The total amount in the patch is 8.4 mg, the  estimated  amount  released  per  day  corresponds  to  about  6%  and  errors  in  the  estimations  are likely. Therefore, from a pharmacokinetic point of view, the data using the systemic exposure method support a daily release of approximately 300 µ g/day.

## · Effect of application site on absorption

Absorption  of  testosterone  from  a  14-cm2  patch  from  the  abdomen  and  from  the  buttocks  was assessed  in  Study  T98002.  The  steady-state  pharmacokinetics  of  testosterone  was  assessed  in surgically menopausal women. The application of the patch on the buttocks in comparison with the abdomen resulted in an approximately 12% lower exposure to free testosterone and 20% lower total testosterone,  with  90%  confidence  intervals  outside  the  commonly  accepted  0.80-1.25  range  for showing bioequivalence. Based on the results, all subsequent studies including the clinical safety and efficacy  studies  utilised  the  abdomen  as  the  application  site.  Where  the  difference  is  small  and possibly non relevant, the CHMP endorsed the recommendation to only use the abdomen and this is included in the SmPC. · Distribution No specific studies on distribution have been performed. Circulating testosterone in serum exists either tightly bound to SHBG (sex hormone binding globulin; a plasma protein synthesized in the liver that specifically  binds  steroid  sex  hormones)  (approximately  65-80%),  weakly  and  reversibly  bound  to serum albumin (approximately 20-30%) or as free testosterone (0.5-2%). The SHBG bound fraction is regarded  as  not  contributing  to  biological  activity.  The  albumin  bound  fraction  and  the  unbound fraction are collectively termed 'bioavailable' testosterone. Factors that affect SHBG concentrations also affect free testosterone concentrations. · Elimination No  specific studies regarding elimination have been performed. Testosterone is extensively metabolised  by  cytochrome  P450  3A4  (CYP3A4),  aromatase,  and  5-alpha-reductase.  CYP3A4 metabolises testosterone primarily in the liver by conversion to various hydroxy steroids. The active metabolites of testosterone are DHT and estradiol. Testosterone is metabolised to DHT by steroid 5alpha-reductase in many tissues, including skin. Testosterone is metabolised to estradiol by aromatase, in various tissues including adipose tissue. About 90% of a dose of testosterone given intramuscularly is excreted in the urine as glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of testosterone and its metabolites; about 6% of a dose is excreted in the faeces, mostly in unconjugated form. · Dose proportionality and time dependencies Dose proportionality of the testosterone transdermal system was assessed in a multiple dose (150, 300 and 450 µ g/day), open, randomised 3-period crossover study (2000155) in 18 surgically menopausal women on stable oral conjugated equine estrogens doses (0.625 mg/day or higher). Results showed the exposure to free and total testosterone tends to increase slightly less than proportionally. Considering that LIVENSA is available in only one strength, it is agreed that dose proportionality is not of major importance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

For time dependencies, in the pharmacokinetic studies, durations of exposure ranging from 7 days to 2  months  of  continuous  dosing  have  been  studied.  In  clinical  studies,  hormone  levels  after  up  to 52 weeks of treatment have been measured. Data from two phase IIb and two phase III studies were used.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2.  Single and multiple dose pharmacokinetic parameters of free and total testosterone as means (SD)

| Analyte           | Parameter   | Units    | Single dose (2003003)   | 3rddose (2000155)   |
|-------------------|-------------|----------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| FreeTestosterone  | Cmx         | pg/mL    | 3.65 (2.7)              | 3.02 (2.0)          |
| FreeTestosterone  | AUC         | pg.hr/mL | 232 (173)               | 157 (79)            |
| TotalTestosterone | Cmax        | ng/dL    | 81 (29)                 | 79 (39)             |
| TotalTestosterone | AUC         | ng.hr/dL | 5243 (1629)             | 4272 (1689)         |

AUC0-∞ is reported for the single dose study and AUC τ is reported for the 3rd dose.

Study 2001134 (see Efficacy section) was a phase III, placebo controlled study to evaluate efficacy and safety  of  transdermal  testosterone  (300 µ g/day)  for  24  weeks  and  safety  for  a  further  28-week open-label period in surgically menopausal women with HSDD on concurrent ERT. Serum samples for hormone analyses were collected at baseline, Week 12, 24, and 52. Administration of the patch increased serum concentrations of free, total and bioavailable testosterone compared to baseline. Testosterone concentrations were higher (10-20%) at Week 12 compared to the average  of  concentrations  at  Week  24  and  Week  52  visits.  No  changes  in  serum  concentrations  of SHBG, estradiol and estrone were observed. Overall these data indicate that stable testosterone levels are achieved upon multiple dosing, with no unexpected accumulation up to 52 weeks of dosing. · Inter-individual and intra-individual variability The inter-individual variability (% CV) in Cmax and AUC values ranges from 30% up to 75% for free and total testosterone. Data on intra-individual variability have not been presented. Factors affecting SHBG levels are expected to have an influence on the intra-individual variability. The  inter-individual  variability  is  high,  but  not  unexpected  since  steroids  often  show  a  high  interindividual variability in  pharmacokinetics  and  the  transdermal administration route  may  also contribute. However, the reference range for normal testosterone levels in premenopausal females also shows a wide range. · Hormone  levels  in  surgical  menopausal  women  with  HSDD  (Phase  III  studies:  2001133, 2001134) by Oestrogen route of administration About 74% of the patients in study 2001133 and about 80% of the patients in study 2001134 received oral estrogen concomitantly, and the remaining patients received estrogen transdermally. Higher  free  testosterone  levels  in  patients  receiving  transdermal  oestrogen  therapy  were  observed across several studies. The  serum  concentrations  of  DHEA-S,  androstenedione,  free  and  total  estradiol,  and  estrone,  were similar between the treatment groups at baseline, and no appreciable changes in the concentrations of these hormones occurred following treatment with LIVENSA. In addition, treatment with LIVENSA for 52 weeks did not exhibit significant changes in SHBG serum concentrations. These results indicate that  administration  of  LIVENSA  for  up  to  52  weeks  has  no  significant  influence  on  serum concentrations  of  estrogens  (free  and  total  estradiol),  SHBG,  and  adrenal  precursors  (DHEA-S  and androstenedione) concentrations. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Consistent  with  the  known  effect  of  the  route  of  ET  on  SHBG  serum  concentrations,  patients  on transdermal ET had lower median SHBG serum concentrations compared with patients on oral ET. However,  patients  on  oral  ET  had  a  larger  range  of  SHBG  serum  concentrations  compared  with patients  on  transdermal  ET,  and  there  was  a  wide  overlap  between  the  2  ET  groups  in  these concentrations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Specifically, the subgroup of patients on transdermal ET exhibited relatively higher mean or median serum concentrations of free and bioavailable testosterone compared with patients on oral ET.

The mean or median total testosterone serum concentrations were similar for patients receiving either oral  or  transdermal ET. Patients on transdermal ET exhibited higher mean or median free and total estradiol and lower mean or median estrone serum concentrations compared with patients on oral ET.

Similar pharmacokinetic results were observed in Study 2001134.

In  both  studies  2001133  and  2001134,  the  mean  free  testosterone  was  similar  at  baseline  in  the placebo and LIVENSA group, and increased about 5 times only in the LIVENSA group at Week 24. However, in the 2001133 the mean free testosterone at Week 24 in patients receiving oral estrogen was 3.74 pg/ml and 6.23 pg/ml in the patient group receiving transdermal estrogen with a median of 3.05 and 5.55 pg/ml, respectively. Difference: 81%. In study 20011134, the mean free testosterone at Week 24 in patients receiving estrogen orally was 3.75 pg/ml and 6.07 pg/ml in the patient group receiving transdermal estrogen with a median of 2.85 and 5.50 pg/ml, respectively. Difference: 92%. The median free testosterone in the efficacy studies at week 24 with oral estrogen background was 2.9 pg/ml and in patients with transdermal estrogen background was 5.55 pg/ml. The  mean  or  median  total  testosterone  was  not  different  when  patients  received  either  oral  or transdermal estrogen. Conversely, SHBG concentrations were markedly different in patients receiving concomitantly transdermal estrogen or oral estrogen and about two-fold higher in patients receiving oral estrogen compared with transdermal estrogen. In study 2001133 mean SHBG concentrations at Week 24 in patients receiving oral estrogen was 112 nmol/L  and  53.8  nmol/L  in  the  patient  group  receiving  transdermal  estrogen  (median  at  week  24: 100.0 and 52.0 nmol/L, respectively). Similar results were observed in study 2001134. Means  of  free  estradiol,  total  estradiol,  and  estrone  concentrations  of  the  total  study  population  in studies  2001133  and  2001134  were  not  changed  during  LIVENSA  application.  In  patients,  who received concomitantly transdermal estrogen the means  of free estrogen and total estrogen concentrations were about 1.5-2.0-fold greater than those observed with concomitant oral estrogen . The CHMP considered the approach of pooling the data of free testosterone from patients receiving oral estrogen or transdermal estrogen questionable, also based on the efficacy analysis by subgroups, which  shows  that  the  improvement  of  the  primary  endpoint  was  greater  in  patients  receiving transdermal estrogen compared to those receiving oral estrogen (see Efficacy section). In  this  view,  the  Applicant  further  clarified  the  free  testosterone  serum  concentration  within  the subgroup of patients on oral oestrogen:  in fact marked reduction of free testosterone only apply to women  concomitantly  treated  by  conjugate  equine  oestrogens  (CEE),  but  not  to  non-CEE  oral treatments.  Pooled  pharmacokinetic  data  from  studies  2001133,  2001134,  1999068  and  1999092 indicated a free testosterone serum concentration at Week 24 of 3.6 pg/mL in CEE subset, versus 5.0 pg/mL in non-CEE subset (where transdermal treated women exhibited at Week 24 a mean value of 6.0 pg/mL). These hormonal values were approximately associated with efficacy results (see also the Efficacy section). · Special populations Medicinal product no longer authorised

No specific studies have been performed in special populations. This is acceptable since testosterone is a well-known endogenous substance.

A population pharmacokinetic analysis in the target population was performed using serum total, free and bioavailable testosterone concentrations collected in two Phase III studies (2001133, 2001134). A total  of  549  patients  received active drug in these studies and were eligible for this analysis. Blood samples were collected at Week -4 (baseline Visit 2) and during Weeks 24 and 52 in Study 2001133.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

An additional  sample  was  collected  at  Week  12  in  Study  2001134.  Linear  mixed-effect  regression analysis was performed to explore relationships between serum free, total, bioavailable testosterone and  various  patient  specific  factors  (covariates),  including  concomitant  treatment  with  CYP3A4 inhibitors.

A significant relationship between total testosterone concentrations and body weight was shown: total testosterone  concentration  decreased  as  body  weight  increased.  However,  since  no  significant relationship  was  found  between  body  weight  and  free  testosterone  levels  the  effect  on  total testosterone seems of limited clinical significance.

N/A

- Mechanism of action

No  effect  of  renal  function  on  the  testosterone  levels  was  observed.  This  was  expected,  since testosterone  is  not  primarily  eliminated  by  renal  excretion.  Also,  the  majority  of  the  patients  had  a normal renal function (mean CLcr 106 ml/min, CV 27%). No patients with hepatic impairment were included in the population pharmacokinetic analysis and no specific  study  has  been  performed.  Where  severe  hepatic  impairment  may  have  an  effect  on  the pharmacokinetics of testosterone, specific data for this dosage form are deemed not necessary. The SPC describes a risk of oedema in patients with pre-existing renal or hepatic disease in section 4.4. It also stated that this is not expected with LIVENSA due to its low dose. LIVENSA is only intended for treatment of females. The age range of the women included in the population analysis was quite narrow: 49 ± 7 years (mean ± SD). Within this range, age did not seem to affect the testosterone concentrations. Limited data are available in elderly women. LIVENSA is not indicated for use in children or adolescents. Overall  the  population  pharmacokinetic  analysis  did  not  reveal  any  new  or  unexpected  covariate relationships. A total of 52 patients were listed as taking CYP3A4 inhibitors during the time period that  pharmacokinetic  samples  were  collected.  Where  the  population  PK  analysis  wais  negative,  the subjects classified as taking CYP3A4 inhibitors did not seem to take potent inhibitors and the number of subjects taking inducers was too low. The observed lack of effect of CYP3A4 inhibitors should be treated with caution. This is taken into consideration in section 4.5 of the SmPC. · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies Two separate studies were performed to evaluate the effect of two oral (study T98003) or transdermal (study T98004) doses of E2 on the pharmacokinetic profiles of free and total testosterone. Results showed that within the same administration route, the dose of concomitant estradiol treatment did not affect the exposure to free or total testosterone. Specific interaction studies with CYP3A4 inhibitors were not performed (see above). · Pharmacokinetics using human biomaterials Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

Testosterone  is  well-known  to  be  the  primary  androgenic  hormone  in  both  men  and  women.  In women, it is produced both by the ovaries and the adrenal glands (100 to 400 µ g/day). For women in whom the ovaries are removed, testosterone production is reduced by approximately 50%. In many of these patients, this reduction in endogenously produced testosterone is associated with low libido and resultant  personal  distress  termed  hypoactive  sexual  desire  disorder  (HSDD).  Although  HSDD  is associated with low levels of circulating testosterone, low serum concentrations of testosterone alone

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

do not predict the presence or the severity of this disorder in women. The exact mechanism by which testosterone may affect sexual function in women is not known.

- Primary and Secondary pharmacology

No primary pharmacological studies were performed.

The physiologic actions of androgens in women have been inferred  from developmental observations, androgen deficiency states, and correlational studies and by analogies to the actions of androgens in men and include:

Pubertal development: voice lowering, facial hair, body (pubic) hair, genital development; Sexual function: libido (sexual desire}, arousal (genital blood flow}, and orgasmic response; Anabolic effects: muscle mass, bone density, haematocrit; Effects on mind: sense of energy (vitality), cognitive functions (spatial perception, memory), feeling of well-being (antidepressant effect); Other actions: Stimulation of oil and sweat production, alterations of hair follicles on the scalp in a manner that promotes hair loss. No secondary pharmacological studies were performed. The  CHMP  agreed  with  the  Applicant  that  the  pharmacological  effects  of  elevated  levels  of testosterone in women are known, and the early, reversible signs are readily monitored in the clinic. · Relationship between plasma concentration and effect No specific clinical studies were performed: a correlation between free testosterone and the primary efficacy endpoint (total satisfying sexual activity over 4 weeks) and the secondary efficacy endpoint (sexual desire over 4 weeks) was carried out for the main efficacy studies. Clinical efficacy The clinical  development  programme  performed  for  the  evaluation  of  efficacy  of  LIVENSA  in  the treatment of HSDD in SM women includes 3 Phase II studies (T96006, 1999068 and 1999092), and 2 Phase  III  studies  (2001133  and  2001134).  A  subset  of  patients  from  the  Phase  III  studies  was evaluated  in  a  clinical  relevance  study  (CMKUS030993)  to  determine  whether  they  experienced meaningful benefits during study participation. · Clinical Program of Controlled Studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3. Studies Included in the Summary of Clinical Efficacy

| longer   | longer   | longer   | longer   | longer   |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
|          | no       |          |          |          |

The Personal  Distress  Scale © (PDS © ) measures  distress  associated  with  low  libido  in  menopausal women over the past 30 days.

· Development of Psychometric Instruments Prior to the start of the key Phase II &amp; III studies (Studies 1999068, 1999092, 2001133, 2001134) the Applicant undertook qualitative and quantitative work (studies 1999069, 1999070 and 19999071) to develop three psychometric instruments that were capable to capture and quantify sexual activities in women: The Sexual Activity Log© (SAL © ) records the frequency of sexual activity, orgasm and satisfying sexual activity over the past seven days. The Profile  of  Female  Sexual  Function © (PFSF © ) is  a  comprehensive  psychometric  tool  which assesses  a  woman's  sexuality  categorised  in  7  domains;  desire,  arousal,  pleasure,  orgasm,  sexual concerns, responsiveness and self image over the past 30 days. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The three studies used for initial instrument development and validation were of essentially identical design  (Studies  1999069,  1999070,  1999071).  Each  was  a  non-randomised,  parallel  group,  multicentre study of 4 weeks duration. The two groups in each study were hysterectomised/ oophorectomised  women  with  low  libido  and  women  with  intact  ovaries  with  normal  libido ('controls').  There  was  no  clinical  intervention  in  either  group  as  the  objectives  were  to  assess  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

validity  and  reliability  of  the  psychometric  instruments  and  to  measure  hormone  levels  in  these groups. After study completion, as pre-planned, question reduction was undertaken through assessment  of  data  quality,  frequency  distribution  of  question  responses  to  assess  clustering  and discriminant and multivariate statistical analysis.

The  SAL  was  demonstrated  to  be  able  to  discriminate  between  low  libido  surgically  menopausal women and normal libido controls. The discriminant ability was robust across the tested geographic areas.

<!-- image -->

Figure  2.  Estimation  of  sexual  activity  in  the  previous  7  days  in  surgically  menopaused  women  versus normal controls (Studies 1999069, 1999070, 1999071 PFSF was validated to discriminate between the low libido and control populations across its seven domains (sexual desire, arousal, orgasm, sexual pleasure, sexual concerns, sexual responsiveness and sexual self-image). The Sexual Desire domain contains questions that correspond most closely to the DSM-IV diagnostic category of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD). This domain shows good discrimination between groups across geographic areas. Similarly  the  PDS  was  validated  to  discriminate  between  low  libido  and  control  populations, while keeping consistency across geographic areas. Overall  these  3  evaluation  tools  are  considered  capable  to  address  the  specific  symptoms  of menopausal  women  with  HSDD.  Their  development  was  rigorous  and  validated  across  different geographic areas. · Dose response studies Dose finding studies were performed in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial testing patches releasing 150, 300 and 450 µ g/24h of testosterone in women with HSDD (1999068). The doses 150 and 300 µ g/24h of testosterone were also tested in a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled study with a cross-over design (T96006). Dose-finding study 1999068 Medicinal product no longer authorised

Results

Borderline significant linear dose effects were observed for PFSF Sexual Desire at week 24  and for the  SAL  (frequency  of  Satisfying  Sexual  Activity)  at  week  24.  Pairwise  comparisons  of  active treatment  with  placebo  demonstrated  a  statistically  significant  change  from  baseline  in  the  PSFS Sexual Desire score for the 300 µ g/day group only. A statistically significant increase in the frequency of  Satisfying  Sexual  Activity  (SAL)  was  also  observed  for  the  300 µ g/day  group  compared  with

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

placebo, whereas no statistically significant differences were observed for the 150 µ g/day group or the 450 µ g/day group.

Adverse events (AE) occurred with similar frequency in placebo and active treatment groups. Across the range of doses no positive AE dose-response was observed. The majority of the AEs reported were mild (57%) or moderate (38%) in severity. The most commonly reported AEs were application-site reactions  (32%),  respiratory  infection  (14%),  acne  (13%),  and  breast  pain  (12%),  all  similarly distributed among the treatment groups. There was some evidence of an androgenic effect (e.g., facial hair,  slight  decreases  in  HDL,  and  slight  increases  in  LDL)  with  450 µ g/day  testosterone.  Serious safety risks, such as severe virilization (i.e., voice deepening or clitoromegaly), were not seen in any patient.

Dose-finding study T96006 Results Although  the  instruments  used  to  measure  efficacy  in  this  study  were  not  those  subsequently developed, the results  showed a dose-response for efficacy, with the 300 µ g  /day  testosterone  dose demonstrating  statistically  significant  mean  increases  over  placebo  for  several  study  endpoints.  No statistically significant improvements in the primary efficacy endpoints were observed for the 150 µ g day dose. This study showed the potential for 300 µ g /day LIVENSA to improve sexual functioning in SM women with HSDD. · Dose selection Based  on  those  studies,  the  300 µ g/day  does  was  found  to  be  safe  and  effective  and  was  therefore selected for further clinical trials. · Main studies The testing of the treatment principle with the selected dose of 300 µ g  was  performed in 2 pivotal randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multinational clinical trials (2001133, 2001134). The 2 studies were nearly identical in design (clinical laboratory tests differed slightly between the studies),  each  study  being  a  52-week,  multicenter,  multinational  study  that  included  a  24-week, randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled,  parallel-group  design,  efficacy  and  safety  period, followed by a 28-week open label safety period, during which all patients received active treatment. Study 2001133 &amp; 2001134 METHODS Study Participants Study 2001133 enrolled 562 patients at 52 clinical sites in the US, Canada and Australia. Of those, 451 (80%) patients completed the efficacy and safety period through week 24.  Study 2001134 enrolled 533  patients  at  51  clinical  sites  in  the  US,  Canada  and  Australia  and  of  those  418  (78%)  patients completed through week 24. Thus, 1095 patients were enrolled and 869 (79%) completed the efficacy period. Medicinal product no longer authorised

According to inclusion criteria, patients were healthy women, aged 20 - 70 years, who had undergone bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and hysterectomy and met the diagnostic criteria for acquired HSDD, were  in stable relationships in which  partner factors would  not  preclude the possibility of demonstrating  a  treatment  effect,  were  on  stable  regimens  of  approved  oestrogen  replacement therapies, and did not have any breast or cervical malignancies at baseline. Patients with psychological or  physical  factors,  other  than  low  testosterone,  that  could  cause  HSDD  were  excluded  from participation. Potential study patients with medical conditions that might cause them to be at increased

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

risk  (e.g.,  patients  with  diabetes,  severe  liver  function  abnormalities, or alcohol or substance abuse) were also excluded, as were patients taking drugs or nutritional supplements that were likely to affect sexual function.

Patients with low sexual desire and causing distress were initially identified by positive answering to a purpose screening questionnaire.

Treatment effects were measured by the SAL, PFSF, and PDS during the 24-week efficacy and safety period. The SAL was completed by patients at home on a weekly basis and returned to the clinical sites at the next scheduled visit. The PFSF and PDS were completed at the clinical sites at baseline and at scheduled visits at weeks 4, 8, 12, and 24. Safety was evaluated by monitoring adverse events (AEs) throughout the study, clinical laboratory measurements, vital signs, and physical examinations. Skin appearance at the most recent abdominal patch application site was evaluated at each clinic visit for patch site symptoms of irritation. Objective assessments of androgenic effects on the skin (increases in hair  growth  at  the  lip  and  chin,  facial  depilation,  and  degree  of  facial  acne  vulgaris)  were  also evaluated in each study. Serum samples were analyzed in each study for determination of free, total, and bioavailable testosterone; SHBG; free and total estradiol and estrone. Treatments Patients were stratified based on their use of oral or transdermal oestrogen and, within each stratum, randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive 300 µ g/24h LIVENSA TTS or a placebo patch. The patch was applied to the abdomen twice weekly and worn for 3-4 days. With regard to oestrogen, more than 75% patients were using an oral oestrogen and, of those, around 60% used conjugated oestrogens. Upon  completion  of  the  24-week  double-blind  efficacy  and  safety  period  of  the  study,  patients receiving placebo were switched to 300 µ g/day LIVENSA, while the active cohort remained on active treatment.  All  patients  were  then  followed  for  an  additional  28  weeks  for  safety  in  an  open  label manner. The patients and study site personnel remained blinded to the initial randomized treatment throughout the remainder of each study. Concomitant treatment with estrogens (ET): Patients were requested to maintain a stable dose of ET (oral or transdermal route of administration) throughout the study. Objectives The primary objective of each study was to assess the efficacy of LIVENSA 300 µ g/day TTS versus placebo  in  treating  Hypoactive  Sexual  Desire  Disorder  in  surgically  menopaused  women  on concomitant oral or transdermal estrogen therapy (ET), over 24 weeks, as captured by the SAL. The secondary objectives of the study, listed in order of importance, were to assess the efficacy of LIVENSA versus placebo over 24 weeks in Sexual Desire, as measured by the PFSF, and Personal Distress as measured by the PDS score. Outcomes/endpoints The primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  the  change  from  baseline  in  the  4-week  frequency  of  total satisfying  episodes  at  24  weeks  (sum  of  the  weekly  frequencies  of  total  satisfying  episodes  from Weeks 21 through 24). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The secondary efficacy endpoints were the change from baseline of the sexual desire domain of the PFSF, personal distress (PDS), the remaining 6 domains of the PFSF, and the total activity and total orgasm endpoints of the SAL.

## Statistical methods

The treatment effect of 300 µ g/day LIVENSA was compared with that of placebo using an analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA) based on the ITT population. If model assumptions of normality or homoscedasticity  were  severely  violated,  a  Wilcoxon  rank-sum  test  (WRS)  was  used  to  compare  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treatment  effect  of  300 µ g/day  LIVENSA  versus  placebo.  To  account  for  patients  who  did  not complete  24  weeks  of  each  study,  a  last  observation  carried  forward  (LOCF)  approach  was  used. Comparisons  of  300 µ g/day  LIVENSA  with  placebo  for  the  secondary  efficacy  endpoints  were performed in a manner similar to the primary efficacy analysis

## RESULTS

## Participant flow

<!-- image -->

Study  2001133 :  Of  the  888  patients  who  were  screened  for  study,  326  were  considered  screening failures, 562 were randomly assigned to treatment and 451 completed 6 month treatment and 380 went on to complete the 28 week open label phase. Figure 3. Study 2001133 Participant Flow Medicinal product no longer authorised

Study 2001134 : Of the 835 patients who were screened for this study, 302 were considered screening failures, 533 were randomly assigned to treatment and 418 completed 6 month treatment and 261 went on to complete the 28 week open label phase.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 4. Study 2001134 Participant Flow

<!-- image -->

Conduct of the study Study 2001133 was amended in order to extend treatment for an additional 52 weeks to assess: overall safety  of  LIVENSA  and  persistence  of  treatment  benefit  in  a  subset  of  patients  who  responded  to treatment during the previous 28-week OL period of the study; serum concentrations of free, total, and bioavailable testosterone; SHBG; and total DHT; androgenic effects and overall health in patients who decided not to receive an additional 52 weeks of treatment. Baseline data 2001133:  Age  (mean  age  was  49 ± 7.5  years),  race/ethnicity  (Caucasian  89%;  Black  8%;  Hispanic 3%); Body Mass Index was overall 28 ± 6; years since oophorectomy 8.5 ± 6.8. Marital status, weight, height,  BMI,  and  length  of  relationship  with  partner  were  similar  between  the  treatment  groups  at baseline. Overall, most patients at baseline were married to their partners (87%), and the length of the relationships with their partners averaged about 19 years. Medicinal product no longer authorised

2001134: Age (mean age was 48.9 ± 7.5 years), race/ethnicity (90-92 % were Caucasian), Body Mass Index was overall 27.6 ± 5.7; years since oophorectomy 9 ± 7.3. Marital status, weight, height, BMI, and length  of  relationship  with  partner  were  similar  between  the  treatment  groups  at  baseline.  Overall, most patients at baseline were married to their partners (87%), and the length of the relationships with their partners averaged approximately 18 years.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Treatments

Overall, 87% of patients in study 2001133 and 86% of patients in study 2001134 were compliant with treatment (during the time in which they were enrolled) during Weeks 1 through 12 and 13 through 24. The percentage of patients who were compliant with treatment within each interval of the 28-week open label safety period was 82% (2001133) and 69% (2001134).

## Concomitant treatment with estrogens (ET)

In  the  pivotal  clinical  trials,  around  25%  of  women  were  on  transdermal  and  75%  of  the women took oral oestrogens and of those, 60% took conjugated equine oestrogens (CEE) and around 40% took non-CEE. The percentage of patients on concomitant oral ET or transdermal ET was similar between the treatment groups for each ET route in both studies, as well as the percentage of patients taking conjugated oral estrogen therapies. Numbers analysed 2001133: Of  the  562  patients  (placebo:  n=279;  LIVENSA  300 µ g:  n=283)  included  in  the  ITT population  82%  of  patients  in  the  placebo  group  (230/279)  and  78%  of  patients  in  the  LIVENSA group (221/283) completed the 24 week study . 2001134 : Of  the  532  patients  (placebo:  n=266;  LIVENSA  300 µ g:  n=267)  included  in  the  ITT population  77%  of  patients  in  the  placebo  group  (206/266)  and  79%  of  patients  in  the  LIVENSA group (212/267) completed the 24 week study. Outcomes and estimation · Results (Pivotal study 2001133) A statistically significant increase was observed in the primary efficacy endpoint (SAL, frequency of total satisfying episodes)) at Week 24 for the LIVENSA group compared with placebo both according to  ANCOVA  (adjusted  mean  difference  =  1.15;  p  =  0.0003)  and  Wilcoxon  rank  sum  test  (mean difference = 1.11; p = 0.0011). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4.  Study  2001133  Change  from  baseline  in  4-week  Frequency  of  total  satisfying  episodes  (SAL)  at  Week  24 (LOCF Intent-to-Treat Patients)

|           |     |             |                                 |                                 |                                 | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   |
|-----------|-----|-------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
|           |     |             | Unadjusted Change from Baseline | Unadjusted Change from Baseline | Unadjusted Change from Baseline |                                   |                                   | Difference                        |                                   |
|           |     | Baseline    |                                 | Median (P25, P75)               | Difference                      |                                   |                                   | in Least- squares                 | ANCOVA                            |
|           |     |             |                                 |                                 | in Means                        | WRS                               | Least- squares                    | Means                             |                                   |
| Treatment | n   | Mean (SE)   | Mean (SE)                       |                                 | (CI)                            | p- value                          | Means (SE)                        | (CI)                              | p-value                           |
| Placebo   | 273 | 2.94 (0.19) | 0.98 (0.19)                     | 0.3 (-0.5,2.0)                  | 1.11                            | 0.0011                            | 0.98 (0.25)                       | 1.15                              | 0.0003                            |
| TTS       | 276 | 2.82 (0.15) | 2.10 (0.25)                     | 1.0 (-0.3,3.5)                  | (0.50,1.73)                     |                                   | 2.13 (0.24)                       | (0.54,1.77)                       |                                   |

|           |     |                    |                                       | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   | Adjusted Change from Baseline a        | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   |
|-----------|-----|--------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Treatment | n   | Baseline Mean (SE) | Week 24/LOCF Least-squares Means (SE) | Least-squares Means (SE)          | Difference in Least-squares Means (CI) | ANCOVA p-value                    |
| Placebo   | 269 | 20.82 (0.84)       | 27.20 (1.14)                          | 6.90 (1.14)                       | 4.95 (2.13,7.78)                       | 0.0006                            |
| TTS       | 269 | 19.79 (0.78)       | 32.16 (1.12)                          | 11.85 (1.12)                      |                                        |                                   |

The frequency of total satisfying episodes was based on the Sexual Activity Log (SAL), which recorded weekly sexual activity. The last observation carried forward (LOCF) analysis at Week 24 was based on responses recorded on the last weekly SAL and the preceding 3 weekly SALs. Difference corresponds to the difference in means between TTS and placebo and the 95% confidence interval (CI). p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis of no treatment difference. n = number of patients with responses; SE = standard error; P25 = 25 th percentile; P75 = 75 th percentile; WRS = Wilcoxon Rank-Sum; ANCOVA = Analysis of Covariance; TTS = 300 mcg/day testosterone transdermal system. a Change from baseline adjusted for treatment, age, estrogen therapy route, pooled centers, and baseline rate of sexual activity. As  for  the  main  secondary  efficacy  endpoints,  patients  who  received  LIVENSA  experienced  also significantly  greater  increase  in  sexual  desire  domain  of  PSFS  and  significantly  greater  decrease  in personal distress (PDS) as compared with patients on placebo at Week 24. Table 5. Study 2001133 Change from baseline in Sexual Desire (PSFS) at Week 24 (LOCF Intent-to-Treat Patients) The last observation carried forward (LOCF) analysis at Week 24 was based on responses recorded on the last Profile of Female Sexual Function (PFSF) evaluated. Difference corresponds to the difference in means between TTS and placebo and the 95% confidence interval (CI). p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis of no treatment difference. n = number of patients with responses; SE = standard error; ANCOVA = Analysis of Covariance; TTS = 300 mcg/day testosterone transdermal system. a Change from baseline adjusted for treatment, age, estrogen therapy route, pooled centers, and baseline sexual desire. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 6. Study 2001133 Change from baseline in Personal Distress (PDS) at Week 24 (LOCF Intent-to-Treat Patients)

|           |     |                    |                                       | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   | Adjusted Change from Baseline a        | Adjusted Change from Baseline a   |
|-----------|-----|--------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Treatment | n   | Baseline Mean (SE) | Week 24/LOCF Least-squares Means (SE) | Least-squares Means (SE)          | Difference in Least-squares Means (CI) | ANCOVA p-value                    |
| Placebo   | 266 | 62.57 (1.56)       | 47.37 (1.66)                          | -16.31 (1.66)                     | -7.25 (-11.37,-3.12)                   | 0.0006                            |
| TTS       | 268 | 64.78 (1.52)       | 40.12 (1.63)                          | -23.55 (1.63)                     |                                        |                                   |

| no   | no   |
|------|------|

Difference corresponds to the difference in means between TTS and placebo and the 95% confidence interval (CI). p-value corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis of no treatment difference. n = number of patients with responses; SE = standard error; ANCOVA = Analysis of Covariance; TTS = 300 mcg/day testosterone transdermal system. a Change from baseline adjusted for treatment, age, estrogen therapy route, pooled centers, and baseline PDS. Ancillary analyses Responder analysis SAL A responder was defined as a patient who had an increase from baseline of &gt;1 episode per 4-week period. A significantly higher percentage of patients in the LIVENSA group responded to treatment compared with placebo: 46% in the LIVENSA group versus 35% in placebo. Other cut-off values (i.e., &gt; 0, &gt; 2, &gt; 3 episodes per 4-week period) were also analysed on exploratory basis. Table 7. Responder analysis SAL, using different cut-off points for the definition of a responder. Responder analysis PFSF A responder  was  defined  as  a  patient  who  had  an  increase  of &gt; 8.89  on  the  Sexual  Desire  domain score.  An  increase  of  8.89  corresponds,  on  the  average,  to  an  increase  of  1  unit  (e.g.,  'seldom'  to 'sometimes') on 4 of the 9 items in the Sexual Desire domain. A significantly higher percentage of patients  who  received  LIVENSA  responded  to  treatment  compared  with  placebo  (51%  in  the LIVENSA group versus 35% in placebo. Subgroup analyses The SAL results in various subpopulations (patients categorized by disease severity, baseline hormone concentrations, and demographic and reproductive characteristics etc) showed a generally consistent treatment effect with LIVENSA relative to placebo. Subgroup analysis by baseline SHBG Medicinal product no longer authorised

A  statistically  significant  increase  in  the  frequency  of  total  satisfying  episodes  at  Week  24  was observed in the LIVENSA group compared with the placebo group for patients with baseline SHBG serum  concentrations ≤ 160  nmol/L  using  ANCOVA  (p  &lt;  0.0001),  but  not  at  SHBG  serum concentrations &gt; 160 nmol/L at baseline. This subgroup represented 13% of the total study population.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A statistically significant increase in the PSFS Sexual Desire score at week 24 was observed in the LIVENSA group compared with placebo for patients with baseline SHBG serum concentrations &lt; 160 nmol/L (adjusted mean difference = 6.54; p &lt; 0.0001). Conversely, a statistically significant decrease in the Sexual Desire score PSFS at week 24 was observed in this subgroup (adjusted mean difference = -7.37; p = 0.0358).

Subgroup analysis by route and dose of oestrogen

| EOT Table 8 Change from Baseline in 4-week Frequeney of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24 (LOCF): Responder Analysis (Intent-to-treatPatients)   | EOT Table 8 Change from Baseline in 4-week Frequeney of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24 (LOCF): Responder Analysis (Intent-to-treatPatients)   | EOT Table 8 Change from Baseline in 4-week Frequeney of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24 (LOCF): Responder Analysis (Intent-to-treatPatients)   | EOT Table 8 Change from Baseline in 4-week Frequeney of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24 (LOCF): Responder Analysis (Intent-to-treatPatients)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                     | Responders                                                                                                                                          | Responders                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                     |
| Cut-off                                                                                                                                             | Placebo (n = 255) m (%)                                                                                                                             | TTS (n = 258) m (%)                                                                                                                                 | p-valueb                                                                                                                                            |
| > 1                                                                                                                                                 | 64 (25.1%)                                                                                                                                          | 109 (42.2%)                                                                                                                                         | <0.0001                                                                                                                                             |

Greater  increases  from  baseline  were  observed  in  the  LIVENSA  group  relative  to  placebo  in  the primary  endpoint  regardless  of  the  route  of  oestrogen  (transdermal  p  =  0.0045;  oral  p  =  0.0154). However,  the  difference  between  the  treatment  groups  was  greater  for  patients  on  transdermal oestrogen (adjusted mean difference = 1.94) compared with patients on oral oestrogen (adjusted mean difference = 0.86). Greater differences between the treatment groups were observed for patients who received higher doses of oral (conjugated oestrogen equivalent &gt; 0.625 mg) or transdermal (&gt; 0.05 mg) oestrogen compared with lower doses for each route. · Results (Pivotal study 2001134) For SAL at week 24 (primary endpoint) the ANCOVA model assumption of normality was severely violated. Based on ANCOVA, the difference in adjusted means between the LIVENSA and placebo groups with regard to the change from baseline in the frequency of total satisfying episodes at week 24 was  not  statistically  significant  (adjusted  mean  difference  =  0.65;  p  =  0.0816).  Therefore,  the Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to compare treatment groups. A statistically significant increase was observed in the primary endpoint (SAL, frequency of total satisfying episodes)) at Week 24 for the LIVENSA group compared with placebo according to the Wilcoxon rank-sum test (mean difference = 0.83; p =0.0010). Table 8. Study 2001133 Change from baseline in 4-week Frequency of total satisfying episodes (SAL) at Week 24 (LOCF Intent-to-Treat Patients) For the secondary endpoint PFSF Sexual Desire at week 24, a statistically significant increase from baseline  was  observed  for  the  LIVENSA  group  compared  with  placebo  in  sexual  desire  using ANCOVA (adjusted mean difference = 5.17; p = 0.0006). For the next secondary endpoint, Personal Distress Score (PDSA), a statistically significant decrease was observed for the LIVENSA group compared with the placebo group at week 24 (p = 0.0091). Responder analysis For the Frequency of total satisfying episodes (SAL), responder analyses were based on the change from  baseline  at  week  24.  A  significantly  higher  percentage  of  patients  in  the  LIVENSA  group responded to treatment compared with placebo. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For  the  PFSF  Sexual  Desire  score,  Responder  analyses  were  based  on  the  change  from  baseline  at week 24 (LOCF). A significantly higher percentage of patients who received LIVENSA responded to treatment compared with placebo.

## Subgroup analyses

Subgroup analyses according SHBG serum concentration, gave results similar to study 2001133, with lower (SAL) or no efficacy (PSFS) for SHBG &gt;160 nmol/L; greater efficacy (SAL) for patients on transdermal  oestrogen  (mean  difference  =  2.62)  compared  with  patients  on  oral  oestrogen  (mean difference  =  0.38).  The  Applicant  subsequently  clarified  via  additional  subgroup  analyses  that the efficacy  of  LIVENSA  was  affected  by  the  type  of  oestrogen  used  with  no  significant  difference compared to placebo in women on CEE.

<!-- image -->

Other  Secondary  efficacy  endpoints  in  Studies  2001133,  2001134  (Other  SAL  Endpoints,  PFSF Domains) In study 2001133, significant increases from baseline were observed in the LIVENSA group compared with  placebo  at  Week  24  for  most  of  the  SAL  and  for  all  PFSF  domains  at  Week  24  (LOCF). Significant improvements were observed in study 2001134 for PFSF only (all domains). · Time of onset and duration of effect Onset and maintenance of efficacy for LIVENSA therapy over placebo was tested in the two pivotal trials. Statistically significant treatment effects with LIVENSA compared with placebo in the mean change from baseline were observed beginning at weeks 5-8 based on ANCOVA and were sustained for the duration of the treatment period · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) Analysis of the primary endpoint and main secondary endpoints were performed from the combined 24-weeks  data  from  the  two  Phase  III  studies  (2001133  and  2001134)  and  two  Phase  II  studies (1999068 and 1999092). Treatment: LIVENSA with 300 µ g testosterone release/day. There was a significant  increase  with  LIVENSA  vs.  placebo  in  the  primary  endpoint  Change  from baseline in 4-week frequency of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24 (ANCOVA). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

F igure 5.  Change from baseline in 4-week Frequency of Total Satisfying Episodes at Week 24(LOCF): Individual and Combined Studies 2001133, 2001134, 1999068, 1999992 (Intent-to-treat Patients)

<!-- image -->

Consistent results were found for both  secondary endpoints PFSF Sexual Desire and PDS Personal Distress Scale,  at Week 24 (LOCF). Subgroup analyses of the combined studies In  the  combined  subgroup  analyses  of  primary  endpoint  outcome  (SAL),  mean  improvement  with LIVENSA treatment  was  greater  than  with  placebo  regardless  of  route  of  oestrogen,  although  the mean improvement was greater in the subgroup on transdermal oestrogen therapy With regard to age, there was no difference in the combined analysis between those on LIVENSA and those on placebo among women over 65. Figure 6. Change across trials in Total Satisfying Episodes at week 24 in the LIVENSA group compared to placebo Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Supportive studies: Qualitative and Quantitative Follow-Up (Study CMK US030993)
- .  The  results  were  subsequently  used  to  define  a  responder  in  the  analyses  of  studies  2001033  and 2001034.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Baseline demographics and disease severity were representative of the entire group of women in the phase 3 studies.  The  primary  assessment  in  the  clinical  relevance  study  was  based  on  the  subjects' answers (yes or no) to the following question, which was asked with reference to their experiences during  the  double-blind  part  of  the  studies:    Patients  were  asked  specifically  if  they  experienced  a meaningful benefit

. The questions and results are seen in Table 9.

In  response  to  the  major  objection  on  the  clinical  meaningfulness  of  the  effect,  the  Applicant  also argued that the clinical relevance study (CMK#US030993) demonstrated that the patients´ perception of a meaningful effect corresponded to the measured endpoint results in SAL, PSFS and PDS. Patients who  did  not  consider  their  own  effect  as  meaningful,  revealed  low  scores  in  all  those  endpoint parameters.  Where this study only comprised 12% of the total study population, it is agreed that the results support that some patients perceive that LIVENSA treatment is clinically meaningful and, also, that others do not. The results indicate that patients are likely to be able to assess their own benefit of treatment  and,  therefore,  also  are  able  to  identify  themselves  as  responders  or  non-responders  and discontinue treatment in case of no effect.

Table 9. Overall treatment experience as expressed by patients on LIVENSA or placebo Patient  responses  in  this  study  were  used  to  define  minimally  important  clinical  differences.  Using Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) analysis, the differences were predefined as the values that best dichotomized subjects on the basis of reported meaningful benefit: · an increase of &gt; 1.0 in SAL per 4 weeks · an increase of ≥ 8.9 in PSFS · a decrease of at least 20 points in PDS These responder definitions were applied to the Phase 3 results to examine the differences between the percentages of responders on LIVENSA treatment and placebo (see above). · Discussion on clinical efficacy While clinical studies were well conducted and generally demonstrated that LIVENSA was superior to placebo,  the  CHMP  was  concerned  about  the  effect  size  of  the  response,  an  average  increase  by  1 satisfactory  sexual  encounter  per  4  week  period,  an  increase  in  PSFS  desire  score  by  6-7  on  a  100 degree scale and a reduction of personal distress by 7 on a 100 degree scale. Therefore, the clinical relevance of the observed improvement, although statistically significant, was questioned. The  Applicant  responded  that  there  is  an  overall  statistically  significant  change  in  favour  of LIVENSA.  The primary endpoint, SAL, consists of number of satisfying episodes per 4 weeks, i.e. is a simple numeric measure whereas the desire endpoint, PSFS, consists of several domains (arousal, orgasm,  pleasure,  reduced  concerns,  responsiveness  and  self  image).  The  CHMP  agreed  that  the meaningfulness of the change is supported by the fact that there is an improvement across all those domains. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  responder  rates  in  the  pivotal  clinical  trials  showed  that  many  patients  do  not  respond  to LIVENSA treatment (46% of patients were responders using the lowest cut-off).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A  responder  regarding  the  primary  endpoint  (SAL),  using  cut-off  scores  that  were  predefined  the clinical relevance study, was defined as an increase in the 4-week frequency of satisfying activities &gt;1. In the combined data (4 studies), the difference in responder rates between LIVENSA and placebo was 14.8%,  which  demonstrates  that  the  difference  in  responder  rates  in  the  active  treatment  group compared to placebo is small. The explanation presented by the Applicant, that sexual dysfunction is multifactorial, is accepted and therefore a substantial placebo effect is not unexpected.

With regard to maintenance of study effects, the data provided support that the effects of  LIVENSA are maintained for up to 1 year.

The  safety  profile  of  the  300 µ g  LIVENSA was evaluated  primarily  using  the  combined  data  from studies 2001133 and 2001134, which had open-label safety extensions following the 6-month, doubleblind,  placebo-controlled  period.  Furthermore,  data  from  studies  1999068  and  19999062  were included in the safety analysis. All of the combined studies were placebo-controlled for the first 24 weeks.  Study  1999092  ended  at  24  weeks,  study  1999068  continued  as  a  double-blind,  placebocontrolled  study  for  an  additional  28  weeks,  and  studies  2001133  and  2001134  continued  with  all remaining patients on open-label active treatment for an additional 28 weeks.

There was an age-related difference in response, however all the women in the studies, regardless of age,  were  carefully  selected  for  HSDD  and  met  all  the  inclusion  criteria.  The  Applicant  has,  in  the response, agreed to limit use to women below the age of 60 years, as there are limited data to support use in women over 60. The finding that the clinical effect of the LIVENSA depended on the route and dose of concomitant oestrogen with markedly greater effects in patients on transdermal compared to oral oestrogen seems not to have been entirely unexpected as patients were stratified by route of oestrogen administration at inclusion.  However,  the  magnitude  of  this  difference  and  the  fact  that  oral  oestrogen  with  CEE differed from oral oestrogen with non-CEE, appears not to have been anticipated. The dominance of CEE in the studies negatively influenced the results in the pooled analyses as shown in the subgroup analyses, in which the efficacy data in women on non-CEE or transdermal oestrogens were consistently superior to those found in women on placebo or CEE. With regard to the primary endpoint SAL, the overall difference in responder rate between LIVENSA and placebo increased from 14.4%  in  the  total  study  population  of  the  pivotal  studies  to  21.3%  when  patients  on  CEE  were excluded.  Thus,  in  women  on  non-CEE  oestrogens,  a  larger  difference  between  LIVENSA  and placebo was reported, and consequently a better efficacy was seen in that patient subgroup than in the pooled analyses. The difference in LIVENSA treatment effects appears to correspond with the effect of the oestrogen on SHBG, which affects protein binding of testosterone and hence free testosterone. Markedly greater treatment effects were associated with lower SHBG and higher free testosterone levels as seen in the transdermal as compared to the oral oestrogen group. The influence of route, type and dose of oestrogen on the efficacy of LIVENSA has been outlined in the SmPC. The subgroup analyses revealed both ethnical and geographical differences in response to treatment. The  Applicant  argues  that  the  studies  were  not  designed  and  sized  to  provide  sufficient  power  to examine treatment effects in various subgroups, which is acceptable. Clinical safety Introduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Patient exposure

In total, 882 patients were exposed to the 300 µ g dose for more than 20 weeks and 348 patients for more than 48 weeks. In studies 2001133 and 2001134, 418 patients who had received placebo and 419 patients who had received LIVENSA during weeks 0 to 24 all received open-label LIVENSA in weeks  25  to  52.  To  assess  whether  there  was  an  increased  risk  associated  with  longer  LIVENSA exposure, the rates of adverse events during the 28-week open-label period in the patients continuing on LIVENSA (LIVENSA - LIVENSA group, second 6 months of exposure) were compared with the rates in the patients newly initiating LIVENSA treatment (placebo - LIVENSA group, first 6 months of exposure).

Seventy-eight percent of patients in the placebo and 300 µ g/day treatment groups completed the 24week,  double-blind  period  in  the  combined  studies  (1999068,  1999092,  2001133,  2001134).  There were  no  important  differences  between  treatment  groups  in  the  time  to  or  reasons  for  patient withdrawal from treatment during weeks 0-24; 8% of patients in both treatment groups withdrew due to adverse events. Data from the natural menopause study (2002006) were taken into account for serious adverse events. This was a multicenter, randomized, 24-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group design study  conducted  in  naturally  menopausal  women  with  HSDD  on  concomitant  oral  continuous oestrogen and progestogen therapy (HRT). The design was similar to studies 20001133 and 2001134. A total of 549 patients were enrolled in the US , Canada and Australia. A total of 433 (79%) patients completed the 24-week study. · Adverse events Common adverse events The overall incidence of adverse events, serious adverse events, and withdrawals due to adverse events was  similar  in  the  LIVENSA  and  placebo  groups  in  the  combined  studies  during  the  double-blind period.  A  higher  percentage  of  adverse  events  in  the  LIVENSA  group  were  considered  possibly  or probably related to study drug compared with placebo (26.8% vs. 23.4%). This was mainly due to an increase in the incidence of androgenic adverse events seen in the LIVENSA group. In the open-label period (weeks 25-52 of studies 2001133 and 2001134), the percentage of patients who reported any adverse events and serious adverse events, regardless of whether they reported such events in the double-blind period, was similar between the placebo - LIVENSA and the LIVENSA LIVENSA groups. The incidence of withdrawal due to adverse events was higher in the LIVENSA - LIVENSA group than  in  the  placebo  -  LIVENSA  group.  This  difference  was  largely  a  result  of  more  patients withdrawing due to increased hair growth (hirsutism) and weight gain in the LIVENSA - LIVENSA group: n=10 (2.4%) and n=6 (1.4%), respectively, compared with the placebo - LIVENSA group: n=4 (1.0%) and n=0. More adverse events reported in the open-label period were assessed as severe in the LIVENSA - LIVENSA group: n=29 (5.8%) than in the placebo - LIVENSA group: n=16 (3.5%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table  10.  Adverse  event  High  Level  Terms  (HLT)  and  Preferred  Terms  (PT)  reported  by  &gt;=2%  of patients in either treatment group in which the incidence for LIVENSA was higher than placebo.

Androgenic adverse events Medicinal product no longer authorised

|         |        | authorised   |
|---------|--------|--------------|
|         | longer |              |
|         | no     |              |
| product |        |              |

The overall incidence of androgenic adverse events (acne, alopecia, hirsutism and voice deepening) was higher in the LIVENSA group than in the placebo group in the combined studies (LIVENSA, 123 patients, 17.7%; placebo, 101 patients, 14.4%). This difference between treatment groups was more pronounced in study 2001134. The specific events that accounted for most of this difference were acne and  hirsutism.  The  incidence  of  androgenic  adverse  events  (acne,  alopecia,  hirsutism,  and  voice deepening) in the 24-week, double-blind period of the studies is summarized in Table 11.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  both  treatment  groups,  more  than  90%  of  the  androgenic  adverse  events  were  assessed  by  the investigator as mild in severity, and less than 2% resulted in patient discontinuation from the study. Most patients in both treatment groups who had androgenic adverse events experienced only one such event. The risk of experiencing two androgenic adverse events or withdrawing from the study due to an androgenic adverse event was higher in the LIVENSA group than in the placebo group.

The  objective  assessment  of  acne,  chin  and  upper  lip  hair  growth  and  patient-reported  depilation showed a slight increase in the LIVENSA group compared with the placebo group during the doubleblind study period. This increase is consistent with the increase in androgenic adverse events reported during this period in the LIVENSA group.  In the open-label period, the rate of individual androgenic adverse  events  was  similar  in  the  LIVENSA  -  LIVENSA  and  placebo  -  LIVENSA  groups.  The severity of the adverse events was also similar between the 2 groups. More patients withdrew due to hirsutism in the LIVENSA - LIVENSA group than in the placebo - LIVENSA group: N=10 (2.4%) and n=4 (1.0%), respectively.

|         | longer   |
|---------|----------|
| no      |          |
| product |          |

In the double-blind period, 11 patients in the placebo group (1.6%) and 11 patients in the LIVENSA group  (1.6%)  reported  weight  gain.  One  patient  (LIVENSA  group)  discontinued  treatment  due  to weight gain in this period. During the open-label period, weight gain adverse events were increased in the LIVENSA -LIVENSA group (11 new cases) as compared with the placeboLIVENSA group (4 new cases).  Six  patients  (1.4%)  in  the  LIVENSA  -  LIVENSA group discontinued treatment due to weight gain, compared with 0 patients in the placebo - LIVENSA group.

Table 11. Summary of androgenic adverse events during the 24 week double-blind period Weight gain Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  mean  change  from  baseline  in  body  weight  in  the  double-blind  period  at  week  24/exit  in  the placebo group was -0.22 kg, compared with a mean increase in the LIVENSA group of 0.33 kg. No net gain from baseline was observed in patients who continued LIVENSA therapy from 6-12 months.

The effect of treatment on the proportion of patients who experienced a weight gain of &gt; 7% of their baseline weight was analyzed. Thirty patients in the LIVENSA group (4.7%) and 10 patients in the placebo group (1.6%) gained &gt; 7% of baseline body weight by the week 24/exit visit.  Examination of the cases with weight gain &gt; 7% from baseline indicated that the risk of having this increase did not appear to be associated with BMI, age, or use of concomitant medications. A higher percentage of patients  in  the  group  who  gained  weight  reported  smoking  at  baseline  (36%  vs.  17%  in  the  overall population). Weight gain was not associated with changes in fasting glucose, insulin, lipid profiles, or blood pressure.

· Psychiatric adverse events There was no increase in psychiatric adverse events (MedDRA Preferred Terms: agitation, aggression, or  irritability)  in  the  LIVENSA  group  compared  with  the  placebo  group  in  the  combined  studies during  the  6-month,  double-blind  period.  In  the  open-label  period,  there  was  no  increase  in  the incidence rate or severity of psychiatric adverse events between the LIVENSA - LIVENSA group and the placebo - LIVENSA group. · Testosterone levels and androgenic adverse events Androgenic  adverse  events  were  also  investigated  by  evaluating  serum  hormone  levels  (free testosterone, total testosterone and total DHT), in patients with these effects.  There was a statistically significant  association  between  the  probability  of  having  hirsutism  and  maximum  serum  free testosterone  level  (p=0.014).  Hirsutism  was  more  likely  with  increasing  maximum  free  testosterone level. Although there was an association, a threshold maximum free testosterone level that acceptably predicted hirsutism could not be identified. Approximately 20% of subjects in the LIVENSA group exhibited free testosterone levels above the normal range for women of reproductive age (normal range: 0.9-7.3pg/mL) as compared to 0.2% of women on placebo and occasional patients exhibited free testosterone levels above 20 pg/mL. There was, however, no clear evidence of a relationship between the probability of having other androgenic adverse  events  (acne,  alopecia,  voice  deepening,  each  considered  separately)  and  maximum  serum hormone level. Application-site reactions The  severity  criteria  for  application-site  reaction  adverse  events  were  different  in  the  Phase  II  and Phase  III  studies.  Because  of  these  differences  between  studies,  only  the  application-site  reaction adverse events from studies 2001033 and 2001034 were combined in the safety summary. Application-site reactions  reported as adverse events were very common (reported by 30.4% of the patients)  and  occurred  at  a  similar  incidence  in  both  the  placebo  and  LIVENSA  groups.  The percentage  of  patients  who  withdrew  from  the  studies  due  to  adverse  events  of  application-site reaction  was  low  and  similar  between  the  treatment  groups.  The  percent  of  patients  experiencing  a severe application-site reaction was also low. The majority of application-site reactions were assessed as mild by the investigators. Four patients during the double-blind study period (2 in the LIVENSA group and 2 in the placebo group) were identified by the investigator as cases of potential sensitization to the patch. Three of these patients withdrew from the study, and one patient continued. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events

## Deaths

One  patient,  receiving  placebo  in  study  2001134,  died  during  the  study  due  to  a  basal  ganglia haemorrhage. Two patients who were receiving LIVENSA in the natural menopause study (2002006) died, both deaths were associated with motor vehicle accidents.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Serious Adverse Events

In  the  6-month,  double-blind  study  periods,  15  patients  reported  serious  adverse  events  in  each treatment  group:  LIVENSA  n=15  (2.2%)  and  placebo  n=15  (2.1%)].  In  the  open-label  period,  7 patients  reported  serious  adverse  events  in  the  placebo-LIVENSA  group  (1.7%)  and  7  patients reported  serious  adverse  events  in  the  LIVENSA-LIVENSA  group  (1.7%).  No  patients  in  the extension of study 1999068 reported serious adverse events.

Two patients in the LIVENSA group reported serious adverse events assessed as possibly related to treatment by the investigators. These adverse events were a transient ischemic attack in one patient and one patient who reported an episode with the following symptoms: tightness in chest, diarrhoea, flushing, increased heart rate, nausea, tingling in the roof of mouth, and diaphoresis. In both cases, the adverse events resolved while the patient was on study drug. Breast In the double-blind period, one patient in the LIVENSA group reported a breast mass that resolved on its  own.  Another  patient  in  the  LIVENSA  group  was  found  to  have  'thickening  of  the  left  breast around the nipple' coded to breast dysplasia on physical exam. The patient withdrew due to migraines 8  months  after  the  finding  and  refused  to  return  to  the  site  for  any  exit  procedures  including  a mammogram.  Fifteen  patients  had  a  reported  breast  mass  or  microcalcification  in  the  open-label period  (6  in  the  placebo-LIVENSA group and 9 in the LIVENSA-LIVENSA group). Five of these patients' masses resolved, 7 were diagnosed as benign or probably benign, 2 patients discontinued the study and refused further follow-up by the investigators, and 1 patient had a palpable mass that was not evident on mammogram. One patient had an abnormal mammogram after approximately 29 weeks of LIVENSA therapy that was  found  to  be  a  ductal  carcinoma  in  situ  (DCIS).  One  patient  was  diagnosed  with  metastatic adenocarcinoma of the breast approximately 5 weeks after initiation of LIVENSA treatment. Both of these adverse events were assessed as doubtfully related to therapy by the investigators. · Study on breast density and breast epithelial cell proliferation To  explore  the  effects  of  testosterone  on  the  breast,  a  6-month  randomised,  double-blind,  placebocontrolled study was conducted to assess the effects of the 300 µ g/day LIVENSA on breast density and breast  epithelial  proliferation,  compared  to  the  effects  of  continuous  HRT  alone  in  naturally menopausal  women.  Of  the  99  patients  randomly  assigned  to  treatment,  88  (89%)  completed  the study.  The  treatment  difference  at  6  months  in  the  mean  change  from  baseline  in  epithelial  cells proliferation showed reduced breast cell proliferation in the testosterone group. The difference was not statistically  significant  when  adjusting  for  baseline.  A  total  of  87  mammograms  were  evaluable, showing no statistically significant difference in breast density at month 6 between the two treatment groups, whether using the Wolfe classification, the percentage of dense parenchyma or the digitised assessment of breast density, even after adjusting on baseline values. Thus, overall, no negative effects on the breast were seen by testosterone addition during concomitant HRT. Table 12.  Breast epithelial cell proliferation, percent Ki67 positive cells Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Median     | 0           | 0.81        | 0.46        |
|------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| Month 6    | (n=35)      | (n=33 )     | (n=68 )     |
| Mean (SEM) | 3.10 ± 0.45 | 3.03 ± 0.70 | 3.07 ± 0.41 |
| Median     | 2.50        | 2.05        | 2.20        |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 13. Mammographic breast density after 6 months of treatment: Change from baseline

|                                                         | Placebo (N=41)   | Testosterone (N=46)   | Overall (N=87)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------|------------------|-----------------------|------------------|
|                                                         | (%)              | n (%)                 | 11 (%)           |
| Increaseinbreastdensity accordingto WolfeClassification | 7 (18%)          | 10 (22%)              | 17 (20%)         |
| Decreasein breast densityAccording to                   | 0 (%0)           | 0 (0%)                | 0 (0%)           |

| no   | no   | no   |
|------|------|------|

The CHMP considered that while these experimental data on proliferation are reassuring, they cannot be used to predict actual breast cancer risk (see discussion on safety). Cardiovascular System There was a difference between the LIVENSA and placebo group when all adverse events within the MedDRA Cardiac Disorders  System  Organ  Class  (SOC)  were  compared  in  the  double-blind  study period: placebo, n=5 (0.7%) and LIVENSA n=10 (1.4%; Table 14). When the adverse events were assessed at the MedDRA Preferred Term (PT) level, no difference between groups was noted. In the open-label period of the study, there was no difference in the rates of cardiovascular adverse events between the LIVENSA -LIVENSA group and the placebo-LIVENSA group. Table 14. Cardiac disorders reported as AEs in the combined studies during 24 weeks double-blind period · Systolic and diastolic blood pressure No general difference in systolic or diastolic blood pressure between LIVENSA and placebo was seen. The open label phase permitted assessment of changes from baseline or differences in blood pressure based upon duration of testosterone exposure. Those subjects who had been exposed to placebo in the first six months (double blind phase) of the clinical trials, had baseline values at the visit just prior to their initiation of testosterone therapy. The changes from baseline in mean systolic blood pressure was 1.6 (SD 12.3) and in median systolic blood pressure 2.0 mm Hg in the placebo-&gt;LIVENSA group. In the LIVENSA-&gt;LIVENSA group, the corresponding changes from baseline were 1.5 (mean; SD 14.0) and  0  (median)  mm  Hg.  For  diastolic  blood  pressure,  the  mean  (SD)  and  median  changes  from baseline were 0.9 (9.0) and 0 mm Hg in the placebo-&gt;LIVENSA group, and 0.5 (9.7) and 0 mm Hg in the LIVENSA-&gt;LIVENSA group. · Laboratory findings Medicinal product no longer authorised

Lipids,  liver  function  tests,  measures  of  carbohydrate  metabolism,  and  haematology  were  reported. There were no clinically significant changes in any of these laboratory parameters in any treatment group in any of the clinical studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Lipids

No  differences  were  noted  in  total  cholesterol  or  triglyceride  levels  between  LIVENSA-treated patients and the placebo-treated patients during the 24-week double-blind period in either the phase II or phase III studies or with additional therapy up to 52 weeks.

## Liver, renal and carbohydrate function

No  clinical  cases  of  hepatic  injury  or  hepatic  malignancy  were  reported  in  any  of  the  studies. Abnormal liver function test (HLT of 'liver function analyses' including increased ALT and/or AST, or  bilirubin)  as  an  adverse  event  was  reported  at  a  higher  incidence  in  the  LIVENSA  group (6  patients,  0.9%)  compared  with  the  placebo  group  (1  patient,  0.1%)  during  the  6-month,  doubleblind  study  period.  In  the  open-label  period  of  the  studies,  3  patients  in  the  LIVENSA -LIVENSA group  and  none  in  the  placebo-LIVENSA  group  experienced  increased  liver  enzymes  (2  ALT  and 1 AST) reported as adverse events. One patient withdrew due to an elevated ALT level.

It  is  agreed  that  androgenic  adverse  events  are  uncommon  and,  if  they  occur,  they  should  lead  to discontinuation of LIVENSA use. This is taken into account in section 4.4 of the SmPC.

· Safety in special populations N/A · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions N/A · Discontinuation due to adverse events N/A · Post marketing experience · Discussion on clinical safety In the short-term perspective up to 12 months of exposure, there was little safety concern emerging from  the  clinical  trials  programme.  The  lack  of  difference  between  LIVENSA  and  placebo  may, however, be due to the relatively limited number of mostly healthy women exposed in the trials for a comparatively  short  time.  However,  as  duration  of  treatment  could  be  assumed  to  continue  over several  years,  provided  a  positive  effect  is  perceived  by  the  patient,  long-term  safety  data  are unavailable but will be addressed via the agreed follow up measures As expected, women treated with LIVENSA had a slightly higher rate of androgenic adverse effects, most often mild to moderate.  The relative rates of acne, alopecia, hirsutism and voice deepening were less than 1.5, and the increase versus placebo was statistically significant for hirsutism and acne only. It should be noted, however, that androgenic events such as acne, hirsutism and voice deepening may not be reversible and are likely to increase with long-term use and therefore will remain a concern of importance. In the resolution of androgenic adverse events study (from studies 2000133 and 200134) subsequently presented by the Applicant, it was reported that in 27% of patients with acne, 57.5% of hirsutism,  39%  of  alopecia  and  40%  of  women  with  voice  deepening,  androgenic  events  had  not resolved, indicating the importance of appropriate observation and follow-up measures.  Resolution rates were similar in LIVENSA and placebo groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The CHMP was mainly concerned about long-term safety. Long-term safety of the LIVENSA is little studied and creates concerns which relate to cardiovascular and breast, but also to endometrial safety, should  the  LIVENSA  be  inadvertently  used  in  non-hysterectomised  women.  The  Applicant  has submitted  a  comprehensive  review  of  the  literature  on  testosterone  and  the  risk  of  breast  and endometrial  cancer  and  cardiovascular  events.  The  analysis  of  the  General  Practitioner  Research Database (GPRD)  /Health Improvement Network (THIN) database from the UK  comprises

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

2103 women treated with testosterone, followed for an average of 8.6 years. The Ingenix US-based medical claims database comprises around 20,000 oestrogen-testosterone users followed for a mean time of 1,6 years. The results from these two studies show no obvious safety concerns but do have limitations, particularly with regard to limited follow-up and relatively short duration of exposure, so that it is unlikely that risks associated with long-term use would have been detected.

Finally, the Applicant has submitted a Risk Management Plan, in which a number of safety actions are proposed.

The Applicant has presented a review of the literature of data on testosterone and the risk of breast cancer  both  with  regard  to  endogenous  testosterone  levels  in  women  with  breast  cancer  and  with regard to women treated with exogenous testosterone. Some studies showed a statistically significant correlation between endogenous testosterone levels and breast cancer risk whereas other studies found that  a  correlation  was  no  longer  present  after  adjusting  for  oestrogen  levels.  One  case  cohort  study showed that, in women at high risk for breast cancer, high endogenous testosterone levels were not associated  with  increased  risk  for  breast  cancer  and  that  there  was  a  trend  toward  lower  risk  with higher  levels  of  testosterone.  However,  a  prospective  study  in  post-menopausal  women  who  were operated  on  for  breast  cancer  showed  that  serum  levels  of  testosterone  were  significantly  higher  in patients who had recurring breast cancer than in patients who did not. A review of the literature on testosterone effects on the breast found that in vitro studies of the effects of androgens in various breast cancer cell lines predominantly support apoptotic and antiproliferative effects of androgens on the mitogenic effects of oestrogens. On the other hand, animal studies exist that  show  a  proliferative  effect  of  testosterone  on  breast  tissue.  An in  vivo randomised,  placebocontrolled,  6-month  study  to  assess  the  potential  effect  of  LIVENSA  on  breast  epithelial  cell proliferation in naturally menopausal women on oestrogen/norethindrone acetate (Study 2003082) was included in the original market authorization application. Additional data from that study indicate that testosterone  reduced  epithelial  and  stromal  breast  cell  proliferation  compared  with  placebo  in  this population. Observational  studies  with  longer  term  follow-up  of  women  treated  with  testosterone  revealed conflicting results. Two studies suggested an increased risk of breast cancer (Ewertz M: Int J Cancer 1988; 42: 832-838; Colditz GA et al.: New Engl J Med 1995; 332; 1589-1593) while others did not support this finding (Dimitrakakis et al, 2004; GPRD/THIN &amp; Ingenix). · In  summary,  data  in  the  literature  regarding  the  influence  of  testosterone  on  the  risk  of  breast cancer in women are limited, inconclusive and conflicting. The long-term effect of testosterone treatment  on  the  breast  is  currently  unknown,  therefore  patients  should  be  carefully  monitored with regard to breast cancer. Breast safety, , needs to be monitored and investigated further, as suggested in the pharmacovigilance plan. · In section 4.2 of the SPC, breast cancer is listed as a contraindication for use of LIVENSA. Since  the  current  MAA  relates  to  bilaterally  oophorectomised  and  hysterectomised  (surgically menopausal women), no endometrial data exist from pivotal trials. Limited data have been generated during LIVENSA use in naturally menopausal women over a two-year period.  Endometrial biopsies showed 2 cases of hyperplasia among 226 non-hysterectomized patients on testosterone. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Data  on  endometrial  effects  are  available  from  two  epidemiological  databases,  GPRD/THIN  and Ingenix,  where  patients  who  received  testosterone  other  than  LIVENSA  as  part  of  their  HRT  have been evaluated for the occurrence of endometrial cancer. In the GPRD/THIN study no testosterone user  was  diagnosed  with  endometrial  cancer  compared  with  5  control  patients.    In  the  Ingenix database, the risk of endometrial cancer was similar in users and non-users of testosterone.

- In summary, limited data evaluating the effect of low-dose testosterone on the endometrium does neither  allow  conclusions  nor  reassurance.  In  the  event  of  misuse  of  LIVENSA  in  nonhysterectomised and non-oophorectomized women, endometrial safety will be investigated further as part of the pharmacovigilance plan.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

With respect to cardiovascular events, the clinical trials on LIVENSA did not reveal overall alterations versus placebo of lipids, carbohydrate metabolism, coagulation factors or blood pressure.  Weight gain which  increased  with  time  was,  however,  more  frequent  in  patients  LIVENSA.    The  weight  gain observed was not accompanied by effects in other markers of cardiovascular safety.

Nevertheless, literature data recently confirmed possible long-term effects of testosterone in women on insulin resistance and lipid profile (see N Engl J Med April 2006).

The Applicant presents an analysis of a subset of patients, comprising around 15% of all patients in the clinical  LIVENSA trials,  with  cardiovascular  risk  factors  at  baseline  (BMI&gt;30,  on  antihypertensive treatment or systolic/diastolic BP &gt;130/85, on lipid lowering medication or triglycerides&gt;150mg/dL or HDL&lt;50mg/dL,  fasting  glucose&gt;110mg/dL).    A  mean  increase  of  around  4  mm  in  systolic  and diastolic  blood  pressure  was  found  among  LIVENSA  patients  also  taking  HRT  whereas  no  such increase in blood pressure was seen in patients with CV risk factors not taking concomitant HRT.  It cannot be excluded that this finding for the risk of cardiovascular disease is clinically relevant. Analyses  from  the  observational  databases  (GPRD/THIN;  Ingenix)  did  not  reveal  statistically significant  differences  between  women  treated  and  not  treated  with  testosterone  in  the  rates  of cerebrovascular  disease,  ischemic  heart  disease,  deep  venous  thrombosis/pulmonary  embolism,  and diabetes  mellitus.  The  rate  of  ischemic  heart  disease  and  myocardial  infarction  was  comparable between testosterone users and control patients both in those with and without a baseline history of diabetes,  cardiovascular  disease,  smoking and high BMI. There was, however, an increasing RR of deep  vein  thrombosis  (DVT)  in  the  testosterone  group  with  increasing age. The  finding  in GPRD/THIN of a statistically significantly increased risk of ischemic heart disease after 350 weeks (6.7 years), is of concern and underlines the need for continued monitoring as well as limitation of the duration of treatment. · In summary, data evaluating cardiovascular and associated risks in relation to testosterone use in women are still limited. The data are mostly reassuring but cannot exclude that long-term use may carry an increased risk of cardiovascular events. · Information on a possible risk increase in women with own cardiovascular risk factors and after long-term use is included in the SPC. The  Risk  Management  Plan  contains  various  approaches  to  post-marketing  surveillance,  including stimulated  reporting,  active  surveillance  through  prescription  event  monitoring,  review  of  ongoing studies and observational studies using existing databases. A non-interventional prospective observational  study  (EMPOWER)  will  be  set  up  by  the  Applicant.  In  general,  those  activities  are endorsed. Review of ongoing studies will be able to pick-up more data on androgenic adverse events, but,  due  to  small  sizes,  those  studies  will  have  limited  potential  to  study  cardiovascular  and  cancer risks.  The  studies  originating  from  existing  databases  will  have  a  reasonable  potential  to  discover long-term  safety  effects  (cardiovascular,  cancer)  as  they  already  contain  women  treated  with  other testosterone  products.  It  is  likely  that  the  NIPOS  will  take  considerable  time  before  interpretable results are available. It is also of particular importance that risk minimization measures, i.e. adherence to  the  SPC  and  PL  information  be  evaluated  by  the  Applicant  and  that  off-label  use,  i.e.  use  by naturally menopausal patients and use without additional HRT, be discouraged and monitored. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  conclusion,  the  safety  data  as  presented  by  the  Applicant  does  not  reveal  any  apparent  safety problem  but  data  are  limited.  Although  none  of  the  studies  presented,  neither  experimental  nor observational, provides conclusive data on the effect of testosterone on breast cells or breast cancer risk,  the  available data do not suggest an increased risk of breast cancer and may even suggest that androgens have an antiproliferative effect on breast cells when given in combination with oestrogen therapy.  Breast  safety,  however,  needs  to  be  monitored  and  investigated  further  within  the  Risk Management Plan activities.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacovigilance

## Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system

The  CHMP considered that  the  Pharmacovigilance  system  as  described  by  the  applicant  fulfils  the legislative requirements.

## Risk Management Plan

.

The MAA submitted a risk management plan, which included a risk minimisation plan, to address identified (androgenic) and.potential safety concerns (breast cancer, endometrial cancer and cardiovascular effects. The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 5 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of the product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined in the SPC. Physicochemical and biological aspects relevant to the uniform clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. There are no unresolved quality issues, which have a negative impact on the Benefit Risk balance of the product. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology The effects of endogenous and administered testosterone in both men and women have been evaluated and reported in the literature. Overall this information establishes that adverse effects reported are due to the pharmacological profile of the hormone. Published data provide an adequate basis for the assessment of the end-points not deliberately tested for in the clinic, i.e. acute toxicity, genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and reproductive toxicity. Testosterone  is  not  genotoxic,  yet  produces  tumours  in  a  range  of  organs,  including  endometrium, mammary gland, and liver, in rodents when administered at high doses. Consistent with other marketed testosterone products, statements about rodent carcinogenic data are included in the 5.3 section of the SPC. In  addition  it  is  also  clear  that  testosterone  can  have  adverse  effects  on  the  developing  foetus  and should  not  be  used  by  women  who  are,  or  who  are  likely  to  become,  pregnant.  This  is  taken  into account in Sections 4.6 and 5.3 of the SmPC. Efficacy The efficacy of the LIVENSA transdermal system to relieve symptoms of HSDD in surgically induced menopausal  women  with  HSDD  on  concomitant  oestrogen  treatment  has  been  adequately  and consistently  demonstrated  for  all  three  endpoints  and  in  responder  rates  across  placebo-controlled studies.  Greater  effects  versus  placebo  have  been  demonstrated  on  satisfying  sexual  activity  (SAL; primary endpoint), sexual desire and personal distress (PSFS, PDS; secondary endpoints). Medicinal product no longer authorised

There has been some concern regarding the magnitude of the efficacy and whether the effects over placebo could be considered clinically meaningful.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the pivotal clinical trials, around 25% of women were on transdermal and 75% of the women took oral  oestrogens  and  of  those,  60%  took  conjugated  equine  oestrogens  (CEE)  and  around  40%  took non-CEE. All data suggest that the efficacy of LIVENSA was affected by the type of oestrogen used with a clearly poorer effect in women on CEE. The dominance of CEE in the studies has negatively influenced the results in the pooled analyses as shown in the subgroup analyses, in which the efficacy data  in  women  on non-CEE or transdermal oestrogens were consistently superior to those found in women  on  placebo  or  CEE.  With  regard  to  the  primary  endpoint  SAL,  the  overall  difference  in responder  rate  between  LIVENSA  and  placebo  increased  from  14.4%  in  the  total  study  population (including patients on concomitant CEE treatment) of the pivotal studies to 21.3% when patients on CEE were excluded. Thus, in women on non-CEE oestrogens, a larger difference between LIVENSA and placebo was  reported, which  should affect the final judgement  with regard to clinical meaningfulness.

## Risk-benefit assessment

The limited data from surgically menopausal women without oestrogen replacement suggest that the magnitude of efficacy was similar to that  seen  in  women  on  non-CEE  ERT  but  the  results  are  not conclusive. In conclusion, LIVENSA has been adequately and consistently shown to relieve symptoms of HSDD in surgically induced menopausal women with HSDD on concomitant non-CEE oestrogen treatment. The recommendation against concomitant use of CEE with LIVENSA, is included in the SmPC. Safety The  safety  data  as  presented  by  the  Applicant  does  not  reveal  any  apparent  safety  problem, nevertheless  are  limited.  Long-term  safety  of  the  LIVENSA  is  little  studied  and  creates  concerns which  relate  to  cardiovascular  and  breast,  but  also  to  endometrial  safety,  should  the  LIVENSA  be inadvertently used in non-surgically menopausal women. Available  data  regarding  the  influence  of  testosterone  on  the  risk  of  breast  cancer  in  women  are limited, inconclusive and conflicting. The long-term effect of testosterone treatment on the breast is currently  unknown.  Breast  safetywill  be  monitored  and  investigated  further,  as  suggested  in  the pharmacovigilance plan. The  present  indication  does  not  include  non-hysterectomized  women;  nevertheless  limited  data evaluating  the  effect  of  low-dose  testosterone  on  the  endometrium  do  not  allow  conclusions  nor reassurance. Therefore endometrial safety will be investigated further as part of the pharmacovigilance plan. Data evaluating cardiovascular and associated risks in relation to testosterone use in women are still limited. The data are mostly reassuring but cannot exclude that long-term use may carry an increased risk of cardiovascular events. The activities proposed in the Risk Management Plan are endorsed. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  efficacy  of  LIVENSA  transdermal  system  to  relieve  symptoms  of  HSDD  in  oophorectomized hysterectomized  (surgically  induced  menopausal)  women  with  HSDD  on  concomitant  oestrogen treatment,  has  been  adequately  and  consistently  demonstrated  across  placebo-controlled  clinical studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  benefit  was  based  on  the  increase  of  number  of  satisfying  sexual  episodes  (SAL,  primary endpoint),  as  well  as  improvement  on  sexual  desire  and  personal  distress  evaluation  (PSFS,  PDS; secondary endpoints).

The  rate  and  severity  of  androgenic  adverse  event  is  low  and  does  not  appear  to  increase  with prolonged treatment up to one year. Furthermore, no apparent risk has been identified.

Nevertheless  potential long-term risks, such as breast cancer, cardiovascular events, and endometrial effects  have  been  identified  as  issues  that  should  be  carefully  monitored  according  to  the Risk Management Plan .

Overall,  after  review  of  the  Applicant´s  response  to  the  efficacy  and  safety  issues  raised,  the risk/benefit ratio is considered positive. A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that: pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns. Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of LIVENSA in the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) in bilaterally oophorectomized and hysterectomized (surgically induced menopausal) women receiving concomitant estrogen therapy was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised