---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:45:56
document_pages: 22
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/mabcampath-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: mabcampath-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 9.8795763
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 18:00:34.902449
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures,  which have been finalised before 1 December 2004. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

1. Introduction MabCampath (alemtuzumab) is a humanised monoclonal antibody that recognises the human CD52 antigen, a membrane glycoprotein expressed in virtually all cases of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and in the majority of cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), and present on at least 95% of all peripheral blood lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages. This antigen has also been found in a subpopulation (&lt;5%) of granulocytes but not on erythrocytes, platelets, or bone marrow stem cells. By binding to the CD-52, alemtuzumab causes lysis of lymphocytes through complement fixation and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity mechanisms. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most frequent form of leukaemia in Western countries, affecting  1.8  to  3  patients  per  100,000  populations.  CLL  is  marked  by  clonal  proliferation  and accumulation  of  neoplastic  B-lymphocytes  in  the  blood,  bone  marrow,  lymph  nodes,  and  spleen. Patients  present  lymphocytosis,  lymphadenopathy,  splenomegaly,  and  symptoms  of  fatigue,  weight loss, and malaise. As the disease progresses, bone marrow replacement by the disease process leads to anaemia,  neutropenia  and  thrombocytopenia.  Alkylating  agents  such  chlorambucil  are  the  standard chemotherapy,  although  they  achieve  few  complete  remissions.  Combinations  of  alkylating  agents with corticosteroids, anthracyclines or other compounds do not appear to prolong survival compared with  alkylators  alone.  Fludarabine  in  resistant  forms  of  CLL  may  achieve  higher  remission  rates (approximately 30 %) but its impact on survival has not been demonstrated. MabCampath is indicated  as  a  third-line  treatment  of  patients  with  chronic  lymphocytic  leukaemia (CLL)  who  have  been  treated  with  alkylating  agents  and  who  have  failed  fludarabine  phosphate therapy. It is a colourless concentrated solution for dilution with 0.9% sodium chloride solution or 5% glucose solution, for administration by IV infusion over approximately 2 hours. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition MabCampath  is a buffered, isotonic, non-preserved solution, containing the active substance, alemtuzumab  in  a  concentration  10  mg/ml,  filled  in  ampoules  as  30-mg/3  ml.  The  formulation  also contains: disodium edetate (EDTA), polysorbate 80 and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) consisting of:  potassium  chloride,  potassium  dihydrogen  orthophosphate,  sodium  chloride,  dibasic  sodium phosphate and water for injections. Fill volume is 3.3 ml including an overfill of 0.3 ml. The container is a 5 ml ampoule with white score ring composed of Type I clear tubing glass, which complies with Ph Eur and USP. Product development and finished product The active substance, alemtuzumab (INN) (previously known as CAMPATH-1H), is defined as the formulated product pool containing alemtuzumab, EDTA, polysorbate and PBS. Medicinal product no longer authorise

Manufacture  of  the  active  substance  and  the  finished  product  is  conducted  at  Boehringer  Ingelheim Pharma KG, Germany (BI). Labelling and packaging is conducted at Schering AG, Berlin, Germany.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CPMP did not require GMP inspections in relation to the manufacture of MabCampath.

## Method of preparation

The final dosage form is produced by terminal sterilisation of the alemtuzumab bulk active substance via 0.22 µm sterile filter followed by filling into 5 ml glass ampoules to a volume of 3.3 ml. Batch definition A  production  batch  is  defined  as  the  harvest  from  a  single  production  vessel  during  and  after purification to active substance. Validation of the manufacturing process The manufacturing process is fully validated for fermentation, purification, filling, visual inspection, intermediate hold times and media fills. In  process  controls  during  fermentation  monitor  cell  density,  cell  viability,  microbial  content,  pH, product content and a variety of metabolic parameters. In-process controls during filling include membrane integrity testing, bubble point tests, fill weight, fill volume, nitrogen purge flow rate, ampoule seal and automatic visual inspection. A sterility test is performed on the sterile-filtered bulk active substance and on the filled vials. Production and control of the starting materials The active substance, alemtuzumab, is a humanised monoclonal antibody directed against the human CD52 antigen. It is a glycosylated immunoglobulin of the IgG1 subclass. Description of the molecule The alemtuzumab molecule is a genetically engineered human IgG1 kappa monoclonal antibody with a molecular weight of approximately 150 kD. The humanised antibody was made by the insertion of six  complementarity-determining  regions  (CDRs)  from  an  IgG2a  rat  monoclonal  antibody  into  a human IgG1 immunoglobulin molecule. The alemtuzumab molecule consists of two light chains of ~ 24 kD (214 amino acids) and two heavy chains (450 amino acids) linked together by two intra (light chain - heavy chain) disulphide bridges and two inter (heavy chain - heavy chain) disulphide bridges to  form  the  typical  Y-shaped  IgG1  molecule.  Each molecule  also  contains  a  total  of  12  intra-chain disulphide bridges and an asparagine residue (301) in each heavy chain, which is glycosylated. Developmental genetics The product intended for commercialisation is an evolutive antibody obtained by a series of somatic cell and  genetic manipulations. A  rat  hybridoma  specific  for  human  CD52  was  genetically manipulated  to  enhance  its  affinity  for  the  CD52  antigen  expressed  on  lymphoid  cells.  In  order  to reduce the immunogenicity of rat immunoglobulins in patients, the CDR regions of this hybridoma were cloned and expressed with a human IgG1 framework.  Details of the preparation, storage and distribution of the master and working cell banks have been provided. The virological safety, genetic stability and equivalence of the extended production and limit of cell age  cells  with  the  MCB2  and  WCB100 have  been  demonstrated  in  accordance  with  the  CPMP Scientific Advice on Quality obtained in February and September 1998 . No concerns relating to TSE compliance have been raised during the evaluation. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Production of bulk antibody

Alemtuzumab is produced by fermentation.  The descriptions of the production process in relation to the facilities in which the various steps take place indicate that appropriate measures appear to be in place to minimise the risk of contamination.

All the materials used are sufficiently described. A list of suppliers has been given together with the specifications  and  the  methods  used  to  evaluate  non-pharmacopoeial  raw  material.  Composition  of media has been given, as well as in process controls adopted to approve their use. Purification of bulk antibody The downstream processing of the active substance is a sequence of validated steps including affinity, cation exchange and size exclusion chromatography and two robust viral removal steps. The product is then  formulated  by  the  addition  of  polysorbate  80  and  diluted  to  a  final  bulk  concentration  of  10 mg/ml. The  process  has  been  demonstrated  to  adequately  clear  viruses,  DNA  and  host  cell  proteins. Satisfactory rabbit pyrogen and general safety testing were performed on the three validation batches produced at the 12,000 l scale and on three batches produced at the 2,000 l scale.  In process controls are adequate to control the quality and consistency of the production. Characterisation The  primary,  secondary,  tertiary  and  quaternary  structures  of  the  active  substance  have  been characterised using a combination of protein and carbohydrate analytical tools and physicochemical techniques.  The primary structure has been confirmed by mass spectrometry analyses of proteolytic digests. The carbohydrate moieties are linked to the CH2 domain at a single N-linked site (asparagine301) and consist  predominately of  core-fucosylated  biantennary structures  containing,  one  or  zero  galactose residues. Assessing the binding to the CD52 antigen performs biological characterisation.  Batch analysis data on three commercial scale and three pilot scale batches demonstrate consistent production of the active substance. Control tests The active substance and the finished product are adequately controlled by a combination of validated physico-chemical, immunological and biological methods. Trending of batch analysis data demonstrates consistent production of both the active substance and the finished product. Release  tests  include  tests  at  the  end  of  fermentation  in  addition  to  sterility,  endotoxin,  potency, appearance, pH and biochemical tests on bulk drug substance and final product to assess the quality of the desired product and verify removal of impurities. All excipients and immediate packaging materials meet accepted pharmacopoeial requirements. Stability Stability assessment of the active substance shows that the material is stable for 18 months at 2-8 ° C and 14 days at 30 ° C. A shelf life of 6 months at 2-8 ° C has been assigned. The available stability data justify a finished product shelf life of 36 months when stored 2-8 ° C (in a refrigerator) and protected from light. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Viral safety

Model viruses used for the clearance testing included SV-40, Reo-3, MulV and PRV. The viral safety of the product has been documented satisfactorily.

No  concerns  relating  to  TSE  compliance  have  been  raised  during  the  evaluation.  The  Ph  Eur Certificate of Suitability will be submitted to the EMEA when available.

Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The  applicant  had  sought  CPMP  Scientific  Advice  with  regard  to  the  potency  assay,  safety  and characterisation data on genetic stability of limit for cell age (LCA) cells and microbial safety on endof-production cells and product comparability between batches produced at different manufacturing sites. The documentation provided by the company had been reviewed by the Biotechnology Working Party. The applicant has complied with the advice given in February and in September 1998. In general, the Part II of the dossier is of good quality; the Notice to Applicants has been followed and the EU guidelines have been fulfilled.  A number of points related to stability of MCB and WCB after storage,  shelf  life  of  columns,  stability  of  the  finished  product  for  the  full-scale  production,  viral validation, will be answered on an on-going basis. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Alemtuzumab is a humanised monoclonal antibody that binds and mediates the lysis of the human CD52 antigen. CD52 is a membrane glycoprotein predominantly expressed on T- and B-lymphocytes, monocytes  and  macrophages  in  humans.  It  is  present  in  virtually  all  cases  of  chronic  lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and in the majority of cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), and in at least 95% of  all  peripheral  blood  lymphocytes  and  monocytes/macrophages,  in  a  subpopulation  (&lt;5%)  of granulocytes but not on erythrocytes, platelets, or bone marrow stem cells. Choice of animal model A number of animals have analogues of the human CD52, but alemtuzumab only cross-reacts with old world monkeys as baboons and macaques. However, since the antibody also recognises erythrocytes in baboons and rhesus monkeys, the only possible animal model is the cynomolgus monkey, but even this model presents limitations. A single autosomal dominant gene is responsible for a heterogenous expression and these animals are therefore either all CD52 positive in the erythrocytes or all negative. Only the negatives are then selected for the trials. In addition, due to an amino acid deletion there is only 85% homology to the human CD52 molecule, which results in a 16 fold lower affinity of the cynomolgus CD52 vs the human antigen. Another restrictive factor is the development of neutralising anti-MabCampath  antibodies  after  a  few  days  treatment,  which  limits  the  extent  of  repeated  dose studies. Also, the tissue distribution of the cynomolgus CD52 antigen is not sufficiently known. For these reasons the in vivo preclinical studies are limited and pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics and toxicology data are derived from the same set of studies in cynomolgous monkeys. The CPMP, through their scientific advice review, approved this approach. Pharmacodynamics In vitro studies Alemtuzumab  is  a  strongly  lytic  human  IgG1,  it  cause  lysis  by  three  primary  mechanisms: complement  activation  (CMC)  and  by  antibody-dependent  cell-mediated  cytotoxicity  (ADCC)  and apoptosis. Secondary pathways include cytokine release, T-cell activation and non-specific activation of complement. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  affinity  of  alemtuzumab  binding  to  CD52  was  studied  in  a  human  T-cell  line  from  a  Sézary patient, a human Burkitt lymphoma B-cell line and a hamster fibroblast line transfected with a human CD52 antigen. The affinity constants were found to be 0.31x10 8 , 1.01x10 8 , and 0.74x10 8 x M -1 and the half  maximal  binding  of  the  CD52  antigen  to  be  achieved  at  concentrations  of  4.72,  1.47  and 2.00 µ g/ml respectively.

Effects of single and repeated doses of alemtuzumab (given by IV infusion or SC bolus) were studied in cynomolgus monkeys. Cynomolgus monkeys were given 0.1, 1 and 3 mg/kg of alemtuzumab as a 40-min IV infusion. Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated assuming a two-compartment model

Alemtuzumab binding  to  its  target  tissues  (peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow)  as  well  as  to  other normal and malignant human cells is satisfactorily documented. It binds through its Fab to essentially all B and T normal lymphocytes as well as to monocytes, thymocytes and macrophages. In the bone marrow the lymphoid progenitors stain strongly with alemtuzumab while non-committed progenitors or  myeloid  committed  progenitors  stain  very  weakly.  Furthermore  more  than  half  of  NK  cells  and monocytes and a small fraction of less than 20 % of granulocytes were positive. There was no binding to  erythrocytes  or  platelets.  Alemtuzumab  does  not  alter  the  ability  of  CD34  positive  cells  to repopulate bone marrow cultures in vitro. With  regard  to  other  non-haematopoietic  tissues,  alemtuzumab  specifically  binds  few  cells  of  Tlymphocyte origin and some dendritic cells in the skin. CD52 antigen is expressed on 100% B and T CLL, 94% NHL, 79% ALL, 32% AML, in human epididymus, sperm, seminal vesicles and seminal plasma. Apart from the specific Fab-binding present in the haemopoietic system, in lymphoid tissues, in the mononuclear phagocyte system and in the male reproductive tract, a nonspecific Fc-binding, which was found in a large  number  of  organs  and  tissues,  was  seen  in  immunocytochemical  studies.  The specific binding in the haemopoietic and lymphoid system followed the pattern already described and lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tonsils were all markedly stained. In lymph nodes the germinal centres stained comparatively weakly. In vivo studies Based on in vitro data, antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) is thought to play the major role. Apoptosis was demonstrated in vitro with T- and B-cell lines, but its role in the in vivo lytic effect of alemtuzumab is uncertain. The exact mechanism of action of alemtuzumab in vivo is not completely understood. Only one acceptable model for the in vivo lymphocytolytic effect of alemtuzumab has been found, the cynomolgus monkey, and it is not ideal, since the CD52 affinity for the antibody is 16 fold lower than in human cells. Experiments were carried out using single and repeated IV and SC doses for up to 30 days. In  all  studies  the  treatment  with  1  mg/kg  and  above  led  to  a  dose-related,  profound  and  reversible lymphocytopenia, while a reversible neutropenia was only seen after prolonged treatment and at the high doses. Single  dose  SC  at  doses  1  -  3  mg/kg  produced  the  same  magnitude  of  lymphocyte  depletion  as comparable doses IV, but with a trend towards later occurring nadirs. Repeated IV or SC for up to 30 days led to very deep nadirs of 0 - 9 % of pre-treatment values, but the nadirs occurred late and the recovery seemed also delayed. In a separate study of human B lymphoma transplanted into SCID mice, a marked lymphocytolytic effect of Campath-1G on the tumour cells was seen as a support to the in vivo effect. Pharmacokinetics Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

excluding samples with antiglobulin response. The compound reached maximum serum concentrations (Cmax) immediately after infusion, of 3.2 and 36.1 µg/ml at 0.1 and 1 mg/kg, 108.1 and 100.1 at 3 mg/kg. The exposure, in terms of area under the curve (AUC), increased from 541 µg/ml.h at 0.1 mg/kg to 11263 µg/ml.h at 3 mg/kg in one monkey (a 21 to 30-fold dose increment), and from 3976 µg/ml.h at 1 mg/kg to 9904 µg/ml.h at 3 mg/kg in a second one (a 2.5 to 3-fold dose increment). The volume of distribution (Vd) was low (0.09+0.02 and 0.13+0.05 l/kg), and so was the clearance (Cl) (0.25 ± 0.05 and 0.58 ± 0.22 ml/h/kg), resulting in a mean elimination t1/2 β of more than 200 h (range 220-254 h). In other studies in monkeys given 3, 10 and 30 mg/kg IV as a 40-min infusion, the mean observed Cmax were 72.1, 275.7 and 1036.1 g/ml respectively. AUC were 429, 1822 and 5396 g/ml/h. The distribution t1/2 α was 12-18 h, similar to that   (12-15 h) found at 3 mg/kg in another study.

With  the  exception  of  a  female  that  died  after  the  30-mg/kg  doses,  no  important  effect  on echocardiographic patterns or myocardial conduction was seen.

SC doses of 1, 2 and 3 mg/kg were slowly absorbed from the site of injection. The time (tmax) to reach maximum concentrations (Cmax) was generally about 48 h. Cmax increased with the dose, but due to the small number of animals (only one each for the 1 and 2 mg/kg doses) and the significant inter-animal variability  at  3  mg/kg,  it  was  not  possible  to  establish  whether  the  increase  was  dose-proportional. After the peak, mean plasma concentrations declined but then remained raised. The bioavailability of SC alemtuzumab was approximately 47%. Tissue distribution was only studied in CD-1 nude mice bearing a CD52- transfected CHO tumour. Alemtuzumab binds to mouse Fc γ receptors but not to mouse CD52 antigen. Following injection of 35 S-labelled alemtuzumab the tissue radiolocalisation was at 7 and 24 hours mainly localised to spleen (32 and 18% respectively) and liver (20 and 14%), while it dropped to 6 -8% after 48 hours. In the tumour,  the  radioactivity  increased  from  initially  5.8-  20.7  %  at  48  hours.  All  mice  produced measurable antibody titres after two injections. Placental transfer and milk excretion of alemtuzumab were not investigated. The repeated dose study evaluated five groups of monkeys: two groups received daily 40-minute IV infusions of alemtuzumab for either 14 or 30 days; two other groups received daily SC doses for either 14 or 30 days. The dosing schedule was as follows: 1.0 on days 1-7, 1.5 on days 8-10, 2.0 on days 1114 and 3.0 mg/kg on days 15-30. As in the single dose studies, antiglobulin responses complicated the determination of alemtuzumab concentrations. At the end of treatment, the alemtuzumab concentrations were expected to decrease but instead an unexpected rise in alemtuzumab concentrations was observed. However, the Cmax of alemtuzumab measured during dosing was in line with  the  values  predicted  from  single  dose  studies,  suggesting  that  there  was  no  unexpected accumulation after IV or SC dosing in monkeys. Toxicology Studies in cynomolgus monkeys, including a single dose IV infusion study and a repeated dose SC injection and IV infusion study up to 30 days, are the same as those discussed above. The Applicant did not consider it ethical or necessary to conduct further pre-clinical toxicology or pharmacokinetic studies. The CPMP approved this approach through their scientific advice. In  view  of  the  antiglobulin  response  the  animals  were  treated  for  30  days  and  not  for  12  weeks  as proposed  for  man.  The  highest  daily  dose  given  to  cynomolgus  monkeys  was  30  mg/kg  and  the highest cumulative dose was 64.5 mg/kg. These doses were 50 times and 3 times the proposed single and cumulative patient doses (30 mg/patient - approximately 0.6 mg/kg - IV 3 x weekly, and 1033 mg, approximately 21 mg/kg). No  mortality,  adverse  clinical  effects  or  macro-  or  microscopic  treatment-related  findings  were observed after single doses of 0.1, 1 and 3 mg/kg by IV infusion, or after 1, 2 and 3 mg/kg SC. The cardiovascular  and  respiratory  effects  of  alemtuzumab  were  evaluated  in  anaesthetised  cynomolgus monkeys  given  IV  administration.  Slight  to  moderate  changes  in  blood  pressure  were  noted  in monkeys treated with 3-30 mg/kg; male monkeys were less susceptible than females. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A number of biochemical markers appeared to be influenced by high alemtuzumab doses. Urea, lactate dehydrogenase, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase and α -hydroxybutyrate  dehydrogenase  were elevated  at  the  10  and  30  mg/kg  doses.  Cholesterol  was  reduced  at  30  mg/kg  these  changes  might largely reflect cardiac and renal changes.

Respiratory minute volume (rate and/or tidal volume) increased slightly to moderately in all groups. The effect was not dose-related. No significant effect was seen on arterial blood PO2   and PCO2   or acid/base status. However the female monkey that died after a dose of 30 mg/kg experienced clinical deterioration that was highlighted by increasing metabolic acidosis. A post-mortem examination revealed \"pale-coloured\" kidneys, signs of necrosis  in  the  liver,  suggestive  of  hypoxia  probably  related  to  the  hypotension,  moderate  alveolar haemorrhages and slight oedema in the lung. The latter was possibly a consequence of thrombosis, shocked lung syndrome, or altered pulmonary vascular haemodynamics. Toxicity studies did not indicate any damage to central nervous, renal, and gastrointestinal system. In the repeated dose toxicity study no mortalities, adverse clinical signs, nor macro- or microscopic histopathological treatment-related findings were observed in cynomolgus monkeys administered with 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 mg/kg/day of alemtuzumab for up to 14 days and 3 mg/kg/day from day 15 to 30 by IV infusion or SC injection. Clinical observations did not show any drug-related changes in clinical health/behaviour. Repeated treatment did not cause any pathology other than exaggerated pharmacodynamic effects, which might be expected in patients. Alemtuzumab  reduced  lymphocyte  counts  in proportion to the dose in all toxicity studies, independently of the administration route and frequency. Given IV or SC to monkeys for 30 days the drug  provoked  an  absolute  neutropenia,  reversible  during  recovery.  No  important  treatment-related changes in biochemical parameters were observed in either the IV or SC single dose studies, but in the repeated dose study, it lowered the concentrations of serum total protein and albumin. No  treatment-related  adverse  physical  signs  were  observed  after  a  single  IV  or  SC  dose  (0.1-3.0 mg/kg) in the cynomolgus monkey. Transient mild to moderate fever was observed in one monkey in the repeated dose study and was probably due to haematological changes. The  potential  immunosuppressive  effect  was  investigated  in  cynomolgus  monkeys  vaccinated  with live attenuated Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). About 14 months later, these animals and nonvaccinated controls received alemtuzumab (cumulative dose 23 mg/kg in 7 days) and on the next day were  challenged  with  wild-type  SIV.  Despite  the  profound  lymphopenia  (99  %  depletion  of  T lymphocytes),  the  vaccinated  animals  did  not  develop  viraemia.  The  non-vaccinated  alemtuzumab treated  monkeys  had  the  same  antibody  response  as  non-treated  controls.  Lymphoid  reserves  in extravascular tissues were still sufficient to preserve humoral and cellular  memory responses in the vaccinated monkeys and to mount a primary response in the native animals. Alemtuzumab  seems  to  act  on  epithelial  cells  of  the  male  reproductive  tract,  their  secretions  and mature sperm. The possibility that it might damage spermatogenesis was also considered. However, it is  not  clear  whether  effective  concentrations  of  alemtuzumab  are  reached  in  the  seminal  fluid  at therapeutic  doses.  The  possibility  of  long-lasting  damage  to  the  male  sex  organs  because  of inflammatory reactions was also raised. During the repeated dose toxicology studies, male sex organs (testes,  epididymis,  prostate)  were  examined  macro-  and  microscopically  after  histological  staining. There were no remarkable observations. The  development  of  anti-alemtuzumab  antibodies  did  not  cause  any  noteworthy  antigen-antibody reactions in cynomolgus monkeys. Medicinal product no longer authorise

Since  alemtuzumab  should  not  be  given  to  women  with  childbearing  potential,  reproductive  and developmental toxicity, including teratogenicity, have not been studied.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Mutagenicity  of  alemtuzumab  was  not  studied.  In  general,  it  is  accepted  that  such  studies  are  not useful for biotechnology products, including monoclonal antibodies. Likewise, since alemtuzumab is not intended for prolonged treatment, carcinogenicity studies have not been conducted.

Local tolerance SC  and  IV  administration  of  alemtuzumab  did  not  cause  injection  site  reactions  in  cynomolgus monkeys. In clinical trials, after SC treatment, local injection site reactions were noted after the first dose, but soon disappeared. · Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects. Overall, the primary pharmacodynamic studies provided adequate information on the affinity and the binding to human cells and tissues, normal as neoplastic and on the in vivo lymphocytolytic effect in cynomolgous monkey which was the most relevant species for preclinical efficacy and safety studies, because of the lack of expression of the CD52 antigen on non-primate species. Lymphocytopenia was the most common treatment-related effect in this species. A slight cumulative effect  on  the  degree  of  lymphocyte  depletion  was  seen  in  repeated  dose  studies  and  was  rapidly reversible after cessation of dosing. Reversible neutropenia was seen following daily intravenous or SC dosing for 30 days, but not following single  doses or daily dosing for 14  days. Histopathology results from bone marrow samples revealed no remarkable changes attributable to treatment. Single IV doses of 10 and 30 mg/kg produced moderate to severe dose related hypotension accompanied by a slight tachycardia. Alemtuzumab  binding  was  observed  in  lymphoid  tissues  and  the  mononuclear  phagocyte  system. Significant  binding  was  also  observed  in  the  male  reproductive  tract  (epididymis,  sperm,  seminal vesicle) and the skin. This information has been included in the SPC. No other findings, in the above toxicity studies, provide information of significant relevance to clinical use. Overall, the toxicology programme was limited, however this was due to the recognised difficulties with  the  availability  of  a  suitable  animal  model.  This  same  problem  probably  contributed  to  the restriction in the number of in vivo studies. In view of the accumulated knowledge on pharmacology, safety  and  efficacy  in  the  clinical  testing,  further  preclinical  animal  testing  is  considered  to  be unnecessary. 4. Clinical aspects MabCampath (alemtuzumab) is a humanised monoclonal antibody that recognises the human CD52 antigen, a membrane glycoprotein expressed in virtually all cases of CLL and in the majority of cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), and present on at least 95% of all peripheral blood lymphocytes and monocytes/macrophages. By fixing to the highly expressed CD52 antigen on the cell surface it causes lysis of lymphocytes. CLL is a neoplastic disease characterised by an accumulation of a population of monoclonal, small, mature appearing CD5 and CD52 positive lymphocytes either of B-type (95%) or T-type (5%). The incidence  is  1.8  -  3.0  cases  per  100.000  populations.  The  diagnosis  depends  on  the  detection  of lymphocytosis  in  blood  and marrow.  Immunophenotyping  is  a  necessary  diagnostic  tool  for differential diagnosis and for characterisation of the tumour cells as being of the B- or T-cell line. Medicinal product no longer authorise

The course of CLL is highly variable with indolent disease without survival affection at one end of the spectrum and aggressive leukaemia with large tumour burden, B-symptoms, bone marrow insufficiency and a survival from diagnosis in the order of few months at the other end. Prognostic subgrouping of patients are therefore important and are being applied in various ways. The presence of lymphadenopathy, organomegaly and  signs  of  bone  marrow  affection  (thrombocytopenia,  anaemia) are used in various combinations to delineate stages A, B or C in the Binet staging system or stages 0,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

I, II, III or IV in the Rai staging system. Other important prognostic factors are age and the cytogenetic changes, most frequently trisomy 12 or deletions of 13q, and also cellular phenotype.

<!-- image -->

Treatment with chemotherapy is reserved for intermediate and advanced stages. The NCI guidelines for  initiating  treatment  comprise:  constitutional  symptoms,  symptomatic  lymphadenopathy  and/or hepato-splenomegaly, anaemia, thrombocytopenia (below 100 x 10 9 /l), possibly leukocyte counts over 300x 10 9 /l  and possibly CLL related refractory autoimmune disease. The primary treatment in these cases  has  been  the  alkylating  agent  chlorambucil  with  or  without  prednisolone,  which  can  induce complete remissions (CR) in about 25% plus partial remissions (PR) in about 50%. For patients almost refractory  to  alkylating  agents  a  median  survival  of  15  months  or  below  has  been  shown.  This situation has changed somewhat with the introduction of the purine analogues, especially fludarabine, but  also  pentostatin  (2  DCF)  and  cladribine  (2  CDA),  which  induces  remissions  in  a  relative  large proportion of alkylator-resistant patients. There is usually cross-resistance among purine analogues as is the case among  various  alkylating agents. In such double resistant patients no standard chemotherapy exists and the median survival is only in the order of 6 - 9 months. For these patients alemtuzumab could be an option, since it has a completely different mechanism of action. MabCampath is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  patients  with  chronic  lymphocytic  leukaemia  (CLL) who have been treated with alkylating agents and who have failed to achieve a complete or partial response  or  achieved  only  a  short  remission  (less  than  6  months)  following  fludarabine  phosphate therapy. (a) Clinical trials A total of 21 clinical studies with alemtuzumab were carried out, but only 7 CLL studies are relevant to the applied indication (see Table 1). The other 14 included 6 studies in lymphoma and other types of leukaemia, 3 compassionate use studies, 4 studies in rheumatoid arthritis and one kidney transplant study. Pharmacology  and  dose-finding  data  were  obtained  from  4  studies:  125-001-C-91,  125-002-C-91, 125-003-C-91, 125-005-C-92. Efficacy data were obtained mainly from 3 studies including 157 previously treated B-CLL patients: CAM211  (pivotal  study),  125-005-C-92  (005)  and  125-009-C-92  (009).  Study  005  included  40 patients of whom 8 may have had a diagnosis of B-PLL rather than B-CLL. Thus, the majority of data for efficacy and safety assessment was based on a total of 149 B-CLL patients Safety datawere primarily obtained from the treatment of the 149 previously treated B-CLL patients mentioned above, but supplemented by data from 36 additional CLL and 139 other patients treated in the Phase II studies and from more than 200 patients treated in oncology and polyarthritis studies. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TABLE 1: STUDIES CONDUCTED

| Study No.        | Phase/Desig n                       | No of Patients   | Diagnosis                                                                                                                 | Duration of Treatment                         |
|------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| 125-001-C-91     | I/II Dose ranging Multi-centre Open | All:68 CLL:23    | B-CLL, NHL                                                                                                                | 4-12 weeks                                    |
| 125-002-C-91     | I/II Dose ranging Multi-centre Open | All: 71 CLL: 8   | B-CLL, NHL                                                                                                                | 4-12 weeks                                    |
| 125-003-C-91     | I/II Dose ranging Multi-centre Open | All: 36 CLL: 5   | B-CLL, NHL                                                                                                                | 4-12 weeks authorise                          |
| 125-004-C-91     | Follow-up on studies 125-001,2,3    | All: 55 CLL: 14  | B-CLL, NHL Pts failed MabCampath or might benefit from retreatment longer                                                 | 12 weeks or more at investigator's discretion |
| 125-005-C-92     | I/II Multi-centre Open              | All: 125 CLL: 32 | B-CLL, NHL Histological confirmation Pts failed 1 st line fludarabine and other chemotherapy                              | 12 weeks max                                  |
| 125-009-C-92     | II Multi-centre Open                | All: 24 CLL:24   | CLL Histological confirmation Pts failed 1 st line fludarabine and other chemotherapy or 2 nd or 3 rd line fludarabine no | 8-16 weeks                                    |
| CAM211 (Pivotal) | II Multi-centre open                | All: 93 CLL: 93  | B-CLL, NHL Confirmation by lymphocyte counts/ CD type Pts who have received alkylators and failed fludarabine             | 4-12 weeks                                    |

<!-- image -->

Clinical pharmacology Pharmacokinetic  and  pharmacodynamic  studies  are  limited.  Two  additional  studies  are  ongoing: CAM213, a Phase II study on pharmacokinetics and efficacy taking place at one centre in the UK and CAM002 , a randomised cross-over pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic study investigating the IV and SC route of administration in the US. The results will be reported to the CPMP on an ongoing basis. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

Specific  pharmacodynamic  studies  were  not  performed.  The  effects  on  the  major  target,  the lymphocyte,  were  described  briefly  in  relation  to  dose  and  administration  in  the  Phase  I/II  dosefinding studies.

TABLE 2: DOSE RAGING STUDIES

| Study No.    | Phase   | Unit Dose (mg)   | Dosing Frequency/Route/Duration   |
|--------------|---------|------------------|-----------------------------------|
| 125-001-C-91 | I/II    | 2.5, 8.0, 25, 80 | 3 x weekly / IV / 4-12 weeks      |
| 125-002-C-91 | I/II    | 7.5, 24, 75, 240 | 1 x weekly / IV / 4-12 weeks      |
| 125-003-C-91 | I/II    | 0.5, 5, 50       | 5 x weekly / IV / 4-12 weeks      |

In study 125-002, lymphocytolysis and a temporary decrease in peripheral lymphocyte counts began to  occurr  within a few hours following single weekly doses between 7.5 - 240 mg. However, at all doses  there  was  a  quick  rebound  and  no  consistent  suppression  of  lymphocytes  was  seen.  This  is related to the lack of antineoplastic efficacy of this dose schedule. The therapeutically recommended schedule, 3 x weekly, with a dose escalation 3 mg to 10 mg to 30 mg was used in study 125-005. The median time to a reporting of a lymphocyte count below 1.0 x 10 9 was 12 days, but with considerable interpatient variability and also with a trend towards longer time for patients with high pre-treatment counts. In two patients, who failed to dose escalate above 3 -10 mg, a fall down to the 1.0 x 109 count was not accomplished. Twenty previously treated CLL patients did dose escalate to 30 mg and did stay on study a reasonable time. Studies exploring the cellular level of expression of CD52 its relation to MabCampath sensitivity and its  relation  to  other  prognostic  factors  are  needed  and  such  studies  are  undergoing  at  the  M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Texas, USA. The results should be reported to the CPMP. (b) Dose finding studies The 3 Phase I/II dose-ranging studies, 125-001-C-91, 125-002-C-91 and 125-003-C-91, are described in Table 2 below. In all 3 studies, MabCampath was administered as a 2 hour IV infusion. Response rates  to  either  25  mg  or  80  mg  given  3  x  weekly  appear  to  be  similar  though  there  is  a suggestion that the higher dose is associated with more adverse events. Thus, a dose of approximately 25 mg 3 x weekly appears to have the best risk-to-benefit ratio. The subsequent Phase II studies all used 30 mg 3 x weekly and this dose appears to be effective with acceptable toxicity. II Pharmacokinetics Four open-label, multicentre, Phase I/II studies were performed, (125-001-C-91, 125-002-C-91, 125003-C-91 and 125-005-C-92) all in previously treated patients and all included both patients with CLL and NHL. A total of 76 patients with CLL and 139 with NHL participated. All patients received the drug by 2 hour IV infusion except for 7 CLL patients who received MabCampath by SC injection. Among  the  studies  performed  only  125-002-C-91  comprised  collection  of  a  full  pharmacokinetic blood sample profile following infusions 1 and 4 (see Table 3), while in the other studies only pre- and post-dose samples were obtained for analysis. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE 3: PHARMACOKINETIC PARAMETERS BY MAXIMUM DOSE LEVEL (POPULATION:  ALL PATIENTS IN THE EVALUABLE PK POPULATION)

| Dose       | Statistic   | C max ( µ g/ml)   | t 1/2 (hours)   | AUC 0- ∞ ( µ g × hrs/l)   |
|------------|-------------|-------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|
| 7.5 mg n=8 | Mean ± SD   | 1.23 ± 0.78       | 29.48 ± 19.67   | 40.54 ± 49.53             |
| 7.5 mg n=8 | Median      | 1.01              | 23.57           | 30.55                     |
| 24 mg n=9  | Mean ± SD   | 5.11 ± 2.84       | 47.28 ± 68.08   | 183.73 ± 165.1            |
| 24 mg n=9  | Median      | 6.25              | 27.54           | 135.57                    |
| 75 mg n=17 | Mean ± SD   | 11.93 ± 5.92      | 43.95 ± 34.16   | 386.6 ± 398.29            |
| 75 mg n=17 | Median      | 11.55             | 30.35           | 244.55                    |
| 240 mg     | Mean ± SD   | 54.38 ± 27.78     | 97.36 ± 79.06   | 4131.39 ± 3052.94         |
| n=7        | Median      | 46.75             | 75.26           | 4655.12                   |

| Evaluation/Criteria      | Study CAM211                                                              | Study 005                                                                                                          | Study 009                                                                                 |
|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Patient Population:      | B-CLL pts who had received an alkylating agent and had failed fludarabine | Pts with NHL including CLL who failed to respond or relapsed following treatment with conventional chemotherapy no | CLL pts who had failed to respond to or had relapsed following treatment with fludarabine |
| Treatment regimen:       |                                                                           |                                                                                                                    |                                                                                           |
| Initial dosing regimen   | gradual escalation from 3 to 10 to 30 mg product                          | gradual escalation from 3 or 10 to 30 mg                                                                           | gradual escalation from 10 to 30 mg                                                       |
| Final dosing regimen     | 30 mg IV 3 x weekly                                                       | 30 mg IV (or SC) 3 x weekly                                                                                        | 30 mg IV 3 x weekly                                                                       |
| Maximum dose allowed     | 30 mg                                                                     | 80 mg a                                                                                                            | 80 mg a                                                                                   |
| Duration of infusion     | 2 hours                                                                   | 2 hours: could be reduced to 30 minutes b                                                                          | 2 hours: could be reduced to 30 minutes b                                                 |
| Duration of treatment    | Tied to response; maximum of 12 weeks                                     | 12 weeks                                                                                                           | 16 weeks                                                                                  |
| Prophylactic antibiotics | From Day 8 to at least 2 months post- treatment                           | Optional                                                                                                           | Optional                                                                                  |

About 80%  had lymphocytosis in peripheral blood, and more than 50%  had anaemia or thrombocytopenia.

Clinical efficacy Efficacy and safety of MabCampath have been evaluated in 3 Phase II, non-comparative, open studies (005-;  009;  CAM211)  which  included  157  B-CLL  patients,  treated  with  an  intravenous  (IV)  or subcutaneous (SC) dose regimen of 30 mg daily 3 x weekly up to a maximum of 12 weeks. Basic elements of the studies are presented below. TABLE 4: OVERVIEW OF STUDY DESIGNS a Only two patients, one in Study 005 and one in Study 009 were escalated to 80 mg. b Reduced at weekly intervals in the absence of acute-infusion related events. 70 - 75% of the patients were in Rai stage III-IV. The majority had lymph node involvement, about half had splenomegaly and 17 - 37% had B-symptoms. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The degree of bone marrow infiltration was also comparable among the studies. The percentages with more than 50% involvement of the marrow were 78.5, 75.0 and 87.5% in study CAM211, 005 and 009 respectively.

<!-- image -->

98.7%  had  received  at  least  one  prior  regimen  containing  an  alkylating  agent  and  85.9%  had previously been treated with fludarabine (study 005 was initiated prior to the approval of fludarabine). 67% had received 3 or more prior regimens. CPMP scientific advice The pivotal CAM211 study was based on data from the previous 125-005 and 125-009 studies and was discussed with the EMEA (CPMP Scientific Advice of September 1998) and the FDA. It was designed  as  a  non-comparative  multicentre  study  in  US  and  Europe  with  patients  who  had  failed fludarabine, in order to confirm and extend results of previous studies. The duration would be 4-12 weeks therapy based upon response. It was then considered by the CPMP that a comparative Phase III prior to approval was not feasible or necessary since an acceptable comparator cannot be identified in this population and best supportive care is considered unethical. The  EMEA  Clinical  Scientific  Advice  indicated  that  NCI  criteria  had  to  be  used  for  appropriate assessment of response and an overall response rate between 20 and 30% for &gt; 6 months would be considered  of  true  clinical  significance  for  patients  who  relapsed  after  alkylating  agents  and/or fludarabine. The applicant has complied with the CPMP advice. Evaluation of response The investigators primarily evaluated the patients and the responses were classified. For each study an independent  review-panel  of  haematology/oncology  experts  was  formed.  This  panel  reviewed  the patient data and  reclassified  the  response,  using  the  classification  of  response  recommended internationally  and  by  the  NCI  1996  workshop  (Table  4).  In  this Complete  Response  (CR) means complete disappearance of detectable disease, absence of constitutional symptoms and normalisation of abnormal blood parameters. A Partial Response (PR) needs at least a 50% decrease in lymphocyte counts, lymphadenopathy, hepato-splenomegaly and one of three, defined haematological improvements. Progressive Disease (PD) denotes the situation with a 50% increase in lymphadenopathy, hepato-splenomegaly and lymphocyte count. The response rate was considered, as an adequate surrogate parameter for patient benefit in CLL, since an improvement in haemoglobin and platelet counts is part of the response criteria. A decreasing tumour burden is correlated to a decrease in constitutional symptoms. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## TABLE 5: 1996 NCIWG RESPONSE CRITERIA

## COMPLETE RESPONSE (Duration ≥ 2 months)

- No constitutional symptoms
- Normal physical examination (including nodes, liver, spleen) and by X-ray
- Lymphocytes ≤ 4,000/ µ l

l

· Neutrophils ≥ 1,500/ µ · Platelets &gt; 100,000/ µ l · Haemoglobin &gt; 11.0 g/dl (untransfused) · Marrow normocellular for age, lymphs &lt; 30%, no nodules; if hypocellular marrow, repeat in 4 weeks PARTIAL RESPONSE (Duration ≥ 2 months) · Lymphocytes ≥ 50% decrease from baseline, and · Lymphadenopathy ≥ 50% decrease from baseline, and/or · Liver/spleen ≥ 50% decrease from baseline, plus ≥ 1 of: · Neutrophils ≥ 1,500/ µ l or 50% increase over baseline · Platelets &gt; 100,000/lL or 50% increase over baseline · Haemoglobin &gt; 11.0 g/dl or 50% increase over baseline (untransfused) · Otherwise CR with persistent nodules classed as nodular PR · Otherwise CR with persistent anaemia or thrombocytopenia due to drug toxicity classed as PR and monitored prospectively. PROGRESSIVE DISEASE · ≥ 50% increase in sum of products of at least two nodes on two consecutive exams 2 weeks apart (at least one node must be ≥ 2 cm); new nodes · Liver/spleen ≥ 50% increase or new palpable organomegaly · Lymphocytes ≥ 50% increase to ≥ 5,000/ µ l · Transformation  to  more  aggressive  histology  (eg  Richter's  syndrome  or  PLL  with  &gt;  55% prolymphocytes STABLE DISEASE · All others Efficacy Major response rates The  CR+PR  rate  considered  for  efficacy  was 33.3 %  in  the  pivotal  study  CAM211,  and 28.1 and 33.3 % in the two other studies, 005 and 009. With a large overlap in the confidence limits, there is no statistical difference among these results. Data were presented for study CAM211 from a cut-off date in February 2000 and for studies 005 and 009 from their completion dates in 1995. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TABLE 6:  SUMMARY OF DISEASE RESPONSE BY INDEPENDENT PANEL IN STUDIES CAM211, 005, AND 009  (n (%))

| Response                                            | Study CAM211 n = 93   | Study 005 n = 32   | Study 009 n = 24   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Complete response (CR)                              | 2 (2.2)               | 0                  | 0                  |
| Partial Response (PR)                               | 29 (31.2)             | 9 (28.1)           | 8 (33.3)           |
| CR with persistent anaemia/ thrombocytopenia (PR) a | 6 (6.5)               | NR                 | NR                 |
| CRwith persistent nodules b                         | 5 (5.4)               | NR                 | NR                 |
| Stable disease (SD)                                 | 50 (53.8)             | 14 (43.8)          | 6 (25.0)           |
| Progressive disease (PD)                            | 8 (8.6)               | 8 (25.0)           | 6 (25.0)           |
| Not assessed                                        | 4 (4.3)               | 1 (3.1)            | 4 (16.7)           |
| Responders (CR+PR)                                  | 31 (33.3)             | 9 (28.1)           | 8 (33.3)           |
| 95% CI on Percent Response                          | (24 - 44)             | (14 - 47)          | (16 - 55)          |

| Response (Months)                                                   | Study CAM211 n = 93   |   Study 005 n = 32 |   Study 009 n = 24 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Median time to response                                             | 1.5                   |                3.8 |                3.9 |
| Duration of response                                                | 8.7                   |                7.1 |               15.4 |
| Median time to progression, alternate therapy or death - responders | 9.5 *                 |               10.3 |               19.6 |
| Median time to survival - responders                                | Not reached **        |               44.3 |               35.8 |

A part of the difference between the median times to response (from first dose to first evidence of CR/PR) across the 3 studies was explained by differences in the disease assessment time points (4 vs. 6 vs. 8 weeks).

a Patients who fulfilled criteria for CR but who had persistent anaemia or thrombocytopenia were considered to have PR. b CR with persistent bone marrow nodules. NR denotes a category not recorded. The response rate was independent of age (above or below 65 years) and gender (although there are reservations from the statistical point of view due the small numbers in the female group). The  response  rate  was  higher  in  Rai  stages  0-II  (17/38  or  44.7%)  than  in  stages  III-IV  (31/111  or 27.9% The  influence  of  previous  resistance  pattern  was  examined  in  study  CAM211.  13/45  patients,  who never  responded  to  prior  purine  analogue-based  regimens  and  thus  were  primary  resistant  had  a response to MabCampath of 28.9%. In 18/48 patients, who previously had responded to at least one regimen, the MabCampath response was similar, 37.5%. Time to event variables - response, progression, survival Time to event variables are given in the Table 7 below: TABLE 7:  SUMMARY OF TIME TO EVENT VARIABLES IN STUDIES CAM211, 005 AND 009 *   3/31 responders were still in remission and therefore censored for analysis. ** Median survival for the 31 responders had not yet been reached with 21 (67.7%) of 93 patients still alive at February 2000. Overall, the 18-month survival rate was 45% (42/93 patients). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE 8: SUMMARY OF COMPLETE OR ≥ 50% RESOLUTION IN DISEASE AT EACH MAJOR DISEASE SITE (n = 149)

| Disease Sites   | Study CAM211 (%)   | Study CAM211 (%)   | Study CAM211 (%)   | Studies 005 + 009 (%)   | Studies 005 + 009 (%)   | Studies 005 + 009 (%)   | Studies 005 + 009 (%)   |
|-----------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                 | All Patients       | Responders         | Stable Disease     | All Patients            | Responders              | Stable Disease          |                         |
| Lymphocytosis   | 100                | 100                | 100                | 97.8                    | 100                     | 94.4                    |                         |
| Bone Marrow     | 61.3               | 71.0               | 51.9               | 55.1                    | 87.5                    | 45.0                    |                         |
| Lymphadenopathy | 74.2               | 95.7               | 60.0               | 39.5                    | 76.9                    | 29.4                    |                         |
| Hepatomegaly    | 74.2               | 88.9               | 78.9               | 40.0                    | 66.7                    | 33.3                    |                         |
| Splenomegaly    | 82.6               | 100                | 73.1               | 46.7                    | 75.0                    | 38.5                    |                         |

<!-- image -->

In study CAM211, the response of the malignant lymphocytes in blood and marrow was assessed with flow-cytometry. In the bone marrow, the median % fell from a pre-treatment value of 81.8% to 10% by study week 4 and 0.8% by week 8. In blood, a median pre-treatment count of 33.61 x 10 9 /l fell to 0.003 by week 4 and 0.001 x 109/l by week 8. An analysis of the effect on other abnormal blood parameters in the pivotal study demonstrated that at the evaluation 2 months post-treatment 43.9% of 57 anaemic patients (and 73.3% of responders) met the  criteria  for  haemoglobin  response.  Over  all  3  studies,  24/34  (71%)  patients  with  baseline  grade 2-4 anaemia improved at least one grade at the 2-month follow-up. At  the  same  time-point  50.0%  of  24  neutropenic  patients  (&lt;  1500  cells/ µ l)  had  a  50%  ANC improvement  (60.0%  in  responders).  Over  all  3  studies,  12/15  (80%)  of  patients  with  a  baseline neutropenia of grade 3 or 4 improved to grade 2 or better at the 2-month follow-up and therefore came into a lower category of risk of infection. A platelet response was seen in 38.9% of 54 thrombocytopenic patients (platelets &lt; 100.000) in the pivotal study, but in 53.8% among responders. In the 17 patients over all 3 studies with grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia at baseline, 11 (or 65%) improved to grade 2 or better at the 2-month follow-up and thus came into a lower category of risk for bleeding. Improvement in disease related symptoms In study CAM211, 63 patients had disease related symptoms at baseline. 28/63 (44.4%) had complete resolution of the symptoms following MabCampath treatment. A more specific analysis was made in CAM211:  B-symptoms  (fever,  night  sweats,  weight  loss)  resolved  in  29/39  (74.4%)  of  patients. Asthenia resolved in 10/32 patients and pain in 4/9 patients. Other types of disease related symptoms resolved in 7/19 patients. Over all three studies 59 patients had B-symptoms at baseline or fatigue and 31 (52.5%) had resolution of their symptoms? Response according to previous treatment The relevant response parameters for patients treated in the pivotal and supportive studies (CAM211, 005 and 009) are summarised below, according to response to prior therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE 9: RESPONSE PARAMETERS IN MABCAMPATH STUDIES, CAM211, 005 AND 009 BY RESPONSE TO PREVIOUS THERAPY (n = 157)

| Patient Subgroup                                                     | No. of Patients   | Median Duration of Response (months)   | 95% CI*       | Median Survival (months)   | 95% CI                         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Failed Alkylating Agents All Patients CR+ PR**                       | 109 37            | NA 9.1                                 | NA 6.1 - 12.5 | 18.8 35.8                  | 13.7 - 28.4 28.4 - 44.3        |
| Failed Alkylating Agents and Fludarabine All Patients CR+PR          | 84 27             | NA 8.3                                 | NA 5.3 - 12.5 | 16.1 35.8                  | 11.3 - 30.3 18.8 - 35.3        |
| Received Alkylating Agents and failed Fludarabine All Patients CR+PR | 110 35            | NA 8.7                                 | NA 5.9 - 11.5 | 14.2 35.8                  | 11.3 - 30.3 35.8 - not reached |

*  CI = confidence interval **CR = complete response; PR = partial response (intent-to-treat; independently assessed per 1996 NCI criteria) Discussion on clinical efficacy The claim for a  marketing authorisation is  based  on one  pivotal Phase II study (CAM211) with an objective response rate of 33% and duration of response in excess of 6 months along with supporting data from two other Phase II studies, 005 and 009. It  was  considered  at  the  time  of  the  review  of  the  applicant's  request  for  Scientific  Advice  that  a comparative Phase III prior to approval was not feasible or necessary since an acceptable comparator cannot be identified in this population and best supportive care is considered unethical. The applicant has complied fully with the CPMP advice. The response rate was considered, as an adequate surrogate parameter for patient benefit in CLL, since an  improvement  in  haemoglobin  and  platelet  counts  is  part  of  the  response  criteria.  A  decreasing tumour burden is correlated to a decrease in constitutional symptoms. In this population of heavily pre-treated patients with CLL, MabCampath has shown outstanding anti-leukaemia activity. Results  of  response  in  the  5  major  disease  sites  showed  a  remarkable  effect  on  the  circulating lymphocyte  mass,  while  the  response  at  the  other  sites  are  still  significant:  improvement  of  bone marrow infiltrates, major resolution in lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly or hepatomegaly. All disease-related symptoms resolved in 44% of the patients with such baseline characteristics in the pivotal study and the specific B-symptoms resolved in 74%. Haemoglobin improvement by at least one  grade  occurred  across  the  protocols  in  63%  of  the  patients  with  baseline  grade  2-4  anaemia. Improvement in thrombocytopenia to grade 2 or better occurred in 65% of the patients with grade 3 or 4 at baseline and improvement in neutropenia to grade 2 or better occurred in 80% of the patients with grade 3-4 at baseline. Another clinical benefit was the prolongation of the length of the chemotherapyfree  period  (related  to  the  duration  of  remission),  which  was  4.0  months  in  the  last  series  before MabCampath and 11.7 months in median following MabCampath treatment. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  applicant  has  committed  to  further  development  of  MabCampath  and  has  presented  a  clinical programme that includes 3 studies.

CAM307 is a randomised Phase III trial investigating MabCampath efficacy versus chlorambucil as front-line therapy in patients with progressive B-CLL as measured by progression-free survival (PFS).

<!-- image -->

CAM213 is  an  ongoing Phase II pharmacokinetic and efficacy study, which will be provided to the CPMP within one year post-authorisation. CAM002 is an ongoing randomised crossover study to evaluate IVand SC administration. Clinical safety The primary studies used for assessment are the same three efficacy studies: CAM211, 125-005 and 125-009, which included 149 previously treated B-CLL patients. In addition, data are presented from 36 CLL patients plus further 139 other patients in the Phase I/II studies 125-001, 125-002 and 125003.  Furthermore  data  are  available  from  55  patients  in  the  follow-up  study  125-004,  from  177 patients in compassionate need programmes and 7 other oncology studies and finally there are data from  140  patients  in  three  studies  of  rheumatoid  arthritis.  Thus,  at  least  700  patients  have  been exposed to MabCampath. The data presented below are based on the three B-CLL studies. Discontinuations The  occurrence  of  adverse  events  was  the  major  factor  contributing  to  patient  discontinuation  of treatment:  26.9%  of  patients  in  study  CAM211,  31.3%  in  study  005  and  37.5%  in  study  009.  The majority of events were most commonly due to infections. Adverse events,serious adverse events and deaths Overall adverse events 148/149 CLL patients had at least one adverse event on study. The maximum severity was grade 1-2 in 50 patients, grade 3 in 50 and grade 4 in 48. The most frequently reported adverse events were the infusion-related  events  of  fever    (85.2%),  rigor  (85.9%),  nausea  (53.7%),  vomiting  (40.9%),  rash (32.2%)  and  hypotension  (31.5%).  Frequently  occurring  infections  include:  pneumonia  (16.1%), sepsis (14.8%) and herpes simplex infection (11.4%). The  very  common  ( &gt; 10%),  common  ( &gt; 1-10%)  and  uncommon  ( &gt; 0.1-1%)  drug-related  adverse reactions are reported in full in the SPC, Section 4.8. Infusion-related reactions Acute  infusion-related  reactions  usually  occur  during  the  first  week  of  therapy  and  substantially decline thereafter. Very commonly reported reactions have been acute infusion-related reactions including fever, rigors, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, fatigue, rash, urticaria, dyspnoea, headache, pruritus and diarrhoea. The  majority  of  these  reactions  are  mild  to  moderate  in  severity.  Grade  3  or  4  infusion-related reactions are uncommon  after the first week of therapy. Appropriate recommendations on premedication and dose escalation in  order to avoid  or  ameliorate  these events,  are  included  in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Haematological reactions

Severe bleeding reactions have been reported. One patient developed fatal idiopathic thrombocytopenic  purpura  (ITP)  following  MabCampath  therapy.    Pancytopenia  has  been  reported commonly and may be grade 3 or 4 in severity or serious in nature. A positive Coombs test is also a common event; clinically apparent haemolysis has not been reported in patients treated to date.

<!-- image -->

Cardiovascular reactions Decrease  in  blood  pressure  (BP)  was  most  common  in  week  one,  where  19%  had  systolic  values below 90 mm Hg and 60.0% diastolic values below 60 mm. The corresponding values for week 2 were  9.2%  and  52.9%.  For  all  subsequent  weeks  the  proportion  of  patients,  who  had  at  least  one reading below these limits were 13.5% for systolic BP and 57.3% for diastolic BP. Infections CLL is accompanied by a general immunosuppression inherent in the disease and worsened by the cytostatic treatment. Both bacterial and viral infections are therefore common, affecting about 80% of the patients and infection is the cause of death in up to 60% of the cases. 59% the 149 previously treated patients experienced at least one infection while on study medication, which in 42/88 was of grade 3 or 4. Most of these last patients (82%) had Rai stage III/IV disease and most  were  non-responders  to  MabCampath.  Thus,  only  6/48  patients  with  a  major  response  had  a grade  3-4  infection  against  36/101  non-responders.  Pneumonia  was  the  most  frequent  infection. Pneumocystis  carinii  pneumonia  (PCP)  occurred  in  5  patients,  none  of  who  had  received  effective prophylaxis. The on-study infections contributed to death in 8 patients. Among the 15 blood borne infections 8 appeared related to indwelling catheters. Opportunistic infections were seen on study in 21 patients and included PCP 5, CMV 8, aspergillus 3, herpes zoster 3, candidiasis 1, mucomycosis 1). In  the  interval  from  1  to  6  months  after  last  treatment,  12  patients  were  found  to  have  pneumonia, including 2 PCP (none received prophylaxis) and 2 aspergillus. 8 patients had sepsis, 6 patients had herpes zoster and 1 patient had a Listeria meningitis. Serious reactions and all serious infections: The following table summarises the on study serious drug-related reactions and all serious infections, which occurred in more than 1% of patients: Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE 10 : SUMMARY OF ON-STUDY DRUG-RELATED SERIOUS ADVERSE REACTIONS AND ALL SERIOUS INFECTIONS IN STUDIES CAM211, 005, AND 009 BY MAXIMUM NCI/WHO GRADE (POPULATION:  B-CLL PATIENTS (n = 149)

| WHOPreferred Term              | No. of Patients   | %of Patients   | Maximum NCI/WHO Grade   | Maximum NCI/WHO Grade   | Maximum NCI/WHO Grade   | Maximum NCI/WHO Grade   | Maximum NCI/WHO Grade   |
|--------------------------------|-------------------|----------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                                |                   |                | 1                       | 2                       | 3                       | 4                       | NR                      |
| Total Pts with related SAEs a  | 73                | 49.0           | --                      | 13                      | 24                      | 33                      | 3                       |
| Fever                          | 29                | 19.5           | 1                       | 19                      | 6                       | 1                       | 2                       |
| Pneumonia                      | 20                | 13.4           | 1                       | 2                       | 6                       | 9                       | 2                       |
| Sepsis                         | 18                | 12.1           | 1                       | 3                       | 5                       | 9                       | --                      |
| Granulocytopenia               | 10                | 6.7            | --                      | 1                       | 2                       | 5                       | 2                       |
| Cytomegalovirus infection      | 8                 | 5.4            | --                      | 3                       | 4                       | 1                       | --                      |
| Dyspnoea                       | 7                 | 4.7            | --                      | 1                       | 1                       | 5                       | --                      |
| Neutropenic fever              | 7                 | 4.7            | --                      | 5                       | 2                       | --                      | --                      |
| Thrombocytopenia               | 7                 | 4.0            | --                      | --                      | 1                       | 5                       | --                      |
| Rigors                         | 5                 | 3.4            | --                      | 4                       | 1                       | --                      | --                      |
| Hypotension                    | 5                 | 3.4            | 1                       | --                      | 3                       | 1                       | --                      |
| Pneumonitis                    | 5                 | 3.4            | --                      | --                      | 3                       | 2                       | --                      |
| Anaemia                        | 4                 | 2.7            | --                      | --                      | 2                       | 2                       | --                      |
| Asthaenia                      | 3                 | 2.0            | --                      | 3                       | --                      | --                      | --                      |
| Abdominal pain                 | 3                 | 2.0            | --                      | 1                       | 1                       | 1                       | --                      |
| Pneumocystis carinii infection | 3                 | 2.0            | --                      | --                      | 2                       | 1                       | --                      |
| Pancytopenia                   | 3                 | 2.0            | --                      | 1                       | --                      | 2                       | --                      |
| Dehydration                    | 2                 | 1.3            | -- longer               | --                      | 2                       | --                      | --                      |
| Confusion                      | 2                 | 1.3            | --                      | 1                       | --                      | 1                       | --                      |
| Moniliasis                     | 2                 | 1.3            | 1                       | --                      | 1                       | --                      | --                      |
| Sinusitis                      | 2                 | 1.3 no         | --                      | 1                       | --                      | 1                       | --                      |
| GI haemorhage                  | 2                 | 1.3            | --                      | 1                       | --                      | 1                       | --                      |
| Leucopenia                     | 2                 | 1.3            | --                      | --                      | --                      | 2                       | --                      |

Deaths 15 (10.1%) of the 149 B-CLL patients died during or within 30 days of treatment with MabCampath. None of these patients had had an objective response to treatment. The causes of death were:disease progression (5  patients),  pneumonia  (4),  sepsis  (2),  pulmonary  embolism  (1),  cerebral  haemorrhage (1), suicide (1) and rhinocerebral mucormycosis. Eight of the deaths, including 7 infection-associated, were considered related to the treatment with MabCampath. In the follow-up period starting 30 days post-treatment  7  deaths  were  reported  that  were  assessed  as  possibly  related  to  treatment  with MabCampath.  6  patients  died  from  infection  and  one  patient  from  idiopathic  thrombocytopenic purpura (bleeding). 6/7 patients had not responded to MabCampath treatment. Anti-MabCampath antibodies In studies 005 and 009, 80 serum samples from 19 patients with CLL were analysed for the presence of anti-MAbCampath  antibodies. 79/80 samples were negative and one sample had a low concentration of antibody. In 7 other studies, including both CLL and NHL, 192 patients were examined. Three positive samples were found, two in very low titres and one with a high concentration in a sample obtained 5 months after the treatment, where the sample one-month post treatment had been negative. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Haematological changes

The  haemoglobin  concentration  initially  decreased  slightly,  but  then  increased  to  values  above  the baseline.

The  absolute  neutrophil  count  (ANC)  demonstrated  the  same  development.  If  only  grade  3-4 neutropenia is considered the percentage changed from 18.9% at baseline to 37.4% in week 1-2 and to about 50% in the following weeks and then at the 2 month interval a decrease to about 22.5%. These numbers are for all patients, but neutropenia is most pronounced in non-responders. The platelet count also showed an initial decrease and thereafter a constant improvement. At baseline 24.2% of patients had grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia, but this reduced to 9.9% at the 2-month point only 11/17 patients (64.7%) had improved from grade 3-4 to grade 2 or better. The median values for lymphocyte counts reflect the expected pharmacologic, lymphocytolytic effect of alemtuzumab with a decrease down to 0.1 x 10 9 /l at week 4. In  CAM211,  flow  cytometry  was  used  to  follow  the  recovery  of  the  normal  T-  helper  and  Tsuppressor cells (CD4+ and CD8+ respectively). Both decreased to very low values in week 4, but then gradually recovered and by month 6 they had returned to about 80% of the baseline values. Safety information from other studies Detailed presentation of safety data from studies 125-001,125-002, 125-003 and 125-004 with a total of 230 patients with CLL and NHL demonstrated a pattern similar to that described above. Safety data were also collected from 120 patients in compassionate use programmes, from 57 patients in other oncology studies and from 140 patients in rheumatoid arthritis studies, but were not reported in detail. In the rheumatoid arthritis studies, 5 patients developed malignancies, but an analysis with comparison to a control group concluded that the incidence was not increased. Discussion on clinical safety Although there is no apparent significant increase in the risk of severe infections following sequential therapy with fludarabine and MabCampath, the analyses presented do not rule out the possibility of cumulative immunosuppression. The issue is addressed in the SPC, Section 4.4, but this potential risk needs  close  monitoring  in  future  clinical  trials. The  programme  of  monitoring  CD4+  and  CD8+ lymphocytes  and  the  planned  pharmacovigilance  programme  with  respect  to  infections  has  been presented. Although there is no evidence of a HAMA response, the sample size was small. Further data will be forthcoming from the ongoing study CAM213. 5. Overall conclusion and benefit/risk assessment The  quality  of  MabCampath  is  considered  to  be  acceptable  when  used  in  accordance  with  the conditions  defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  safety  and  batch-to-batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  tests  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications. The applicant has made a commitment to provide additional information on an ongoing basis. Medicinal product no longer authorise

Overall, the primary pharmacodynamic studies provided adequate information on the affinity and the binding to human cells and tissues, normal as neoplastic and on the in vivo lymphocytolytic effect in cynomolgous monkey which was the most relevant species for pre-clinical efficacy and safety studies because of the lack of expression of the CD52 antigen on non-primate species.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Lymphocytopenia was the most common drug-related effect in this species. Higher doses (10 and 30 mg/kg) caused moderate to severe dose-related hypotension, which persisted for up to 3.5 hours and was  accompanied  by  slight  tachycardia.  Although  the  pre-clinical  acute  toxicity  studies  did  not indicate major risks, hypotension and tachycardia were the most frequent adverse events also in man.

<!-- image -->

Alemtuzumab  binding  was  observed  in  lymphoid  tissues  and  the  mononuclear  phagocyte  system. Significant  binding  was  also  observed  in  the  male  reproductive  tract  (epididymis,  sperm,  seminal vesicle) and the skin. This information has been included in the SPC. No other findings, from toxicity studies, provide information of significant relevance to clinical use. Ongoing  studies  include  a  Phase  II  study  on  pharmacokinetics  and  efficacy  (CAM213)  and,  a randomised  crossover  pharmacokinetics  and  pharmacodynamics  study  investigating  the  IV  and  SC route of administration (CAM002). The results will be reported to the CPMP on an ongoing basis. MabCampath  is  associated  with  an  outstanding  response  rate  and  substantial  reduction  in  disease burden in all sites of involvement in the majority of patients. Meaningful clinical benefits are realised for many patients including both responders and non-responders according to the NCIWG criteria. The applicant has complied with the CPMP advice given in 1998. It was considered that a comparative Phase III prior to approval was not feasible or necessary since an acceptable comparator cannot be identified in this population and best supportive care is considered unethical. The  applicant  has  committed,  as  part  of  the  specific  obligations,  to  perform  a  randomised  trial (CAM307)  to  investigate  MabCampath  vs  chlorambucil  as  front-line  therapy  in  patients  with progressive B-CLL as measured by progression-free survival. Safety and efficacy will be assessed by an independent data safety monitoring board on a regular basis. Particular attention will be given to infection  and  bone  marrow  toxicity. It is anticipated  that this will  elucidate  the position  of MabCampath in the treatment of CLL. Benefit-risk assessment In a population of heavily pre-treated patients with CLL, MabCampath has shown outstanding antileukaemia  activity.  The  response  rate  and  duration  was  independent  of  previous  treatment  as  the molecule  has  a  completely  different  mechanism  of  action.  The  response  rate  was  higher  in  earlier stages of the disease. The  main  safety  issue  with  MabCampath  is  the  risk  of  infections  in  the  context  of  the  general immunosuppression, which is inherent in the disease and worsened by the cytostatic treatment. The  majority  of  infusion  related  reactions  were  mild  to  moderate  in  severity  and  appropriate recommendations on premedication and dose escalation in order to avoid or ameliorate these events, are included in the SPC. Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile was favourable for MabCampath in the treatment of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) who have been treated with alkylating agents and who have failed to achieve  a  complete  or  partial  response  or  achieved  only  a  short  remission  (less  than  6  months) following fludarabine phosphate therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->