---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:41:12
document_pages: 39
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/macugen-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: macugen-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 23.9217628
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 17:49:59.647823
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1. Introduction

## Age-related macular degeneration

Age-related  macular  degeneration  (AMD)  is  a  disease  characterized  by  progressive  degenerative abnormalities in the macula, a small area in the central portion of the retina with the highest visual acuity.

AMD is the major cause of vision loss in the elderly population in the Western world. Although the disease  rarely  results  in  complete  blindness  and  peripheral  vision  may  remain  unaffected,  central vision is gradually blurred, severely affecting ordinary daily activities.

AMD  is  characteristically  a  disease  occurring  in  older  patients.  Population-based  epidemiologic studies  have  provided  estimates  of  prevalence  and  incidence  of  AMD  among  various  racial/ethnic groups around the world and have shown that AMD is rare before 55 years of age, that it is more common in persons 75 years of age or older, and that it is less common in blacks than whites.

AMD is classified as two different types: the non-exudative (or dry) form and the exudative (or wet) form of the disease. The dry from is the most prevalent, accounting for 90% of cases of the disease. It is  not  uncommon  that  the  dry  form  develops  into  the  wet,  neo-vascular  form  of  AMD.  Exudative AMD, the neovascular form of the disease, is responsible for the majority of cases of severe vision loss. Exudative AMD is characterized by the formation of a choroidal neovascular network beneath the retina (CNV). This neovascular membrane leaks blood and fluid under the retina and eventually progresses  to  scar  formation  with  destruction  of  the  macula  and  loss  of  vision.  The  prevalence  of exudative AMD in developed countries rises exponentially with age, with near absence at age 50 to 1% at age 70 and 5% at age 80.

Pegaptanib  belongs  to  the  pharmacotherapeutic  group  of  \"other  ophthalmologicals\",  ATC  code: 01XA17.    Pegaptanib  is  a  pegylated  modified  oligonucleotide  that  binds  with  high  specificity  and affinity to extracellular Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF165) inhibiting its activity. VEGF is a secreted protein that induces angiogenesis, vascular permeability and inflammation, all of which are thought to contribute to the progression of the neovascular (wet) form of AMD. VEGF165 is the VEGF isoform preferentially involved in pathological ocular neovascularisation. The selective inhibition in animals  with  pegaptanib  proved  as  effective  at  suppressing  pathological  neovascularisation  as  panVEGF inhibition, however pegaptanib spared the normal vasculature whereas pan-VEGF inhibition did not.

The pathogenesis of CNV formation is poorly understood and involves, among many factors, vascular growth factors (including but not limited to VEGF), proteases (serine- and metallo-proteases and their inhibitors) and inflammation (inflammatory cells, bone marrow-derived progenitors, chemokines). There  is  no  curative  treatment  for  AMD.  Treatment  available  includes  low  vision  rehabilitation.  A certain percentage of patients with exudative AMD can benefit from laser treatment with traditional photocoagulation  laser  or  photodynamic  therapy  (PDT).  Photodynamic  therapy  with  verteporfin (Visudyne ™ )  has  been  approved  for  the  treatment  of  predominantly  classic  or  occult  subfoveal exudative  (neovascular)  AMD  on  the  basis  of  decreased  visual  deterioration  in  treated  patients compared to controls.  AMD is currently an area with a need for more efficacious treatments and for treatments applicable to all forms of neovascular AMD. Pegaptanib Medicinal product no longer authorised

To increase the intravitreal residence time, a 40 kD branched polyethylene glycol (PEG) molecule has been  conjugated  to  the  oligonucleotide.  Pegaptanib  has  the  following  sequence  of  nucleotides  and functional groups:

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

5'-[40kD]-[HN-(CH2)5O]-pCfpGmpGmpArpArpUfpCfpAmpGmpUfpGmpAmpAm pUfpGmpCfpUfpUfpAmpUfpAmpCfpAmpUfpCfpCfpGm3'-p-dT

## where

- [40kD] represents the two 20 kD PEG chains.
- [HN-(CH2)5O] represents the amino linker connecting PEG and the oligonucleotide via a phosphodiester bond.
- p represents the negatively charged phosphodiester functional groups that have Na + counter ions.
- Gm or Am and Cf or Uf and Ar  represent 2-methoxy, 2-fluoro and 2-hydroxy variants of their respective purines and pyrimidines.
- C, A, U and G code for cytidylic, adenylic, uridylic and guanylic acids.

<!-- image -->

A  clinical  development  program  to  investigate  the  use  of  pegaptanib  sodium  in  the  treatment  of exudative  AMD began in 1999.  The  nonclinical  program  began  in  1996  and  spans  the  duration  of clinical development. The development program has been conducted entirely in male and female over 50-yr patients with exudative AMD (N= 1210) instead of normal volunteers as the product is delivered by  an  intravitreous  injection.  The  risks  of  such  injections  were  felt  to  be  inappropriate  for  healthy volunteers. GMP inspections were performed at the site of manufacture of the active substance and of the finished product manufacturing site.  Both sites were found to operate in compliance with EU GMP. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Introduction Pegaptanib is a synthetic oligonucleotide.  Pharmaceutically, the product is presented as a sterilised injection 3.47 mg/ml (based on the oligonucleotide weight). The proposed posology is 0.3 mg,  every six  weeks  by  means  of  an  intravitreal  injection  (IVT)  into  the  eye  using  a  single-dose,  pre-filled syringe.  Each syringe contains a nominal delivered volume of 90 µl. The drug product is presented in a 1 ml glass barrel syringe sealed with a rubber plunger stopper. The syringe has a fixed needle with a rubber needle shield and a rigid plastic outer shield. A plastic syringe plunger and flange adapter are also supplied for administration purposes. Evidence has suggested a causal role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in several diseases of the human eye in which neovascularization and increased vascular permeability occur. Pegaptanib has been developed to bind and block the activity of extracellular VEGF, specifically the 165-aminoacid isoform (VEGF165). Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Active Substance

The active substance is present as the sodium salt, Pegaptanib Sodium, and is a 28-mer oligonucleotide aptamer (L. aptus, to fit; Gk. meros, part or region) covalently linked to two 20-kD polyethylene  glycol  (PEG)  chains.  Two  of  the  nucleotides  are  ribonucleotides,  one  is  a  deoxy ribonucleotide, while the rest of the nucleotides contain modified sugars. The modified sugars confer increased resistance towards nuclease degradation of the oligonucleotide. The different nucleotides are linked via 5'- to 3'-phosphodiester linkages to yield the 28-mer oligonucleotide. The 3'-end thymidine contains  a  3'-3-linkage  to  the  penultimate  2'methoxyguanosine.  The  5'-end  of  the  oligonucleotide contains a lysine residue (pentylaminolinker), whose amino groups serve to attach the two PEG units.

Pegaptanib  sodium  is  hydrophilic  and  very  soluble  in  water  and  soluble  in  a  number  of  organic solvents.

- Manufacture

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The manufacture of pegaptanib sodium includes the following steps

- -Oligonucleotide Synthesis, Purification of nonPEGylated Oligonucleotide, PEGylation Reaction, PEGylated Oligonucleotide Purification and drying.

The  oligonucleotide is manufactured  by  solid phase organic synthesis using well-established methodology.

- Characterisation

The  drug  substance  is  an  aptamer,  meaning  it  is  the  secondary  structure  (i.e.  folding)  of  the oligonucleotide chain that governs the structure which is required for its effect on binding to VEGF165. The folding is in turn governed by the primary structure (i.e. nucleotide sequence); hence structural characterisation of drug substance involves determination of primary as well as secondary structure.

The methodologies applied for structural characterisation are well covered. The molecular sequence for  the  pegaptanib  sodium  molecule  was  established  through  a  combination  of  spectroscopic, physicochemical  and  biological  techniques.  The  impurities  present  in  oligonucleotides  have  been investigated.

· Specification A  variety  of  tests  have  confirmed  the  qualitative  and  quantitative  characteristics  of  the  active substance by means of a combination of relevant physicochemical and biological methods. Batch  analyses  indicate  satisfactory  compliance  with  the  agreed  specification  and  uniformity  from batch to batch. · Stability The active substance is stored in sealed glass vials. Validated stability-indicating methods have been developed and stress studies have demonstrated that it is prone to degradation from light, oxidation and heat (40 o C/75%RH). Formal studies according to ICH guidelines have been performed at -20 °C (± 5 °C), recommended storage conditions, and 5 °C (± 3 °C), accelerated storage conditions, for three batches. Supportive data for three batches stored at recommended and accelerated storage conditions, up to 24 months is also presented. The results confirm the retest period and storage conditions of the active substance. Medicinal Product · Pharmaceutical Development Aptamers bind  with  high  specificity  and  affinity  to target  molecules,  including  proteins,  and  as expected,  the  binding  relies  on the  specific  three-dimensional  conformation  of  the  properly folded aptamer.    In  order  to  prolong  activity  at  the  site  of  action,  the sugar  backbone  of  pegaptanib  was modified to prevent degradation by endogenous endonucleases and exonucleases, and the polyethylene glycol moieties were added to increase the half-life of the drug in the vitreous humour. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

A sterile aqueous parenteral solution was developed as a rational presentation for this product.

Compatability  studies  have  demonstrate  that  monobasic  sodium  phosphate  monohydrate,  dibasic sodium  phosphate  heptahydrate,  sodium  chloride,  hydrochloric  acid  and  sodium  hydroxide,  at  the concentrations used in the formulation, are all compatible with pegaptanib sodium in solution.

Due to the instability of the active substance to terminal sterilisation , an aseptic, filter sterilisation process has been developed.

- Manufacture of the Product

Macugen  is  manufactured  by  dissolving  pegaptanib  sodium  into  a  physiologically-compatible solution. This is followed by pH adjustment, assay, and dilution to the desired strength.  The solution is  sterilized  by  filtration  and  filled  into  syringes  under  aseptic  conditions.  The  syringes  are  labelled and then packaged into a foil pouch.  The process uses conventional equipment and facilities. There are no unduly critical steps and the validation of this standard process is satisfactory.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Product Specification

The specification of the product is based on that of the active substance with additional pharmaceutical tests.  Fully  characterised  reference  standards  are  used  in  the  tests.  In  addition  the  specification  also includes tests for delivered volume, osmolality, pH, sterility, endotoxin, and particulate contamination..

Batch  analyses  indicate  satisfactory  compliance  with  the  agreed  specification  and  uniformity  from batch to batch.

## · Stability of the Product

Stability results have been provided for three primary stability lots at the 0.3 mg strength the product in  the  configuration  as  intended  for  market.    In  addition  three  supportive  stability  lots  at  the  1  mg strength are presented in the proposed commercial packaging (syringe in foil pouch).

Tests  were  performed  at  2  -  8 o C  long  term,  and  25 o C  accelerated,  under  ICH  conditions  and  the characteristics were monitored using stability-indicating methods.

<!-- image -->

The non-clinical  pharmacokinetics  and  toxicity  of  pegaptanib  was  evaluated  after  of  both  IVT  and intravenous (IV) administration with the main studies performed in rats, rabbits and dogs. A limited reproductive  toxicology  program was conducted. While no carcinogenicity studies were performed, pegaptanib and its potential metabolites, the component's nucleosides, were evaluated with respect to genotoxicity. Most pivotal non-clinical studies were done according to GLP.

Results support the shelf-life and storage conditions as defined in the SPC. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects This  synthetic  peptide  has  been  manufactured  characterised  and  controlled  in  a  way  that  indicates satisfactory purity and uniformity, and the medicinal product has been developed utilising molecular development  aspects  in  addition  to  standard  pharmaceutical  ones  in  order  to  achieve  the  desired clinical effect. The finished product is  manufactured and tested in a way that indicates a reliable and reproducible product in the clinic, throughout the shelflife. Macugen should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration (see SPC section 6.6). In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products. At the time of the CHMP opinion, a number of minor quality issues related chiefly to method development and validation and ongoing stability studies were unresolved; the applicant agreed to resolve these as FollowUp Measures within an agreed timeframe. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects Introduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacology

Inhibition of VEGF has been shown to, at least partially, prevent neovascularisation in several models, both in models using pegaptanib, as those submitted with this application, but also in published studies utilising antibodies and small molecules.

The  aptamer  of  pegaptanib  was  isolated  from  RNA  libraries  containing  random  nucleotides  and further modified to obtain high selectivity and affinity (picomolar region) towards especially VEGF165. Addition of the PEG-moiety reduced the affinity ~4-fold.

The  pharmacology  studies  were  undertaken  to  demonstrate  the  following  attributes  of  pegaptanib sodium:

- High affinity and selectivity for the VEGF165 isoform over VEGF121 isoform.
- -In vitro functional studies to confirm that pegaptanib's high affinity for this isoform translates to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

VEGF165 antagonism.

## -In vivo

- studies to demonstrate functional antagonism of VEGF- mediated changes in

angiogenesis and vascular permeability.

## · Primary pharmacodynamics ( in vitro/in vivo )

The pharmacological characterisation of pegaptanib included in vitro studies on pegaptanib binding to VEGF165  and  related  ligands,  inhibition  of  VEGF-binding  to  its  receptors,  inhibition  of  functional effects  following  VEGF165  binding  to  its  receptors  (cellular  proliferation,  calcium  flux,  and  tissue factor gene expression), and in vivo effects on vascular permeability and angiogenesis.

## -In vitro studies

The  series  of in  vitro studies  that  characterized  pegaptanib  antiangiogenic  and  anti-permeability pharmacology included studies on binding affinity and selectivity of pegaptanib to VEGF165 relative to other  VEGF  isoforms  and  associated  proteins,  pegaptanib  VEGF165  antagonist  activity  in  human umbilical  vascular  endothelial  cell  (HUVEC)  proliferation  and  tissue  factor  expression  assays, pegaptanib  inhibitory  effects  on  VEGF  binding  to  VEGF  receptor  Fc  constructs,  and  pegaptanib inhibition of calcium mobilization in HUVECs.

In vivo, administration of pegaptanib sodium inhibited hypoxia-induced retinal neovascularization in a murine  model  of  retinopathy  of  prematurity,  VEGF-induced  corneal  angiogenesis  in  a  rat  corneal pocket model, and dermal vascular leakage in a dermal vascular permeability (modified Miles) assay in guinea pigs.  Pegaptanib has not been tested in an animal model for choroidal neovascularisation. In the hypoxia induced neovascularisation model (retinopathy of prematurity, ROP) in rodents, the key role  of  VEGF in abnormal vascular growth was confirmed. The Applicant has generated additional data  showing  that  the  intravitreal  injections  in  the  ROP  model  caused  a  high  variability  and  poor recovery of intravitreal concentrations of pegaptanib. Therefore, the i.p. route of administration was chosen.  In  the  new  studies,  ocular  neovascularisation  could  be  prevented  and  a  50%  inhibition  of retinal vascular growth was achieved at 0.21 nM (~1.95 ng/ml). Extrapolation of data indicates that levels above the IC50-values are obtained clinically at a 6-week dosing interval if the human vitreous T½  exceeds  4  days.  Even  if  the  data  obtained  have  their  weaknesses,  the  submitted  study  is reasonable.  Further,  the  Applicant  plans  a  program  to  evaluate  the  applicability  of 19 F-pegaptanib MRS to obtain repeated non-invasive measures of pegaptanib levels in the human eye.

Pegaptanib binds in vitro to purified recombinant VEGF165 with high affinity but does not bind to the smaller isoform VEGF121 or any of the VEGF-related proteins tested (VEGF-B, VEGF-C, and PlGF). Pegaptanib also binds to VEGF188, the murine ortholog of human VEGF189, which is normally bound to  the  cell  surface.  Binding  to  VEGF188  was  significant,  albeit  less  than  obtained  with  purified VEGF165.  Pegaptanib effectively inhibits VEGF165 binding to its cellular receptors, as seen with both purified  constructs  of  the  Flt-1  (VEGFR-1),  KDR  (VEGFR-2)  and  NP-1  receptors  and  on  the  cell surface of cultured human endothelial cells. Pegaptanib sodium has a three-dimensional conformation that enables it to bind VEGF165 much like an antibody. In  addition,  VEGF165-induced  cellular  proliferation,  calcium  mobilization,  and  tissue  factor  gene expression  are  effectively  inhibited  in  cultured  human  umbilical  vein  endothelial  cells  (HUVECs) treated  with  pegaptanib  sodium.    No  investigations  have  been  carried  out  on  choroidal  endothelial cells. The binding of the aptamer portion of pegaptanib is strong, short-lived and reversible. There is no data to show that the sequence does not bind to any off-target ligands/receptors. -In vivo studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Secondary pharmacodynamics

Even though pegaptanib is highly selective for VEGF165 compared to closely related targets, no data was presented  to  show  that  it  does  not  bind  to  any  off-target  ligands/receptors,  or  whether  the  depegylated (intact or degraded) aptamer may have antisense properties.

## · Safety pharmacology

Pegaptanib sodium was evaluated in animal models for cardiovascular, respiratory and neurobehavioral effects, at  IV  administered  doses with associated systemic exposures up to 10-fold

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

above the exposures observed after a 3 mg/eye clinical dose. All studies were claimed to be performed according to GLP. Pegaptanib did not affect these parameters, nor were any renal parameter changes found following up to 3 mg/eye of pegaptanib administered to animals as frequently as every 2 weeks.

## · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions

No pharmacodynamic interaction studies were performed. The Applicant claimed that no pharmacodynamic  drug  interactions  are  expected  based  on  the    high  specificity  of  pegaptanib  and affinity for VEGF165 other than interactions associated with the use of agents with VEGF agonistic or anti-agonistic activity.  Inhibitors of other anti-angiogenic growth factors as well as anti-VEGF agents may  enhance  the  anti-angiogenic  activity  and  some  pharmacodynamic  actions  of  pegaptanib  when given concomitantly.  .

There is a high probability that pegaptanib will be combined with currently applied therapies for AMD (e.g. PDT). However, in clinical trials, the concomitant use of PDT and pegaptanib did not seem to induce particular safety concerns, nor introduce particular biases. The Applicant has indicated that a randomised  and  double  blind  clinical  study  has  been  initiated  to  compare  the  risks  and  benefits  of pegaptanib in the presence and absence of PDT treatments.

The plasma terminal half-life of pegaptanib following IVT administration was ~2 to 4 days in animals, reflecting the slow exit from the vitreous into systemic circulation.

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics of pegaptanib have been characterised after IV and IVT administration to rabbits, dogs and monkeys and after IV administration to mouse. Analytical procedures were generated to determine pegaptanib in plasma, vitreous fluid and amniotic fluid. Pegaptanib was analysed with HPLC (unchanged molecule) and with a dual hybridisation assay (DH, oligonucleotide portion of pegaptanib). Additional methods to analyse serum antibodies to pegaptanib (ELISA) and 2'-FU (LC-MS/MS) were developed. There is no assay to measure the other individual nucleosides. Overall, the analytical assays are considered sufficiently validated, but large variations are allowed. The antibody assay has several weaknesses and its usefulness is not clear. Besides the lack of positive control, there is no LOQ and it is not known if plasma pegaptanib affects the assay, or whether the assay recognises pegaptanib-antibody complexes. Nevertheless, a significant antibody response is not expected and difficulties in developing an assay are recognised. · Absorption- Bioavailability Pegaptanib plasma and vitreous PK were characterized in a broad range of animal species: mice, rat, rabbit,  dog  and  monkey.    Following  IVT  administration,  pegaptanib  was  slowly  absorbed  into  the systemic circulation. Systemic bioavailability was high in all species and varied between 70 - 100% as determined from comparisons of AUC values after IV and IVT administration. There were no apparent signs of accumulation of pegaptanib in plasma after repeated dosing to rabbits, dogs and monkeys and there were no significant gender differences. Medicinal product no longer authorised

After IV administration, plasma pegaptanib increased linearly with dose. Clearance was not affected by  dose.  In  a  rat  study,  elimination  half  lives  increased  with  the  weight  of  the  PEG-moiety.  In  all species, the pharmacokinetic profile was similar, even though the half-life of pegaptanib was shorter in the dog. The volume of distribution approximately equalled the plasma volume (close to 60 ml/kg), suggesting little tissue distribution of pegaptanib.

Interspecies  differences  in  the  pegaptanib  plasma  pharmacokinetic  profile  suggest  that  in  the  dog pegaptanib  exits  the  eye  and  enters  the  systemic  circulation  more  rapidly  than  that  seen  in  other species.

## · Distribution

In distribution studies, pegaptanib was labelled with 14 C in the lysine residue. After  IVT administration, radioactivity was mainly located in the vitreous fluid, retina and aqueous humour at 24 hours post-dose. Over the study duration of 6 weeks, radioactivity remained high in the retina, but

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

diffused particularly to the sclera and choroid, iris and optic nerve. The 15 days half-life of pegaptanib related  radioactivity  in  sclera/choroid  may  support  a  low  frequency  posology.  A  lower  increase  of radioactivity over the study duration was observed in the cornea and also in the lens at the last time point,  suggesting a diffusion of pegaptanib also to the anterior part of the eye. Compared to ocular levels of radioactivity, extraocular tissue levels of radioactivity were very low. After both IVT and IV administrations,  the  highest  systemic  concentrations  of  radioactivity  (AUC)  were  obtained  in  the kidney  &gt;  spleen  &gt;  bone  marrow  (vertebra)  &gt;  lymph  node  (mesenteric)  and  liver.  The  lowest concentrations  were  found  in  the  brain,  spinal  cord,  skeletal  muscle  (dorsal)  and  bone  (vertebra). Following IV administration, low levels of radioactivity were also found in the eye. Generally, after IV  administration,  the  tissue  to  plasma  ratios  increased  over  the  study  interval  suggesting  that radioactivity was cleared faster from plasma than from tissues. No such consistent pattern was seen after IVT administration. Pegaptanib does not seem to be associated with red blood cells or melanin.

Pegaptanib is designed to remain in the eye for an extended period of time and to be cleared from the eye by slow passive diffusion into the systemic circulation, from where it should rapidly be cleared.

Pegaptanib  is  probably  not  highly  associated  with  plasma  proteins  as  indicated  by  its  capacity  to inhibit VEGF induced tissue factor expression both in the presence or absence of plasma proteins.

Low levels of pegaptanib passes the placenta and approximately 0.04 % of the plasma levels were found in amniotic fluid 1 hour (=Tmax) after IV administration of 40 mg/kg pegaptanib to pregnant mice.

## · Metabolism ( in vitro/in vivo )

In vitro , pegaptanib appears to be metabolized to a greater extent in nuclease and in plasma of lower mammal  species  than  in  monkey  and  human  plasma.    Pegaptanib  is  metabolized in  vivo ;  the component nucleotide, 2'-FU was detected in plasma and urine of DB rabbit following IV and IVT pegaptanib  administration.  Both  pegaptanib  and  2'-FU  are  eliminated  primarily  by  the  kidney  and secondarily by the liver.

Pegaptanib appears to be more metabolically stable in monkeys as the pegaptanib plasma concentrations after IVT administration to both eyes are substantially higher in monkeys compared to other animals for a given IVT dose.

In the monkey, it appears that little if any pegaptanib is metabolized in the vitreous.  High absolute IVT bioavailability of pegaptanib 70% to 100% suggests only a small amount of metabolism is occurring in the vitreous of rabbits and dogs.  IVT

## · Excretion

Labelled pegaptanib was mainly excreted renally, both intact, as 2'-FU and as unidentified radioactivity. After iv. dosing, &gt; 90 % of the dose was recovered in urine. Excretion into bile and passage into breast milk were not investigated.

## Toxicology

The toxicology of pegaptanib was evaluated in mice, rats, rabbits, dogs and monkeys using the clinical route,  IVT,  and  using  SC  and  IV  pegaptanib  sodium  administration.    Because  pegaptanib  was  well tolerated, and because of limits on pegaptanib sodium dose size administrable to the vitreous chamber, no maximum tolerated dose was established.

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

## · Single dose toxicity

The acute systemic toxicity of pegaptanib sodium was low, with no adverse effects observed at the highest dose evaluated (450 mg/kg IV in rats).

| Study ID/ Report No   | Species/ Sex/Number/ Group      | Dose/Route                                                                 | GLP   | Major findings                                                                   |
|-----------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 109-97002-T           | Rabbits/NZW/ 6m                 | 0.5 mg in 40 µl, one eye, PBS in control eye IVT, ocular exam d. 1, 5, 12. | No    | No ocular pegaptanib - related effects. Injection- related effects in both eyes. |
| 109-98006-B (0647-35) | Monkeys/ Rhesus/ 6 f, non-naive | 0.5 mg /eye in 67 µl, IVT 7 or 28 d. observation                           | No    | None                                                                             |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| 109-980142-T (0699-35)   | Monkeys/ Rhesus 1/sex/group - cross over between lots, wash-out 29-35 d.   | 1 st lot: 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1 mg in 65 µl /eye, IVT 2 nd lot: 0.25, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 mg in 65 µl /eye, IVT Up to 29 d. observation.   | No   | No ocular pegaptanib- related effects. Slight injection-related effects in control and treated eyes.   |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 109-97003-T (804-001)    | Rats/SD, 5/sex/group                                                       | 0, 50, 150, 450 mg/kg, IV bolus                                                                                                 | Yes  | None                                                                                                   |
| 109-98011-T (0654-35)    | Monkeys/ Rhesus, 1 control/sex, 2 m+1f treated.                            | 0, 5 mg/kg, IV, 1 hr infusion, 7 d. observation                                                                                 | No   | None                                                                                                   |

## · Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics)

From the total of studies performed, the 6-month rabbit and 9-month dog studies are considered pivotal.

<!-- image -->

| Study ID/ Report No                                  | Species/Sex/ Number/Group                                                                                                            | Dose/Route                                                                                                                         | Duration                                                | NOAEL (drug)                                  | Major findings                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 109-98003-T                                          | Rabbits/DB, 5/sex/group                                                                                                              | Group 1: 0 Group 2: 0.1 (first 4 doses)/ 2 (2 doses) Group 3: 0.3 Group 4:1 mg/eye IVT in 50 µl                                    | 11 weeks 1 dose/2 weeks (6 doses)                       | 1 mg/eye for 6 doses and 2 mg/eye for 2 doses | Slight to moderate dose- dependent presence vitreal macrophages and mild cyclitis. Injection-related ocular effects. authorised                                                                         |
| 144-002 Non-GLP                                      | Dogs/Beagles, control 2f, treated 1/sex                                                                                              | 0, 2 mg in 100 µl/eye, IVT                                                                                                         | 3 weeks 1 dose/week (3 doses) longer                    | 2 mg/eye                                      | No treatment-related effects. Injection-related ocular effects.                                                                                                                                         |
| 109-98010-T Initial Lot: 11838.26 2 nd Lot: 97000690 | Monkeys/ Rhesus 0.5 mg: 4m+2f 1-2 mg: 4/sex Naïve animals (3/sex/group) were assigned to the 0, 0.1 and 0.25 mg/eye groups Medicinal | Initially: 0, 0.5, 1, 2 mg in 66 µl/eye, IVT After 1 st dose: 0.1 (dose 1-4), 1 (dose 5-6), 0.25, 0.5 in 66 µl/eye, IVT product no | 3 months (LD only) 1 dose/2 weeks (6 doses)             | 1 mg/eye after 2 doses                        | Dose-dependent endotoxin-induced ocular inflammation after 1 st dose. Severe at 1 and 2 mg. (Drug lot 11838.26) No treatment-related effects with Drug lot 97000690. Injection- related ocular effects. |
| 109-98004-T (804-002)                                | Rats/SD 10/sex/group                                                                                                                 | 0, 0.1, 1, 10 mg/kg/day, IV bolus                                                                                                  | 13 weeks                                                | 1 mg/kg                                       | 10 mg/kg: Organ weights ↑ . Trace chronic progressive nephropathy (m). From 1 mg/kg: mild lymphoid depletion (splenic white pulp) (m), vacuolated macrophages in several organs.                        |
| 0460LE15.001 Pivotal                                 | Rabbits/NZW, 7- 9/sex/group. Reversibility 2/sex in control and 2 mg groups.                                                         | 0, 0.2, 0.67, 2 mg in 67 µl/eye IVT                                                                                                | 6 months with 6 week recovery 1 dose/2 weeks (13 doses) | 2 mg OU                                       | No treatment-related effects. Injection-related ocular effects.                                                                                                                                         |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Study ID/ Report No   | Species/Sex/ Number/Group                                                  | Dose/Route                     | Duration                                                | NOAEL (drug)   | Major findings                                                                                                                                                       |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 0472DE15.001 Pivotal  | Dogs/Beagle 5-7/sex/group. Reversibility 2/sex in control and 3 mg groups. | 0, 0.3, 1, 3 in 100µl/eye, IVT | 9 months with 6 week recovery 1 dose/2 weeks (20 doses) | 3 mg OU        | Minimal to mild lymphocytic infiltration in a variety of tissues. Vitreal floaters/ strands. No other treatment- related effects. Injection- related ocular effects. |
| OU= both eyes         |                                                                            |                                |                                                         |                |                                                                                                                                                                      |

In IV dose studies, systemic effects were observed in rats only and were limited to vacuolated cells in multiple  organs  and  a  mild  increase  in  severity  and  incidence  of  chronic  progressive  nephropathy. There  were  no  pegaptanib  sodium-related  systemic  adverse  effects  observed  in  IVT  repeat-dose studies.  The vacuolated cells, observed in multiple organs in both male and female rats are considered to reflect phagocytosis of the 40 kD PEG moiety of the pegaptanib molecule by macrophages.  The increase in absolute organ weights noted in this study might have been associated with the vacuolated cells.  There was no cell damage associated with these vacuoles and this finding was not considered adverse. The slight to mild chronic progressive nephropathy was observed in all groups in the repeat IV  dose  rat  study  including  controls;  however,  in  male  rats  administered  10  mg/kg/day  pegaptanib sodium IV the incidence and severity were mildly increased as compared to the other groups.  In these males, a slight decrease in serum protein and albumin was also observed and was likely related to the observed chronic progressive nephropathy.  The NOAEL for this study, based on this finding, was 1 mg/kg/day in males.  The pegaptanib plasma concentration (30 minutes postdose on Day 91) at the NOAEL was approximately 240-fold higher than human maximum pegaptanib plasma concentrations following 3 mg/eye IVT doses.

When  ocular  adverse  effects  (fibrin  deposition,  ocular  discharge,  conjunctival  irritation,  vitreal floaters,  cataracts,  retinal  detachments)  were  noted  in  the  IVT  repeat-dose  studies,  they  were considered related to the IVT injection procedure because they were observed across treatment groups including controls. The  risk of injection-related effects is inherent with the IVT  route  of administration.

There  were  no  relevant  pegaptanib  sodium-related  local  adverse  effects  in  single-  and  repeat-dose toxicity studies by the IVT route of administration.  In the 11-week Dutch-Belted rabbit study there was  an  apparent  attenuation  of  retinal  vessels  and  ocular  macrophage  infiltrate.    The  presence  of retinal vessel attenuation was considered a spurious finding in this study as it was not supported by fundus  photographic  data.    Electroretinograms  (ERG)  appeared  normal  with  the  exception  of  an increase in the week 7 latency following single flash with scotopic white light in high-dose animals (1 mg/eye).    In  addition,  retinal  vessel  attenuation  was  not  observed  in  any  of  the  other  repeat-dose studies,  which  included  studies  in  New  Zealand  White  rabbits.    The  macrophage  infiltrate  likely represents a physiological clearing response to the large pegaptanib molecule; comprised primarily of the  PEG  moiety.    There  was  no  evidence  of  inflammation  or  cellular  damage  associated  with  the macrophages and this finding was not observed in other IVT toxicity studies.  Therefore, the retinal vessel attenuation and macrophage infiltration were not considered relevant local adverse effects. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  injection  related  findings  were  typically  ocular  irritation,  conjunctival  hyperaemia/redness  and traumatic injuries to the retina and lens. Pegaptanib-related effects were limited. In none of the ocular studies,  did  the  severity  of  findings  worsen  during  the  course  of  the  studies  (up  to  18  injections). Effects essentially resolved between injections and resolved fully during recovery. Immediately after injection, intraocular pressure (IOP) increased abruptly with no relation to dose, which is in contrast to what  was  observed  clinically.  The  IOPs  were  normalised  at  the  time  of  the  next  injection.  Since pegaptanib is believed to leave the eye intact, there might be a concern that when parts of the large molecule  diffuses  anteriorly,  it  may  get  trapped  in  aqueous  outflow  pathways  e.g.  the  cribriform meshwork and add to the elevated IOP. The risks with the injection procedure and the high IOPs are significant and addressed clinically.

In the pivotal 9-month dog study, at the early ocular examinations, there were several observations of traumatic  damage  to  the  retina  (tears/detachments/haemorrhages)  and  posterior  lens  capsule.  After

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

improving the injection technique, traumatic changes recovered, e.g. retinal tears healed and turned into scars. Vitreal strands/floaters, occasionally with involvement of pigmented cells, were seen in all groups,  but  were  more  pronounced  in  the  high  dose  group  (3  mg/eye)  and  tended  to  increase  over time. The findings may be a result of infiltration of phagocytosing cells attracted by the PEG-moiety of  pegaptanib,  since  there  was  no  associated  inflammation.  Due  to  the  poor  correlation  between ophthalmological evaluations and histopathology, a blinded peer-review of the histological slides was asked for. In the peer-review, additional injection-related, but no drug-related findings were observed and a NOAEL of 3 mg/eye was confirmed. Ocular adverse effects in the repeat IVT dose monkey study were associated with excessive levels of endotoxin ( ≥ 0.13 EU/mg) in the drug substance.  The risk of adverse effects from endotoxin contamination has been mitigated by establishing an endotoxin specification for the drug product.

## · Genotoxicity in vitro and in vivo (with toxicokinetics)

Intact pegaptanib is not suspected to pose a genotoxic risk since the 50kD molecule hardly enters the cell. Therefore, the carcinogenicity potential for pegaptanib sodium is considered low, based on the negative in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity assays for pegaptanib sodium and its component modified nucleotides. All genotoxicity studies were performed in compliance with GLP. In a battery of genotoxicity assays, 2'-FU and 2'-FC were negative in the Salmonella strains of the Ames assay, the SHE cell and the micronucleus assay but produced a small increase in revertant frequency with no relationship to dose in a single bacterial mutagenicity tester strain ( E. coli ).  Based on the overall weight of the evidence, 2'-FU and 2'-FC are not considered genotoxic and the genotoxic potential of the monomers of pegaptanib is considered low. No neoplastic or pre-neoplastic lesions were found in the pivotal chronic IVT pegaptanib sodium studies (6-month rabbit and 9-month dog). · Carcinogenicity (with toxicokinetics) Carcinogenicity studies were not conducted. · Reproductive and developmental studies The  reproductive  toxicology  program  included  range-finding  embryo-foetal  development  studies  in rabbit and mouse and a final embryo-foetal development study in the mouse. Mice (CD-1) which were dosed  IV  to  maximise  exposure  were  selected  in  accordance  with  ICH  S5A.  A  full  embryo-foetal toxicity in a non-rodent species (e.g., rabbits) was not conducted, but a non-GLP, rabbit dose-rangefinding study with IVT administered pegaptanib was performed. This was justified with the advanced age and limited reproductive potential of the patient population with AMD. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Pegaptanib sodium was not found teratogenic in the range-finding studies in rabbits (IVT) or mice (IV),  or  in  the  definitive  study  in  mice  by  the  IV  route  of  administration.  Developmental  toxicity, characterized by a mild decrease in fetal body weight and a reduction in ossification of phalanges, was observed in the 40 mg/kg/day (GD 6 through15) pegaptanib sodium dose group.  The NOAEL for developmental toxicity in this study was 6.5 mg/kg.  No maternal toxicity was observed.  Maternal peak plasma concentration at 40 mg/kg was approximately 2000 µ g/mL, which is over 20,000-fold greater  than  relevant  clinical  exposure  levels.    Pegaptanib  crosses  the  placenta  and  is  found  in  the amniotic  fluid.      A  very  small  percent  (see  Pharmacokinetics,  Distribution)  of  the  maternal  dose  is found  in  the  amniotic  fluid.    No  pegaptanib  sodium-related  effects  on  ECG  parameters  or  cardiac histopathology were noted in satellite F1 animals, suggesting a lack of effect of maternal pegaptanib sodium treatment on normal fetal cardiac angiogenesis.

## · Local tolerance

No additional studies besides the ocular toxicity studies have been performed. Comprehensive clinical, macroscopic and microscopic evaluations of ocular tissues from animals treated with pegaptanib IVT were  conducted  in  the  majority  of  repeat-dose  IVT  toxicity  studies  (Report  Numbers  109-98003T, 144-002,  109-98010T;  0460LE15.001;  0472DE15.001).    In  addition,  visual  and  ocular  physiologic functional assays (ERG analysis and tonometry) were included in most of the toxicity studies where pegaptanib was administered IVT.  Injection site tissues from the acute toxicity study of pegaptanib administered IV to rhesus monkeys were evaluated by histopathological examination (109-98011T). Pegaptanib sodium was well tolerated locally by both the IVT and IV routes of administration.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Other toxicity studies

As  pegaptanib  metabolism  may  result  in  systemic  exposure  to  nucleosides  structurally  related  to FIAU,  a  known  hepatotoxicant  (e.g.,  2'-FU  and  2'-FC).  An  investigative  study  was  undertaken  to confirm  the  hepatic  safety  of  these  pegaptanib  component  nucleosides  with  particular  emphasis  on mitochondrial toxicity.

The two pegaptanib component modified nucleotides (2'-FU and 2'-FC) were evaluated in 90-day IV toxicity studies in woodchucks and rats. In contrast to what has been seen with FIAU treatment, there was  no  evidence  of  mitochondrial  toxicity  of  the  hepatocytes,  as  measured  by  the  endpoints  of cytochrome  C  oxidase,  citrate  synthase  activity,  and  mitochondrial  DNA  content,  in  either  rats  or woodchucks administered 2'-FC and 2'-FU IV for 90 days.  An increase in the incidence and severity of  microvesicular and/or macrovesicular periportal vacuolization was observed in woodchucks after 2'-FC and 2'-FU treatment; however, at a much lower incidence and severity than previously observed with FIAU administration.  It should be noted that the studies involved IV administration while studies with  FIAU  involved  oral  and  peritoneal  administration.    A  small  amount  of  2'-FU  may  have  been incorporated into the DNA of rats (kidney, liver, muscle, spleen and testes) and woodchucks (liver only), however this did not result in any mitochondrial toxicity.  Similarly, a small amount of 2'-FU may have been incorporated into DNA following repeat IV dose administration of pegaptanib sodium in  rats.    This  finding  is  consistent  with  pegaptanib  being  metabolized  in  vivo  to  the  component modified nucleotide 2'-FU.  Overall, pegaptanib sodium and its component modified nucleotides do not exhibit mitochondrial toxicity.

Qualitatively,  the  impurity  profile  for  pegaptanib  sodium  has  been  consistent  throughout  the nonclinical  toxicology  program  and  the  clinical  development  of  pegaptanib  sodium.    No  new impurities have been observed in long-term stability testing.  The Applicant states that the impurities that  are  expected  to  exceed  the  limit  for  qualification  for  new  drug  products  ( ≥ 1%  )  have  been qualified based on exposures in the pivotal repeat dose and embryo-fetal toxicity studies. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment The pegabtanib sodium PECSURFACEWATER is estimated to be approximately two orders of magnitude less than the action limit of 0.01 µg/L and no other environmental concerns are apparent. Based  on  this  Phase  I  Environmental  Exposure  Assessment,  pegabtanib  sodium  is  unlikely  to represent a risk for the environment following the prescribed usage in patients. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects No primary pharmacodynamic investigations have been carried out on choroidal endothelial cells. The binding of the aptamer portion of pegaptanib is strong, short-lived and reversible. There are no data to show  that  the  sequence  does  not  bind  to  any  off-target  ligands/receptors.  However,  sequence homology  analysis  comparing  the  homology  of  the  heparin  binding  domain  of  VEGF  with  other protein candidates (i.e., FGF2) did not identify any potential targets for a significant interaction with pegaptanib. Therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that no clinically meaningful interactions with pegaptanib are to be expected and the lack of secondary pharmacodynamic or drug-drug interaction studies  is  accepted.  VEGF  seems  highly  conserved  between  species  and  has  an  identical  binding sequence in the pivotal toxicity species (rabbit and dog) as in humans. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No data were presented to show that pegaptanib does not bind to any off-target ligands/receptors, or whether the de-pegylated (intact or degraded) aptamer may have antisense properties. However, the aptamer portion has very little homology with any mammalian sequence and it does not seem likely that pegaptanib (intact or partly degraded) has any antisense properties. Further, there is no significant homology of the heparin-binding domain of VEGF when compared to other protein candidates (i.e., FGF2). Based on this it seems reasonable to assume that no clinically meaningful interactions with pegaptanib are to be expected, and additional binding studies are therefore not requested.

Overall, the analytical assays are considered sufficiently validated, but large variations are allowed. The antibody assay has several weaknesses and its usefulness is not clear. Besides the lack of positive control, there is no LOQ and it is not known if plasma pegaptanib affects the assay, or whether the assay recognises pegaptanib-antibody complexes. Nevertheless, a significant antibody response is not expected and difficulties in developing an assay are recognised.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Pegaptanib  after  IVT  administration  is  predominantly  a  locally  acting  drug.    Compared  to  vitreous concentrations, pegaptanib plasma concentrations are a very small percentage of these concentrations. Given  the  recommended  dose  of  0.3  mg  for  patients  with  AMD,  relatively  low  systemic  levels  of pegaptanib  will  be  seen.    As  pegaptanib  is  not  extensively  distributed  to  peripheral  tissues,  tissue levels of pegaptanib will be even lower than those seen in the plasma after IVT administration.  There is no apparent accumulation of pegaptanib in plasma after repeat biweekly and twice monthly bilateral IVT administration  to  animals.    These  PK  characteristics  suggest  pegaptanib  acts  locally  after  IVT administration.

The lack of characterisation of excretion into bile is accepted since faecal excretion was only a minor route, suggesting little biliary elimination of radioactivity. The lack of information regarding passage of pegaptanib into breast milk is acceptable due to the age of the intended population.

No  particular  safety  issues  were  identified  in  preclinical  studies  of  pegaptanib  sodium  in  acute, subchronic and chronic toxicology studies using the intravitreous route of administration. In repeat IV dose  studies  in  rats  only,  systemic  effects  were  observed  and  were  limited  to  vacuolated  cells  in multiple organs and a mild increase in severity and incidence of chronic progressive nephropathy. A number  of  important  studies  were  not  fully  GLP-compliant,  but  the  quality  of  these  studies  seems adequate.

Concerning impurities, there are no concerns with respect to systemic toxicity since there are large safety  margins  to  the  maximum  clinical  exposure.    With  respect  to  intraocular  toxicity,  the  safety margins are 2-3 fold.  However, taking into account the larger human eye as compared to dogs and rabbits,  the  ratio  to  clinical  local  exposure  is  further  increased  and  thus  considered  acceptable. Regarding genotoxicity, the different impurities are considered qualified.

The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) for intravitreous administration was not identified in animals. When  ocular  adverse  effects  (fibrin  deposition,  ocular  discharge,  conjunctival  irritation,  cataracts, retinal detachments) were noted in the intravitreous repeat-dose studies, they were considered related to  the  injection  procedure  itself,  because  they  were  observed  across  treatment  groups  including controls, with the exception of vitreous floaters which were more common in actively treated eyes. Pivotal long term-studies in up to 9 months with intravitreous injections every 2 weeks did not cause any apparent toxic effects and there was no evidence of increased intra-ocular inflammation during the course of the studies. A transient increase in IOP was consistently observed in all treatment groups including vehicle controls. Oligonucleotides may be potent inducers of immune reactions. Pegylation has, however, been shown to  reduce  the  antibody  recognition  of  proteins  and  the  backbone  of  pegaptanib  is  made  up  of phosphate  diesters  instead  of  phosphothioate  linkages,  the  latter  associated  with  inflammatory reactions. The compound did not induce lymphocyte proliferation and no induction of antibodies was observed, but the accuracy of the antibody assay is not clear. Overall, there were no indications that pegaptanib  induced  a  local  or  systemic  immune  response  and  there  were  only  minor  effects  on immune cells and organs at high exposures. Therefore, there are no concerns regarding antigenicity or immunotoxicity. The main argument considered by the CHMP in order to accept the lack of carcinogenicity studies was due to the very low systemic exposure obtained in the clinical population together with the apparent difficulty to perform relevant study obtaining both high systemic and intraocular exposure. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects

## Introduction

The  marketing  authorisation  for  Macugen  has  been  submitted  as  a  complete  and  independent application based on Article 8.3 (i) of Directive 2001/83/EC as amended. Macugen is indicated for the treatment of neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Macugen 0.3 mg should be administered once every six weeks (9 injections per year) by intravitreal injection into the affected eye. Instructions for use, handling and disposal are described in section 6.6 of the SPC.

The clinical development included affected patients only, since the mode of administration consisting of repeated injections in the vitreous body precludes the participation of healthy control subjects for

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

ethical  reasons.  Patients  were  all  suffering  from  age-related  macular  degeneration  (AMD)  of  the exudative or wet kind. The clinical program consists of an open label Phase 1/2 dose finding PK/safety study (NX109-01) with 15 patients conducted in 1999 which was followed in 2000 by two Phase 1/2 open-label, multi-centre trials (EOP1000 and EOP1001) to establish the safety and pharmacokinetic profile of three consecutive intravitreous injections of pegaptanib sodium 3mg given every 4 weeks in 10 +11 patients.

The  Phase  2/3  program,  which  began  in  2001,  was  designed  to  assess  the  safety  and  efficacy  of pegaptanib sodium in two sham controlled, double-masked, dose-ranging clinical trials of practically identical  design  (EOP1003  and  EOP1004)  with  294  patients  on  0.3  mg,  the  proposed    dose  for registration and 596 patients on higher doses (1.0 and 3.0 mg) of the study drug and 296 patients on sham treatment. Inclusion criteria were representative of the targeted patient group in terms of retinal changes (confirmed angiographically), visual acuity and the presence of age dependent concomitant diseases and medications. Besides these dose-escalating/efficacy trials, there is another 1-year clinical study ongoing, EOP1006, started in January 2003 designed to assess the safety and pharmacokinetics of pegaptanib. Data from the 30 week cut-off date are included in the safety dossier.

In  addition  to  studies  relating  to  the  claimed  indication,  the  dossier  contains  serious  adverse  events reporting  from  3  studies  targeting  diabetic  maculopathy  and  von  Hippel-Lindau  disease,  Table  1 summarises the program.

<!-- image -->

| Table 1 . Overview of Clinical Studies with Pegaptanib Sodium Protocol                                                                                                                                          | Design                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Dose Patients Treated                                                                           | Study Assessments                                                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                               | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                               | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                               | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                    |
| NX109-01 Phase 1, multi- center, open label dose- escalating study with single intravitreous injection of 0.25, 0.5, 1,                                                                                         | either 2 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye                                                                                                                                                                         | 15 patients >50 years of age with exudativeAMD longer                                           | DLT, AEs, vital signs, BCVA, IOP, laboratory parameters, immune response, PK parameters, local ocular events                                         |
| EOP1000 Phase 1/2, multi-centre, open-label. Total of 3 consecutive injections of 3 mg/ sodium/eye, 28 days apart in patients without PDT product no                                                            | years of age with subfoveal CNV secondary to                                                                                                                                                                    | 10 patients >50 exudativeAMD                                                                    | BCVA, AEs, IOP, laboratory parameters, vital signs, DLT, PK parameters, immune response, local ocular events                                         |
| EOP1001 Phase 1/2, multi- centre, open label Total of 3 intravitreous injections of 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye days apart in patients following PDT administration Medicinal                                   | 28                                                                                                                                                                                                              | 11 patients >50 years of age with predominantly classic subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD | BCVA, AEs, IOP, laboratory parameters, vital signs, DLT, PK parameters, immune response, requirement for PDT administration, local ocular events     |
| EOP1003 Phase 2/3 multi-center, randomized, double- masked, sham-injection controlled dose finding study of intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks. | EOP1003 Phase 2/3 multi-center, randomized, double- masked, sham-injection controlled dose finding study of intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks. | 612 patients >50 years of age with active subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD               | BCVA, Fluorescein angiography and fundus photography, AEs, IOP, laboratory parameters, vital signs, PDT administration local ocular events           |
| EOP1004 Phase 2/3 multi-center, randomized, double- masked, sham-injection controlled dose finding study of intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks  | EOP1004 Phase 2/3 multi-center, randomized, double- masked, sham-injection controlled dose finding study of intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks  | 578 patients >50 years of age with active subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD               | BCVA, Fluorescein angiography and fundus photography, AEs, IOP, laboratory parameters, vital signs, PDT administration local ocular events BCVA, QOL |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Protocol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Design                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Dose                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Patients Treated                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Study Assessments                                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                        |
| EOP1006 Phase 2 multi-center, randomized study with intravitreous injections of 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks (study ongoing) 37 open-label (3 mg) and 110 masked patients >50 years of age with subfoveal CNV                                                                | EOP1006 Phase 2 multi-center, randomized study with intravitreous injections of 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks (study ongoing) 37 open-label (3 mg) and 110 masked patients >50 years of age with subfoveal CNV                                                                | EOP1006 Phase 2 multi-center, randomized study with intravitreous injections of 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks (study ongoing) 37 open-label (3 mg) and 110 masked patients >50 years of age with subfoveal CNV                                                                | secondary to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | AE, local ocular events, IOP, laboratory parameters, vital signs, PK parameters, immune response                       |
| Studies in Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Studies in Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Studies in Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Studies in Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                        |
| EOP1005 Phase 2, multi- center, randomised, sham- injection controlled, double-masked dose-finding study with intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1.0 and 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 12 to 30 weeks 169 patients >18 years of age with clinically significant DME (Study is ongoing) | EOP1005 Phase 2, multi- center, randomised, sham- injection controlled, double-masked dose-finding study with intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1.0 and 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 12 to 30 weeks 169 patients >18 years of age with clinically significant DME (Study is ongoing) | EOP1005 Phase 2, multi- center, randomised, sham- injection controlled, double-masked dose-finding study with intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1.0 and 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 12 to 30 weeks 169 patients >18 years of age with clinically significant DME (Study is ongoing) | EOP1005 Phase 2, multi- center, randomised, sham- injection controlled, double-masked dose-finding study with intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1.0 and 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 12 to 30 weeks 169 patients >18 years of age with clinically significant DME (Study is ongoing) | Retinal thickening, BCVA, AEs, IOP, laboratory parameters, local ocular events, need for laser at >12 weeks authorised |
| Studies in Von Hippel-Lindau Disease (VHL) EOP1007 Phase 1/2, open-label, non-randomised pilot study with sodium/ eye 5 patients >18 years                                                                                                                                                                  | intravitreous every 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | injections for 30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | of age with severe ocular VHL tumors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | BCVA, macular thickening, fluorescein leakage, disease progression, AEs, local ocular events, IOP.                     |

CNV = Choroidal neovascularization; PDT = Photodynamic therapy with verteporfin; DLT = Dose limiting toxicity;

AE = Adverse event; BCVA = Best corrected visual acuity; IOP = Intraocular pressure; PK = Pharmacokinetics; QOL = quality of life.

Paediatric development of this therapeutic principle is not relevant, since AMD is a disease of the elderly population. No scientific advice has been obtained from the CHMP.

## Pharmacokinetics

The clinical pharmacology of pegaptanib sodium has been characterized after single and multiple monocular IVT dosing in six clinical trials (NX109-01, EOP1000, EOP1001, EOP1003, EOP1004 and EOP1006) conducted in patients with neovascular or exudative AMD. Plasma concentrations of pegaptanib have been determined in these studies.

Table 2  . Overview of Clinical Studies containing pharmacokinetic information

Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Protocol                                          | Design                                                                      | Dose                                                                                         | Patients Treated                                                           | PK Assessments                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                           | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                            | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                          | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                    |
| NX109-01                                          | Phase 1, multi- center, open label escalating dose, dose finding            | Single intravitreous injection of either 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye      | 15 patients ≥ 50 years of age with exudative AMD                           | PK data (blood samples at 4 h, 22-26 h, day 7, 14 and 28) in 6 patients after administration of 2 or 3 mg/study eye                                  |
| EOP1000                                           | Phase 1/2, multi- center, open label, multiple dose in patients without PDT | Total of 3 consecutive intravitreous injections of 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye, 28 days apart | 10 patients ≥ 50 years of age with subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD | EPO1000 and 1001: PK data after first, second and third dose (samples were taken on Day 1 pre-dose, at 30 min, 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 hr post-dose, Day 2 |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Protocol                                          | Design                                                                                       | Dose                                                                                                       | Patients Treated                                                                                                       | PK Assessments                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD) | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                            | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                          | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                      | Studies in Age-related Macular Degeneration (AMD)                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| EOP1001                                           | Phase 1/2, multi- center, open label, multiple dose in patients following PDT administration | Total of 3 intravitreous injections of 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye, 28 days apart                          | 11 patients ≥ 50 years of age with predominantly classic subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD                       | (between 22-26 hr post-dose), Days 8, 15, and 22, Day 29 (prior to and 4-hr post-dose), Day 30 (between 22-26 hr post-dose), Day 36, Day 57 (prior to and 4- hr post-dose), Day 58 (between 22-26 hr post-dose) and Days 64, 85, 99, 113, and 141 post-dose) |
| EOP1003                                           | Phase 2/3 multi- center, randomized, sham-injection controlled, double masked, dose finding  | Intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye or sham every 6 weeks for 54 weeks | 612 patients ≥ 50 years of age active subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD                                          | EOP1003 and 1004 Pre-dose samples week 12, 30, 42 and 54 in 222 patients. Serial blood samples taken in a small number of patients                                                                                                                           |
| EOP1004                                           | Phase 2/3 multi- center, randomized, sham-injection controlled, double masked, dose finding  | Intravitreous injections of either 0.3, 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/eye or sham every 6 weeks for 54 weeks | 578 patients ≥ 50 years of age active subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| EOP1006                                           | Phase 2 multi-center, randomized, multiple dose, cohort                                      | Intravitreous injections of 1 or 3 mg pegaptanib sodium/ eye every 6 weeks for 54 weeks                    | 37 open-label (3 mg) and 110 masked patients ≥ 50 years of age with subfoveal CNV secondary to exudativeAMD authorised | Interim report for the open-label part with 37 patients. Samples for PK analysis were taken on Day 1 pre-dose, at 4 and 24 hr post-dose and Days 3, 7, 21, and 42 post-dose of the first and fourth dosing intervals                                         |

center, randomized, sham-injection controlled, double masked, dose finding EOP1006 Phase 2 multi-center, randomized, multiple dose, cohort Most of the pegaptanib PK data in humans was obtained after administration of a 3-mg/eye dose in the target  population.  PK  data  were  not  obtained  for  the  recommended  dose  (0.3  mg/eye)  because  of limited  assay  sensitivity.  The  MTD  could  not  be  determined  due  to  high  viscosity  of  concentrated pegaptanib  solutions  and  the  impossibility  to  inject  large  volumes  in  the  eyes.  Only  plasma concentrations  of  pegaptanib  have  been  determined  in  these  studies;  no  data  on  intravitreous concentration of pegaptanib are available in humans. · Absorption After intravitreal (IVT) injection of 2 or 3 mg/study eye, release into plasma is slow and maximum pegaptanib  plasma  concentration  is  usually  reached  within  1-4  days.  Plasma  concentrations  were measurable within 4 hours and for up to 28 to 32 days. Cmax values with the 2- and 3-mg/eye doses were between 50 and 150 ng/mL (mean = 80 ng/mL). The AUC is approximately 25 µ g·hr/mL for the 3-mg/study  eye  dosing  regimen.  It  is  expected  to  be  &lt;3  µg.hr/ml  at  the  recommended  dose  of  0.3 mg/eye. No sex- or age-related effects on plasma concentration were observed. The apparent terminal half-life (t½) is 10 ± 4 days and probably represents absorption from the IVT injection site into the systemic circulation; it is not an elimination half-life. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Distribution

Pegaptanib does not accumulate in the plasma when administered IVT every 6 weeks. At doses below 0.5  mg/eye,  it  would  be  unlikely  that  maximal  pegaptanib  plasma  concentrations  would  exceed  10 ng/mL. The absolute bioavailability of pegaptanib after IVT administration has not been assessed in humans,  but  is  approximately  70%  to  100%  in  rabbits,  dogs,  and  monkeys  (see  non-clinical assessment).

The apparent volume of distribution of pegaptanib (Vz/F) in humans after intraocular injection was not  accurately  estimated  by  noncompartmental  pharmacokinetic  methods.  This  is  because  the terminal-phase rate constant needed to calculate Vz/F likely represents pegaptanib's exit out of the eye and  entrance  of  pegaptanib  into  the  systemic  circulation  rather  than  elimination  from  the  systemic circulation. In animal studies, the volume of distribution of pegaptanib after IV administration is about

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

60 mL/kg, suggesting that pegaptanib remains mainly in plasma and is not extensively distributed to peripheral tissues, as would be expected for a large molecule.

Protein binding has not been determined in humans.

No bioequivalence or bioavailability  studies  were  performed with pegaptanib sodium as there have been  no  major  changes  to  the  drug  substance  manufacturing  process  and  no  changes  to  the  drug product container-closure system or the formulation during clinical development or in the proposed commercial product.

## · Elimination

In  vitro data  suggest that pegaptanib is metabolised by endo- and exonucleases to shorter chains of nucleotides,  which  are  eventually  broken  down  to  some  extent  to  the  individual  component nucleosides. The primary route of elimination for both pegaptanib and its 2'-FU metabolite is renal.

## · Dose proportionality and time dependencies

The pharmacokinetics of pegaptanib is not time dependent. Data are too limited to draw conclusions regarding dose proportionality. However, preclinical data suggest dose proportional pharmacokinetics.

· Special populations Increased  exposure  is  observed  in  reduced  renal  function  (2.3-fold  increase  in  exposure  in  patients with  creatinine  clearance  of  30  ml/min  compared  with  a  patient  with  a  creatinine  clearance  of  70 ml/min). A population PK study (EOP1006) has shown that decreases in renal function (down to a value  of  20  ml/min)  increase  systemic  exposure  in  a  way  (up  to  2.3-fold)  that  does  not  impact  on clinical use. A dosage adjustment is not warranted for patients whose CLcr is &gt;20 ml/min and who are treated with the recommended dose of  0.3 mg pegaptanib sodium as the PK data indicate that this dose would not produce exposures which would exceed those seen with the 3 mg dose. There are no data in case of severely affected renal or hepatic function, but the same reasoning could be applied. There  was  no  significant  influence  of  age,  sex  or  previous  PDT  treatment  with  verteporfin  on pegaptanib exposure. Children were not evaluated due to the nature of the disease. In study 1006 intersubject variability in AUC was estimated to be 26% and intrasubject variability to 23%. · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies No interaction studies have been conducted. The applicant claims that based on information about other oligonucleotide compounds and the large molecular size of pegaptanib, which impedes intracellular uptake, the potential for cytochrome P450 mediated drug interactions with pegaptanib appears to be very low. Oligonucleotides are metabolized by extracellular endo- and exonucleases and are claimed not to inhibit the metabolism of other drugs by the cytochrome P450 system. Discussion on Pharmacokinetics Medicinal product no longer authorised

In animals, pegaptanib is slowly absorbed into the systemic circulation from the eye after intravitreal administration.  The  rate  of  absorption  from  the  eye  is  the  rate-limiting  step  in  the  disposition  of pegaptanib  in  animals  and  is  likely  to  be  in  humans.  In  humans,  the  average  ±  standard  deviation apparent  plasma  half-life  of  pegaptanib  after  a  3  mg  (10-times  the  recommended  dose)  monocular dose is 10 ± 4 days. A mean maximum plasma concentration of about 80 ng/ml occurs within 1 to 4 days  after  a  3  mg  monocular  dose  in  humans.  The  mean  area  under  the  plasma  concentration-time curve (AUC) is about 25 µ g·hr/ml at this dose. Pegaptanib does not accumulate in the plasma when administered intravitreally every 6 weeks. At doses below 0.5 mg/eye, pegaptanib plasma concentrations  do  not  likely  exceed  10  ng/ml.  The  absolute  bioavailability  of  pegaptanib  after intravitreal administration has not been assessed in humans, but is approximately 70-100% in rabbits, dogs and monkeys.

In  animals  that  received  doses  of  pegaptanib  up  to  0.5  mg/eye  to  both  eyes,  plasma  concentrations were 0.03% to 0.15% of those in the vitreous humour.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  apparent  volume  of  distribution  of  pegaptanib  in  humans  after  intraocular  injection  was  not accurately estimated by noncompartmental pharmacokinetic methods. In mice, rats, rabbits, dogs and monkeys, pegaptanib distributes  primarily  into  plasma  volume  and  is  not  extensively  distributed  to peripheral tissues after intravenous administration. Twenty-four hours after intravitreous administration of a radiolabeled dose of pegaptanib to both eyes of rabbits, radioactivity was mainly distributed  in  vitreous  humour,  retina  and  aqueous  humour.  After  intravitreal  and  intravenous administrations  of  radiolabeled  pegaptanib  to  rabbits,  the  highest  concentrations  of  radioactivity (excluding the eye for the intravitreal dose) were obtained in the kidney. In rabbits, the component nucleotide,  2'-  fluorouridine  is  found  in  plasma  and  urine  after  single  radiolabeled  pegaptanib intravenous and intravitreal doses. Pegaptanib is metabolised by endo- and exonucleases. In rabbits, pegaptanib is eliminated as parent drug and metabolites primarily in the urine.

Pegaptanib pharmacokinetics is similar in female and male patients and within the age range 50 to 90 years.

Pegaptanib  sodium  has  not  been  adequately  studied  in  patients  with  creatinine  clearance  below  20 ml/min. A decrease in creatinine clearance down to 20 ml/min may be associated with up to a 2.3-fold increase  in  pegaptanib  AUC.  No  special  considerations  are  needed  in  patients  with  creatinine clearance above 20 ml/min who are treated with the recommended dose of pegaptanib sodium 0.3 mg.

Clinically,  in  the  efficacy  studies  (EOP1003  and  EOP1004),  the  applicant  claims  that  pegaptanib sodium treatment provided anti-angiogenic effects in the retina by reducing the growth of mean total lesion size and CNV size, as assessed by angiography. This suggested to the Applicant that pegaptanib sodium was acting as a VEGF antagonist. However, baseline values for these two important objective parameters are significantly different in treated patients compared to controls. Furthermore, it is not clear that the treatment reduced the growth of new vessels. There is no dose-effect relationship, and the size of the CNV does not seem to predict pegaptanib's effects.

Pegaptanib pharmacokinetics have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment. The systemic exposure is expected to be within a well tolerated range in patients with hepatic impairment, as a 10 fold higher dose (3 mg/eye) was well tolerated. Pharmacodynamics The clinical  development has sought to identify the dose and the regimen needed to inhibit further neovessel formation and macular edema in patients with exudative AMD, a disease with a progressive course ultimately leading to blindness. The ultimate selection of dose and the dosing interval for the 2 pivotal clinical studies EOP1003 and 1004 studies was based on preclinical data and results from the preliminary  open  label  clinical  studies,  NX-109-01,  EOP1000  and  1001.  All  study  participants suffered  from  AMD  according  to  angiograpical  and  visual  function  criteria.  In  the  pivotal  studies, three doses of pegaptanib, 0.3 mg, 1 mg and 3 mg, administered in the vitreous by injection every 6 weeks during a 54 weeks trial period were the study medications yielding a per protocol 9 injections per study eye. · Primary pharmacology and mechanism of action Pegaptanib acts as a selective VEGF antagonist by binding soluble, extracellular VEGF165 in a manner similar to an antibody and preventing it's binding to cell surface VEGF receptors, thus inhibiting the downstream  intracellular  events  that  facilitate  increased  vascular  permeability,  angiogenesis  and neovascularization. The large size (~50 kD) of the pegylated moiety makes entry into cellular targets unlikely or very inefficient, thus pegaptanib is highly unlikely to exhibit any antisense properties. Medicinal product no longer authorised

It is concluded that the mechanism of action of pegaptanib sodium has not been clearly elucidated.

Extrapolation from non-clinical data indicate that the recommended 0.3 mg dose/eye may be sufficient to maintain vitreous IC50 concentrations during 6 weeks.

## · Secondary pharmacology

The potential for pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions with pegaptanib has not been specifically addressed.  The  only  other  treatment  authorised  and  available  for  exudative  AMD,  photodynamic treatment (PDT) with Visudyne, was indeed used concomitantly in the clinical program. In the pivotal studies, PDT was allowed in patients with predominately classical CNV lesions at the discretion of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

investigator. PDT treatment was given post-baseline to 19% of subjects across all treatment arms, but more so in EOP1004 than in EOP1003. In sub-analyses of patients receiving PDT before the start of the pegaptanib pivotal studies or at baseline, no evidence of an impact of the PDT on the response to the  pegaptanib  treatment  could  be  demonstrated.  As  for  patients  receiving  PDT  in  the  course  of EOP1003 and 1004, the analyses were not presented, due to a presumed bias in patient selection for this add-on treatment.

## Clinical efficacy

## · Dose response studies

The  maximum  tolerated  dose  (MTD)  of  pegaptanib  sodium  after  IVT  injection  has  not  been determined  in  humans  or  animals  as  the  drug  is  well  tolerated  in  humans  up  to  3  mg/eye.  The  3mg/study eye dose was the maximal dose used in clinical trials due to the drug product's viscosity at doses higher than this.

Doses  and  dosing  intervals were  selected based  on  the  assumption  that  pegaptanib  vitreous concentrations would be maintained above the concentration required to produce 90% of the maximal inhibition  (IC90)  associated  with  anti-vascular  endothelial  growth  factor  (VEGF)  activity  in  animal models.  The selection of doses and the 6-week dosing interval were supported by early indications of pharmacological  activity in Phase  I/II trials and  the presence  of low  circulating  pegaptanib concentrations 4 to 6 weeks post dosing.  These low circulating levels suggest that effective vitreous concentrations are present in patients receiving 3 mg/study eye every 6 weeks. · Main studies No  healthy  volunteers  participated  in  the  studies.  Initially,  36  patients  were  included  in  Phase  1/2 studies.  Then,  without  solid  preclinical  or  phase  1/2  data,  the  Phase  2/3  clinical  program  began  in 2001 and enrolled 1208 patients. It was designed to assess the safety and efficacy of IVT pegaptanib at 0.3-mg, 1-mg or 3-mg given every 6 weeks, in the treatment of exudative AMD in two controlled, double-masked, dose-ranging clinical trials of practically identical design (EOP1003 and EOP1004). The two studies were of identical design with respect to efficacy endpoints except that Quality of Life (QOL) data were collected in EOP1004 in addition to all the parameters defined in EOP1003. Patient evaluations in the first study year occurred at each treatment visit, i.e. every six weeks and at an  additional  final  evaluation  visit  at  week  54  when  no  injection  was  given.  Assessment  of  visual acuity,  IOP,  ocular  signs  was  performed  at  every  visit  and  CNV  assessment  evaluated  with  fundus photography and fluorescein angiography were carried out at weeks 30 and 54. The efficacy data from the first year (54 weeks, 9 planned injections) of these 2-year studies have been analysed  and  form  the  basis  for  the  claim  of  efficacy  for  pegaptanib  sodium  in  the  treatment  of exudative (wet) AMD. The second-year results should support this claim. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Retrospective  analyses  using  a  combined  database  have  been  used  to  explore  the  efficacy  of pegaptanib sodium in different subgroups of the population defined by certain disease characteristics (CNV lesion subtype, lesion size, baseline vision) and demographic characteristics (age, gender, iris pigmentation) in relation to the dosing regimen.

## Studies EOP1003 and EOP1004

## METHODS

## Study Participants

Ambulatory patients of either gender, aged &gt;50 years, with active subfoveal CNV secondary to AMD were recruited. The two trials enrolled patients, including all neovascular AMD lesion subtypes (25% predominantly classic, 39% occult with no classic and 36% minimally classic), Patients with lesion sizes  up  to  12  disc  area  in  the  study  eye,  of  which  up  to  50%  could  be  comprised  of  subretinal haemorrhage and/or up to 25% fibrotic scar or atrophic damage were included. Patients had up to one prior  PDT  and  baseline  best  corrected  visual  acuity  (BCVA)  in  the  study  eye  between  20/40  and 20/320, and better than or equal to 20/800 in the fellow eye. Excluded were patients with

- -previous subfoveal thermal laser therapy

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Treatments

Intravitreous injection of 0.3 mg, 1 mg, 3 mg pegaptanib sodium or sham injection administered once every 6 weeks. PDT with verteporfin was allowed at the discretion of the investigators (average rate of combined treatment : 19 %, similar in all arms of the study).

Patients  were  given  dilation  eye  drops.  Antiseptic  and  sterility  measures  included  use  of  diluted povidone iodine as an irrigation flush in the conjunctival sac ( antibiotic eye drops were given as an alternative  in  the  case  of  iodine  allergy),  plastic  draping  of  the  eyelids  and  use  of  sterile  gloves.  A speculum  was  inserted.  Subconjunctival  anaesthetics  with  2%  Xylocaine  injected  in  the  inferior temporal  quadrant  was  given  before  the  procedure.  Patients  then  received  intra-vitreous  injections through the pars plana of  0.3 mg, 1 mg or 3 mg pegaptanib in a  95 micro-litres single use pre-filled syringe  or  control  sham  procedure  involving  a  syringe  without  a  needle  being  pressed  against  the globe every 6 weeks up to 54 weeks (9 planned injections). Re-randomisation among actively (to stop or continue as previously) and sham treated patients (to stop or continue on sham or any of the active treatments) took place at week 54 for another 8 injections during the following 48 weeks for a second study year, the data of which was not part of the initial submission. Objectives To establish the safe and efficacious dose of pegaptanib sodium when given as intravitreous injections (0.3  mg, 1 mg or 3 mg/eye) compared with control sham injections every 6 weeks over a 54-week period  (9  treatments)  in  patients  with  subfoveal  choroidal  neovascularization  (CNV)  secondary  to AMD. As  for  the  ongoing  extension,  data  of  which  are  not  included  in  this  dossier,  the  purpose  is  to determine  whether  54  weeks  is  a  sufficient  treatment  period  (50%  of  the  actively  treated  group  is randomised to treatment discontinuation) or additional injections are needed to preserve vision, and to further characterize the safety of continued treatment to 102 weeks. Outcomes/endpoints In  both  studies,  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  the  proportion  of  patients  losing  &lt;  15  letters  of BCVA from baseline up to week 54. Secondary efficacy endpoints were the proportion of patients who remained at baseline or gained ≥ 0 0 letter of vision at week 54, gaining at least ≥ 15 letters of vision at week 54. or severely deteriorating (losing &gt; 30 letters of BCVAfrom baseline up to week 54. Fluorescein angiography and fundus photography were used both to assess the change in total lesion size, total CNV size and CNV leak size from baseline to 30 weeks and 54 weeks. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Sample size

In  both  studies,  a  sample  size  of  540  expected  to  result  in  122  evaluable  patients  in  each  arm (calculating a drop-out of 13 patients per arm), was based on the assumption that the proportion of patients losing 15 letters or more on the ETDRS chart at 1 year would be 50% in the sham group and that the corresponding proportions would be reduced to 35, 30 and 25% in the 0.3mg, 1mg and 3mg groups,  respectively.  With  these  assumptions  the  power  calculations  for  the  pair-wise  comparisons would be 60% for the 0.3 mg, 80% for the 1 mg and 95% for the 3.0 mg arm.

## Randomisation

Randomisation on a 1:1:1:1 basis (three active arms and sham) was practiced with a stratification at each study site considering CNV features and the presence of previous PDT therapy.

At  54  weeks,  subjects  were  randomly  assigned  to  undergo  controlled  discontinuation  or  continue therapy for a further 48 weeks. All patients assigned to pegaptanib sodium were re-randomised (on a 1:1 basis) after 54 weeks of treatment to either continue or discontinue therapy for a further 48 weeks. All sham control patients were re-randomized in a ratio of 1:1:1:1:1.

- -recent intraocular surgery
- -more than one prior photodynamic therapy (PDT) with verteporfin
- -significant  media  opacities  that  might  interfere  with  visual  acuity  assessment  of toxicity or fundus photography
- -severe cardiac or peripheral vascular disease or diabetic retinopathy
- -clinically significant impaired renal or hepatic function.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Blinding (masking)

The  study  was  double-masked.  Proper  masking  was  maintained  by  ensuring  the  physician  who administered the treatments was not involved in any assessments or decisions during the study. The procedures involved in the administration of the sham were identical to those required for intravitreous injection  with  the  exception  that  a  needleless  syringe  was  pressed  against  the  eye  rather  than  an injection being administered. The main efficacy assessment was distance VA assessed by a masked examiner.

## Statistical methods

Primary analyses were performed on the ITT population, defined as all patients with complete baseline data  and  who  had  received  masked  treatment.  Premature  discontinuation  was  treated  with  the  last observation  carried  forward  method  (LOCF).  The  PP  population,  defined  as  patients  without  major violations of the protocol was used in sensitivity analyses. Two other populations were analysed as well:  The  all  randomised  population  meaning  all  allocated  patients  regardless  if  they  received  any treatment, and the week-54 observed population including ITT participants with VA data at week 54 regardless if they were still receiving medication.

Statistical  significance  was  defined  at  a  p-level  of  0.05.  Multiple  comparisons,  i.e.  pair-wise comparisons with sham for each treatment arm was analysed with the Hochberg procedure. After the implementation  of  a  protocol  amendment,  the  results  of  EOP1004  were  analysed  before  those  of EOP1003 allowing for the exclusion of one or two of the treatment arms in EOP1003 to increase the statistical power. The  primary  analysis  was  based  on  the  Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel  statistics  adjusted  for  the following  factors:  lesion  subtype  (predominantly  classic,  minimally  classic,  occult  with  no classic), prior PDT (yes/no), baseline vision (patients with ≥ 54 letters vs. &lt;54 letters) and baseline lesion size (&lt;4 disc areas vs. ≥ 4 disc areas). Continuous data were analysed with ANCOVA. Timerelated data were summarised in life-tables with Kaplan-Meier curves. Pooling of data of the identical pivotal studies was performed While both trials were still masked it was decided that the EOP1004 trial would be analyzed first so that,  based  on  the  results  of  this  trial,  one  or  two  doses  could  be  dropped  from  the  primary comparisons of the EOP1003 trial before it was unmasked. In this case, each of the remaining dose(s) would be compared against sham using Hochberg's multiple comparison adjustments. RESULTS EOP 1003 recruited patients from September 27 th 2001 and last patient's 54 week visit was on August 15 th 2003. The corresponding dates for EOP 1004 were August 3 rd 2001 and August 29 th 2003. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Participant flow

Figure 1. Participant flow (Study EOP1003)

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Participant flow (Study EOP1004)

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Major amendments were not made. Minor amendments included inclusion criteria (presence of active CNV), evaluation of primary endpoint (3 lines loss instead of best corrected visual acuity), and preinjection procedure to decrease the risk of endophthalmitis.

No special measures were used to assess treatment compliance as all treatments were administered by trained study personnel at the study centers.

Treatment compliance was high with the majority of patients (90%) receiving all 9 study treatments. Discontinuations were few and only in a small number of cases due to adverse events.

## Baseline characteristics

Both studies enrolled more women than men, reflecting the demographics of AMD. The ratio of female to male patients across treatment groups and between studies was broadly similar. Some imbalances  in  baseline  covariates  were  observed  in  terms  of  baseline  lesion  characteristics  as evaluated from fluorescein angiograms, with total CNV size, total lesion size and leakage being higher in the sham group than in treated groups. The mean difference in CNV size was 0.6 (the size of the neovascular membrane was 17% higher in the control group) and mean difference in total lesion size = 0.5 (the total size of the lesion was 9% greater in control group).

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2. Demographie Data

*W/ A/ B/ H/ O: White/ Asian/ Black/ Hispanic/ Ofher

|                      | Pegaptanib Sodium   | Pegaptanib Sodium   | Pegaptanib Sodium   | Pegaptanib Sodium   |
|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
|                      | 0.3 mg              | 1mg                 | 3mg                 | Sham                |
| EOP1004              |                     |                     |                     |                     |
| Number of patients   | 144                 | 146                 | 143                 | 145                 |
| Female/ Male (%)     | 56.44               | 53/47               | 69/3 1              | 57/43               |
| Median age           | 80                  | 76.5                | 78                  | 78                  |
| Range (years)        | 58 - 92             | 52 - 92             | 56 - 97             | 55 -89              |
| Race: *W/ A/ B/ H/ O | 0/2/2/00            | 1/Z/0/0/EF          | 0//0/0/1l           | 140/ 0/ 0/ 4/ 1     |
| EOP1003              |                     |                     |                     |                     |
| Number of patients   | 15 1                | 155                 | 153                 | 153                 |
| Female/ Male (%)     | 54/46               | 56/44               | 61/39               | 63/37               |
| Median age           | 75                  | 75                  | 76                  | 75                  |
| Range (years)        | 53 -90              | 53 - 90             | 53 - 89             | 52 - 92             |
| Race: *W/ A/ B/ H/ O | 143/ 0/ 0/ 7/ 1     | 148/ 1/ 1/ 5/ 0     | 145/ 0/ 1/ 7/ 0     | 144/ 1/ 1/ 5/ 2     |

Source: Table 2. 1., safety population

Table 4.

<!-- image -->

Table 6.

| Medicinal   |
|-------------|

Medicinal product no longer authorised

Source: Tables 2.7, 2.4.1, safety population

Table 3a, baseline VA expressed as number of letters

|                    | 0.3 mg   | 1 mg   | 3 mg   | Sham   |
|--------------------|----------|--------|--------|--------|
| EOP1004            |          |        |        |        |
| Number of patients | 144      | 146    | 143    | 145    |
| Mean (letters)     | 52.5     | 50.5   | 52.1   | 54.0   |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Median             | 56.0    | 52.0    | 54.0    | 55.5    |
|--------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| Range              | 23 - 74 | 19 - 73 | 14 - 73 | 27 - 74 |
| EOP1003            |         |         |         |         |
| Number of patients | 151     | 155     | 153     | 153     |
| Mean (letters)     | 53.0    | 50.9    | 50.1    | 51.3    |
| Median             | 54.0    | 51.0    | 51.0    | 53.0    |
| Range              | 11 - 75 | 22 - 77 | 22 - 76 | 21 - 75 |

Table 3b Proportion of patients with baseline visual acuity &gt; 20/80

|          | 0.3 mg   | 1.0 mg   | 3.0 mg   | sham   |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|--------|
| EOP 1003 | 54%      | 45%      | 45%      | 52%    |
| EOP 1004 | 57%      | 48%      | 51%      | 55%    |

Numbers analysed

| Subset EOP1003             | 0.3 mg   | 1 mg    | 3 mg           | sham               |
|----------------------------|----------|---------|----------------|--------------------|
| Randomised                 | 153      | 158     | 155            | 156                |
| Safety (R x at least once) | 151/153  | 155/158 | 153/155        | 153/156 authorised |
| ITT                        | 150/153  | 154/158 | 153/155        | 152/156            |
| PP                         | 142/153  | 147/158 | 147/153        | 147/156            |
| Week 54 observed           | 139/153  | 144/158 | 139/155        | 142/156            |
| Subset EOP1004             |          |         |                |                    |
| Randomised                 | 144      | 147     | 147            | 148                |
| Safety                     | 144/144  | 146/147 | 143/147        | 145/148            |
| ITT                        | 144/144  | 146/147 | 143/147 longer | 144/148            |
| PP                         | 142/144  | 141/147 | 139/147        | 139/148            |
| Week 54 observed           | 132/144  | 131/147 | 125/147        | 133/148            |

<!-- image -->

ITT PP ITT PP Outcomes and estimation A summary of the number of treatments administered and the number of patients with treatment delays,  defined  as  more  than  a  56-day  interval  between  any  two  consecutive  injections,  is provided in Table 7. The mean number of injections was approximately 8.5 across all treatment arms and in both studies; the median number of injections administered in each treatment group was  9  out  of  a  possible  total  of  9,  indicating  high  treatment  compliance.  Overall,  a  total  of approximately 80% of patients received all nine injections in the 2 studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised Table 7.

Souree, Tables 3.1, 3.2, safety population

| EOP1004                                              |           |           |          |           |
|------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|----------|-----------|
| Number of injections                                 |           |           |          |           |
| Mean/Median                                          | 8.4/9     | 8.4/9     | 8.4/9    | 8.5/9     |
| No. of patients who received 9 injections (%)        | 110 (76%) | 115 (79%) | 104(73%) | 121 (83%) |
| No. of patients with one or more treatment delay (%) | 28 (19%)  | 17 (12%)  | 22 (15%) | 17 (12%)  |
| EOP1003                                              |           |           |          |           |
| Number of injections                                 |           |           |          |           |
| Mean/Median                                          | 8.4/9     | 8.6/9     | 8.5/9    | 8.6/9     |
| No. of patients who received 9 injections (%)        | 116 (77%) | 131 (85%) | 116(76%) | 126 (82%) |
| No. of patients with one or more treatment delay (%) | 23 (15%)  | 12 (8%)   | 20 (13%) | 15 (10%)  |

The Table below presents a summary of the first year efficacy results in the two pivotal studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                                                  | Study EOP1003 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1003 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1003 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1003 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1004 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1004 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1004 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      | Study EOP1004 Pegaptanib Sodium                                                      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ITT population                                                                   | 0.3 mg N=150                                                                         | 1 mg N=154                                                                           | 3 mg N=153                                                                           | Sham N=152                                                                           | 0.3 mg N=144                                                                         | 1 mg N=146                                                                           | 3 mg N=143                                                                           | Sham N=144                                                                           |
|                                                                                  | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** | Primary Efficacy Endpoint - %of Patients Losing <15 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54** |
| Vision loss < 15 letters                                                         | 73%                                                                                  | 75%                                                                                  | 69%                                                                                  | 59%                                                                                  | 67%                                                                                  | 66%                                                                                  | 61%                                                                                  | 52%                                                                                  |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.0105*                                                                              | 0.0035*                                                                              | -                                                                                    |                                                                                      | 0.0031*                                                                              | 0.0273                                                                               | 0.1294                                                                               |                                                                                      |
|                                                                                  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >15 Letters VA, Baseline-Week 54**   |
| Vision gain >15 letters                                                          | 4%                                                                                   | 6%                                                                                   | 5%                                                                                   | 3%                                                                                   | 8%                                                                                   | 7%                                                                                   | 4%                                                                                   | 1%                                                                                   |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.9304                                                                               | 0.4934                                                                               | -                                                                                    |                                                                                      | 0.0047*                                                                              | 0.0095*                                                                              | 0.0421*                                                                              |                                                                                      |
|                                                                                  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients Gaining >0 Letters VA, Baseline - Week 54**  |
| Vision gain >0 letters                                                           | 33%                                                                                  | 38%                                                                                  | 39%                                                                                  | 28%                                                                                  | 34%                                                                                  | 35%                                                                                  | 23%                                                                                  | 17%                                                                                  |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.3783                                                                               | 0.0749                                                                               | -                                                                                    |                                                                                      | 0.0006*                                                                              | 0.0015*                                                                              | 0.1712                                                                               |                                                                                      |
|                                                                                  | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    | Secondary Efficacy Endpoint - Mean Changes in VA, Weeks 6, 12 and 54** authorised    |
| Mean change in VA Week 6                                                         | -1.01                                                                                | -0.60                                                                                | -2.52                                                                                | -3.31                                                                                | -2.08                                                                                | -1.84                                                                                | -2.03                                                                                | -4.78                                                                                |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.0375*                                                                              | 0.0273*                                                                              | --                                                                                   |                                                                                      | 0.1881                                                                               | 0.1009                                                                               | 0.1653                                                                               |                                                                                      |
| Mean change in VA                                                                | -3.31                                                                                | -0.69                                                                                | -2.83                                                                                | -5.38                                                                                | -3.12                                                                                | -3.67                                                                                | -5.27                                                                                | -7.31                                                                                |
| Week 12 p-value                                                                  | 0.1539                                                                               | 0.0006*                                                                              | --                                                                                   |                                                                                      | 0.0310                                                                               | 0.1028                                                                               | 0.5934                                                                               |                                                                                      |
| Mean change in VA Week 54                                                        | -7.58                                                                                | -6.03                                                                                | -7.20                                                                                | -12.78                                                                               | -8.42                                                                                | -8.58                                                                                | -12.53                                                                               | -17.38                                                                               |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.0059*                                                                              | 0.0014*                                                                              | --                                                                                   |                                                                                      | 0.0001*                                                                              | 0.0004*                                                                              | 0.1069                                                                               |                                                                                      |
| Other Efficacy Endpoint - Study****                                              | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               | %Patients Receiving PDT with Verteporfin During longer                               |
| Patients with PDT                                                                | 13%                                                                                  | 14%                                                                                  | 14%                                                                                  | 16%                                                                                  | 26%                                                                                  | 27%                                                                                  | 30%                                                                                  | 35%                                                                                  |
| Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no      | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          | Other Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with 20/200 or Worse VA at Week 54** no          |
| Patients with 20/200 vision or worse at Week 54                                  | 51 (34%)                                                                             | 61 (40%)                                                                             | 60 (39%)                                                                             | 82 (54%)                                                                             | 60 (42%)                                                                             | 67 (46%)                                                                             | 69 (48%)                                                                             | 83 (58%)                                                                             |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.0005                                                                               | 0.0041                                                                               | 0.0110                                                                               |                                                                                      | 0.0026                                                                               | 0.0110                                                                               | 0.0509                                                                               |                                                                                      |
| Retrospective Efficacy Endpoint - %Patients with Severe Vision Loss (>30 Letters | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        | VA)** product                                                                        |
| Patients losing >30 letters VA at Week 54                                        | 13 (9%)                                                                              | 9 (6%)                                                                               | 17 (11%)                                                                             | 30 (20%)                                                                             | 15 (10%)                                                                             | 15 (10%)                                                                             | 23 (16%)                                                                             | 35 (24%)                                                                             |
| p-value                                                                          | 0.0022                                                                               | 0.0007                                                                               | 0.1020                                                                               |                                                                                      | 0.0007                                                                               | 0.0102                                                                               | 0.0675                                                                               |                                                                                      |

*** Letters of VA ANCOVA model

**** Patients receiving PDT at baseline and/or PDT received after 2 weeks from first study treatment in the study eye.

For the primary endpoint, i.e. the proportion of responders (loss of &lt; 15 letters of VA from baseline to week 54), in study EOP1004, in study EOP1003 and in combined analysis, pegaptanib sodium 0.3 mg showed a statistically significant treatment benefit compared with sham treatment using the Hochberg procedure (pegaptanib 0.3mg 70% versus Sham 55%, p=0.0001; EOP 1003 pegaptanib 0.3mg 73% versus Sham 59%, p = 0.0105; EOP 1004 pegaptanib 0.3 mg 67% versus sham 52%, p=0.0031). The 1-mg dose had some significant effect, but the 3-mg dose had none. Subgroup analyses did not reveal any factor that would predict a better response to pegaptanib sodium. However, prior PDT therapy seemed to be a favorable factor for the 0.3-mg dose while curtailing the effect of the 3-mg dose (although none of the statistical interaction analyses gave significant results). Lesion subtype did not influence the outcome).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For  mean  change  of  VA  at  6,  12  and  54  weeks,  a  consistently  superior  effect  vs.  sham  was demonstrated in both studies at the last follow-up for both 0.3 mg and 1 mg of pegaptanib, but not for 3 mg (see Figures below). No dose response treatment effects were observed.

Figure 1. EOP 1003. Mean change of VA over time.

<!-- image -->

Mean Change in Total Lesion Size from Baseline to 30 and 54 Weeks Pegaptanib Sodium

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Lesion size (DA) 1     | 0.3 mg   | 1 mg   | 3 mg   | Sham   |
|------------------------|----------|--------|--------|--------|
| EOP1004                |          |        |        |        |
| ITT population         | N=144    | N=146  | N=143  | N=144  |
| Baseline               | 3.6      | 4.4    | 3.6    | 4.4    |
| Mean change at week 30 | 1.39     | 0.98   | 1.65   | 1.44   |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.90     | 1.56   | 2.68   | 2.59   |
| EOP1003                |          |        |        |        |
| ITT population         | N=150    | N=154  | N=153  | N=152  |
| Baseline               | 3.9      | 3.7    | 3.7    | 4.0    |
| Mean change at week 30 | 1.07     | 1.00   | 1.45   | 1.52   |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.74     | 1.88   | 2.34   | 2.38   |
| Combined Analysis      |          |        |        |        |
| ITT population         | N=294    | N=300  | N=296  | N=296  |
| Baseline               | 3.7      | 4.0    | 3.7    | 4.2    |
| Mean change at week 30 | 1.22     | 0.99   | 1.54   | 1.48   |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.82     | 1.73   | 2.50   | 2.48   |

|                        | Pegaptanib Sodium   | Pegaptanib Sodium   | Pegaptanib Sodium   |       |
|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-------|
| CNV size (DA) 1        | 0.3 mg              | 1 mg                | 3 mg                | Sham  |
| EOP1004                |                     |                     |                     |       |
| ITT population         | N=144               | N=146 longer        | N=143               | N=144 |
| Baseline               | 3.1                 | 3.8                 | 3.2                 | 3.9   |
| Mean change at week 30 | 0.93                | 0.79                | 1.00                | 1.13  |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.55                | 1.20 no             | 1.77                | 1.92  |
| EOP1003                |                     |                     |                     |       |
| ITT population         | N=150 product       | N=154               | N=153               | N=152 |
| Baseline               | 3.1                 | 3.2                 | 3.2                 | 3.5   |
| Mean change at week 30 | 0.85                | 0.68                | 1.13                | 1.28  |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.58                | 1.35                | 1.89                | 2.20  |
| Combined Analysis      |                     |                     |                     |       |
| ITT population         | N=294               | N=300               | N=296               | N=296 |
| Baseline               | 3.1                 | 3.5                 | 3.2                 | 3.7   |
| Mean change at week 30 | 0.89                | 0.73                | 1.07                | 1.21  |
| Mean change at week 54 | 1.57                | 1.28                | 1.83                | 2.06  |

1 Lesion size given in DA (disc area) Mean Change in Total CNV Size from Baseline to 30 and 54 Weeks 1 CNV size given in DA (disc area) Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   | Summary of Mean Changes in Visual Acuity from Baseline to Weeks 6, 12, 54 and 102 (LOCF)   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                            | EOP 1003                                                                                   | EOP 1003                                                                                   | EOP 1003                                                                                   | EOP 1004                                                                                   | EOP 1004                                                                                   | EOP 1004                                                                                   |
|                                                                                            | 0.3-0.3                                                                                    | 0.3- discontinued                                                                          | Sham- sham/sham+ discontinued                                                              | 0.3-0.3                                                                                    | 0.3- discontinued                                                                          | Sham- sham/sham+ discontinued                                                              |
| N                                                                                          | 67                                                                                         | 66                                                                                         | 54                                                                                         | 66                                                                                         | 66                                                                                         | 53                                                                                         |
| Mean change in VA Week 6                                                                   | -1.9                                                                                       | -0.0                                                                                       | -4.4                                                                                       | -1.9                                                                                       | -2.0                                                                                       | -3.4                                                                                       |
| Mean change in VA Week 12                                                                  | -4.3                                                                                       | -2.0                                                                                       | -4.8                                                                                       | -2.8                                                                                       | -2.2                                                                                       | -4.7                                                                                       |
| Mean change in VA Week 54                                                                  | -9.6                                                                                       | -4.3                                                                                       | -11.7                                                                                      | -8.0                                                                                       | -7.6                                                                                       | -15.6                                                                                      |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Mean change in VA Week 102   | -10.8   | -9.7   | -13.1   | -8.0   | -12.7   | -21.1   |
|------------------------------|---------|--------|---------|--------|---------|---------|

On average, the treatment benefit was maintained at 102 weeks with continuing preservation of visual acuity  for  patients  re-randomized  to  continue  pegaptanib.  Patients  who  were  re-randomized  to discontinue pegaptanib after one year, lost visual acuity during the second year.

For clinically important secondary efficacy endpoints such as vision stabilization (% of patients losing &lt;15  letters  of  VA  from  baseline;  %  of  patients  maintaining  baseline  vision),  pegaptanib  showed  a benefit in EOP1004 but not in EOP1003.

EOP 1003. Mean proportion of responders (patients losing &lt; 15 letters of VA) over time.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

As the two trials EOP1003 and EOP1004 were sufficiently similar in design and patient recruitment, a statistical analysis was performed on the combined data from both trials up to week 54 assessment. For the pooled ITT data from the two studies, 6% of patients in the 0.3 mg (p=0.0401) and 7% of patients in the 1 mg (p=0.0238) arms compared with 2% in the sham arm showed vision gain of 15 or more letters. Vision gain of 0 letters or more (no vision loss) was achieved by 33% of patients in the 0.3 mg arm (p=0.0032), 37% in the 1 mg arm (p=0.006) and 31% in the 3 mg arm (p=0.0210) vs. 23% in  sham  treatment  arm.  For  the  angiographic  endpoint,  change  in  the  mean  total  CNV  size  was significantly less with the 1 mg pegaptanib sodium treatment arm for the pooled data at the week 30 and 54 time points and for the 0.3 mg treatment arm at week 54.

Ancillary analyses CNV size and leakage analysis revealed less pronounced changes with both 0.3 mg and 1 mg dosing but differences vs. sham were not statistically significant, view the section presenting pooled data. The quality of life assessment evaluating visual performance and disturbances did not result in any statistically significant findings favouring the active treatments. · Clinical studies in special populations Analyses of the primary endpoint by CNV lesion subtype, lesion size, age, gender, race, iris pigment (retrospective), baseline visual acuity, PDT use prior to baseline or at baseline, did not overtly show that pegaptanib sodium treatment with the doses 0.3 mg or 1 mg confer a particular benefit in these specific subgroups). · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Discussion on clinical efficacy

Reductions  in  the  growth  of  mean  total  lesion  size,  choroidal  neovascularisation  (CNV)  size,  and fluorescein  leak  size  have  been  shown  in  patients  with  AMD  treated  with  Macugen.  A  1-year treatment with pegaptanib 0.3 mg or 1.0 mg increases the chances of not losing more then 3 lines of vision in active exudative AMD as compared with sham. Since the 0.3 mg and 1 mg doses produced almost identical results, the selection of the 0.3 mg dose for market authorisation appears justified with the given regimen.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The clinical effect of pegaptanib in all subtypes of AMD seems to be in the order of that the reference treatment, i.e.  photodynamic therapy ( PDT, Visudyne, centrally authorised), in the subtypes where the  latter  is  indicated.  There  is  no  study  comparing  pegaptanib  sodium  and  PDT,  and  this  is  a shortcoming  of  the  development  plan  since  it  makes  it  difficult  for  physicians  to  choose  the  most appropriate  treatment  in  the  subgroup  of  patients  for  which  either  treatment  might  be  indicated. Although  not  addressing  this  issue,  a  randomized  and  double  masked  clinical  study  (EOP1012)  of patients  with  predominantly  classic  lesion  subtype  has  been  initiated  to  compare  the  efficacy  and safety of pegaptanib treatment alone to pegaptanib plus PDT treatment.

There appears to be no specific CNV lesion more responsive to the treatment than others rendering the labelling  non-restricted  in  terms  of  lesion  size  and  type  much  obviating  the  need  for  repetitious angiography and detailed delineation of the lesion.

Some imbalances were observed in terms of baseline lesion characteristics. A meta-analysis performed for photodynamic therapy (PDT) recently suggested that lesion size was a more significant predictive factor for the magnitude of treatment benefit than either lesion composition or visual acuity (Blinder et al,  2003).  However,  based  on  exploratory  analyses,  lesion  size  was  not  a  significant  parameter  for determining the effect of pegaptanib. The CHMP concluded that the difference observed in CNV and total lesion size at baseline was unlikely to be an important  confounding factor in the interpretation of the results after one-year treatment.

The  main  problem  with  the  2-year  efficacy  data  was  the  lack  of  difference  in  responders  and  the virtual lack of difference in VA worsening between the 0.3-mg pegaptanib active group (as well as other groups) and the sham group in study, EOP 1003, conducted mostly in Europe. When comparing EOP 1003 and 1004, it appears that the evolution is similar in the two lowest active dose groups across both studies, whereas progression towards poor VA is much more pronounced in the sham+DC group in EOP 1004 than in EOP 1003. Thus, the efficacy of pegaptanib seems to have been consistent across both studies. An ITT analysis over the 2-year period based on the original randomisation supported this conclusion.

On  the  other  hand,  baseline  VA  had  an  influence  on  the  response,  both  in  the  active  or  sham treatments,  but  exactly  to  the  same  extent,  with  a  better  outcome  for  patients  with  &lt;54  letters  at baseline. The influence of baseline VA may also translate the natural history of AMD, with a growth phase of the CNV complex along with loss of vision that is followed by a phase of stable, lower vision accompanied by an involution and remodeling of the lesion to disciform scar. On this background, the CHMP also agreed that there is no evidence that pegaptanib treatment benefit would be different for patients with initially good or poor VA, and that individual patients with very poor baseline VA may still benefit from pegaptanib. No predictors of response to pegaptanib have been identified. The Applicant provided the final study reports of the 2 nd year of treatment of EOP 1003 and 1004 to provide reassurance on long-term safety and benefit as regards preservation of useful visual acuity. At the Week 54 visit, patients in the active therapy groups were re-consented and re-randomized on a 1:1 basis  to  either  discontinue  or  continue  treatment  for  a  further  48  weeks  (8  injections).  Patients receiving sham treatments were re-consented and re-randomized on a 1:1:1:1:1 basis to discontinue the  masked  treatment,  continue  in  the  study  receiving  one  of  the  3  active  treatments,  or  continue receiving  sham  treatments.  The  Week  54  randomization  was  stratified  by  center  and  visual  acuity (VA) in the study eye at Week 54 (better than 20/100 versus equal to, or worse than 20/100). The number of patients per treatment group was thus considerably reduced, especially in the sham control group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical safety

## · Patient exposure

The safety documentation submitted consisted of data collected from all phase I-III trials as well as the 30-week results of an open-label cohort of the 1-year safety/PK study EOP1006. In addition, safety results were reported from clinical studies with the indication diabetic macular oedema EOP1002 and 1005 and von Hippel-Lindau EOP1007, the last two still ongoing. All safety data were included up to 26-09-2003. For the ongoing studies (post Week 54 cohorts of EOP1003 and EOP1004; EOP1005;

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

EOP1006; and EOP1007), SAEs and deaths as of a 30-04-2004 data cut-off date were included in the dossier.

Safety  endpoints  included  all  ocular  and  non-ocular  reported  adverse  events  (regardless  of  the perceived relationship to study treatment), serious adverse events and deaths, discontinuations, clinical laboratory  values,  and  vital  signs  (blood  pressure,  pulse  rate  and  body  weight).  All  adverse  events were coded according to the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) 5.1. If a patient experienced  more  than  one  occurrence  of  the  same  event,  only  the  event  with  the  highest  severity value was counted.

Approximately  1000  patients  have  been  treated  at  or  above  the  recommended  dose  on  a  long-term basis and close to 8000 IVT injections of pegaptanib have been performed. Macugen was administered to 892 patients in controlled studies for one year (total number of injections = 7545, mean number of injections/patient = 8.5) at doses of 0.3, 1.0 and 3.0 mg  (Tables 1-2). All three doses shared a similar safety profile.

| Table 1. Exposure Number of Patients         |   0.3 mg |   1 mg |   3 mg |   All active doses* |   Sham |
|----------------------------------------------|----------|--------|--------|---------------------|--------|
| Studies 1003 and 1004 AMD, 54 Week Cohort    |      295 |    301 |    296 |                 892 |    298 |
| Non-controlled exudative AMD, all patients 1 |        0 |      3 |     61 |                  73 |      0 |
| DME Patients 2 , EOP1002                     |        0 |      0 |     10 |                  10 |      0 |
| Overall Total                                |      295 |    304 |    367 |                 975 |    298 |

| Table 2 Number of Injections Administered Total number of injections   | 0.3 mg   | 1 mg 3 mg   | All Doses*   | Sham   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|-------------|--------------|--------|
|                                                                        |          | N=304 no    | N=975        |        |
| Studies 1003 and 1004 AMD, 54                                          | N=295    | N=367       |              | N=298  |
| Week Cohort                                                            | 2478     | 2568 2499   | 7545         | 2557   |
| Phase 1/2 exudative AMDstudies                                         |          | 3 62        | 74           |        |
| Study 1006 1 exudativeAMD                                              | product  | 218         | 218          |        |
| Study 1002 2 DME                                                       |          | 53          | 53           |        |
| Total                                                                  | 2478     | 2571 2832   | 7890         | 2557   |

In the 295 patients who were treated with the recommended dose of 0.3 mg for one year (total number of  injections  =  2478,  mean number of injections/patient = 8.4), 84% of the patients experienced an adverse  event  attributed  by  the  investigators  as  being  related  to  the  injection  procedure,  3%  of  the patients experienced a Serious Adverse Event potentially related to the injection procedure, and 1% experienced an adverse event potentially related to the injection procedure that led to study treatment interruption  or  discontinuation. Twenty seven percent (27%) of the patients experienced an adverse event  attributed  by  the  investigators  as  being  related  to  the  study  drug.  Two  patients  (0.7%) experienced Serious Adverse Events potentially related to study drug. One of these patients had an aortic aneurysm;  the  other had  a retinal  detachment  and  retinal  haemorrhage,  which  led  to discontinuation of treatment.

* Includes 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg and 2 mg doses from study NX109-01; 1Only the completed cohort from study EOP1006 is included; 2Study EOP1005 is not included as it is ongoing and has not been unmasked. * Includes 0.25 mg, 0.5 mg and 2 mg doses from study NX109-01; 1Only the completed cohort from study EOP1006 is included; 2Study EOP1005 is not included as it is ongoing and has not been unmasked. · Adverse events Medicinal product no longer authorised

Overall pegaptanib sodium injection was well tolerated at all doses studied, since the discontinuation rates in the pivotal studies were 8-13% (1-2% for adverse events) and consistent across the treatment arms.

Most of the adverse events were ocular, predictable and judged by the investigator to be related to the IVT  injection  procedure  (Table  4).  Common  ocular  adverse  events  included  eye  pain,  vitreous floaters,  punctate  keratitis,  iatrogenic  cataract,  reduced  visual  acuity,  vitreous  opacity,  anterior chamber  inflammation,  increased  intraocular  pressure  (IOP)  and  visual  disturbance.  Mild,  transient

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

increases  in  IOP  were  expected  with  IVT  injection  of  pegaptanib  sodium  but  were  manageable. Increases in IOP &gt; 10 mmHg in comparison to pre-treatment values were seen after injection in 6-11% of patients. A few cases needed pharmacological interventions to restore IOP to pre-injection levels.

Table 4 Most Frequently Occurring Adverse Events in the SOC Eye Disorders in Completed Controlled Exudative AMD Studies

Punctate keratitis Study eye 97 (33) 91 (30) Fellow eye 6 (2) 7 (2) Cataracts Study eye 51 (17) 61 (20) Fellow eye 28 (9) 41 (14) Visual acuity reduced Study eye 67 (23) 47 (16) Fellow eye 22 (7) 15 (5) Vitreous opacities The  most  commonly  occurring  non-ocular  adverse  events  by  preferred  term  occurring  in ≥ 5%  of patients in any treatment group included nausea, arthralgia, headache, nasopharyngitis, bronchitis and hypertension.  Few  systemic  events  occurred  with  meaningful  excess  in  pegaptanib  sodium  arms compared with sham. This determination was based upon examination of all causality and study drug related  SOC/preferred  terms  and  assessed  in  terms  of  absolute  increase  in  frequency  of  patients reporting events, the presence of a dose response, and the number of AEs and their severity. There was no evidence of an overall increase in the proportion of patients with AEs related to elevated blood pressure after administration of  pegaptanib sodium. The incidence of systemic vascular hypertensive disorders (including the preferred adverse event terms of hypertension, hypertension aggravated and systolic  hypertension)  was  similar  in  the  pegaptanib  sodium  (10%)  and  sham  (10%)  patients.  In addition, in the open-label cohort of  Study  EOP1006  where  blood  pressure  was  examined prospectively and more frequently for up to 30 weeks, there was no evidence of an increase in blood pressure  after  administration  of  pegaptanib  sodium  3  mg.  Headache  was  reported  with  a  slightly higher incidence in the pegaptanib sodium arms (7%) compared with the sham arms (4%). Headaches were predominantly mild in severity and approximately half of the cases in the active and sham arms were assessed to be related to the injection procedure. It was very infrequently (3 patients in the active arms,  &lt;1%) assessed to be related to the study drug. There were no notable differences among the three  pegaptanib  sodium  dose  groups  in  the  incidence  of  systemic  AEs,  consistent  with  the  low systemic levels of pegaptanib sodium at all dose levels. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Number of Patients (%)   | Pegaptanib Sodium Dose   | Pegaptanib Sodium Dose   | Pegaptanib Sodium Dose   | Pegaptanib Sodium Dose   | Pegaptanib Sodium Dose   |
|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Eye Disorder SOC:        | 0.3 mg N=295             | 1 mg N=301               | 3 mg N=296               | All doses N=892          | Sham N=298               |
| Preferred Term:          |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| Eye pain                 |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| Study eye                | 97 (33)                  | 97 (32)                  | 105 (35)                 | 299 (34)                 | 83 (28)                  |
| Fellow eye               | 9 (3)                    | 3 (1)                    | 5 (2)                    | 17 (2)                   | 7 (2)                    |
| Vitreous floaters        |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| Study eye                | 88 (30)                  | 103 (34)                 | 103 (35)                 | 294 (33)                 | 23 (8)                   |
| Fellow eye               | 7 (2)                    | 7 (2)                    | 7 (2)                    | 21 (2)                   | 3 (1)                    |
| Punctate keratitis       |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| Study eye                | 97 (33)                  | 91 (30)                  | 98 (33)                  | 286 (32)                 | 79 (27)                  |
| Fellow eye               | 6 (2)                    | 7 (2)                    | 3 (1)                    | 16 (2)                   | 7 (2)                    |
| Cataracts                |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| Study eye                | 51 (17)                  | 61 (20)                  | 69 (23)                  | 181 (20)                 | 54 (18)                  |
| Fellow eye               | 28 (9)                   | 41 (14)                  | 40 (14)                  | 109 (12)                 | 32 (11)                  |
| Visual acuity reduced    |                          |                          |                          | authorised               |                          |
| Study eye                | 67 (23)                  | 47 (16)                  | 52 (18)                  | 166 (19)                 | 71 (24)                  |
| Fellow eye               | 22 (7)                   | 15 (5)                   | 12 (4)                   | 49 (5)                   | 18 (6)                   |
| Vitreous opacities       |                          |                          |                          |                          |                          |

The safety data described below summarise all procedure and drug potentially related adverse events in the 295 patients in the 0.3 mg treatment group. The adverse reactions are described by system organ class and frequency (very common ( ≥ 1/10), common ( ≥ 1/100 and &lt;1/10), and uncommon ( ≥ 1/1000 and &lt;1/100).

Psychiatric  disorders  (uncommon:  nightmare,  depression).  Nervous  system  disorders  (common: headache).

Eye  disorders:  these  ocular  adverse  reactions  were  considered  potentially  related  to  treatment  with Macugen  (either  injection  procedure  or  due  to  Macugen),  and  for  the  most  part  were  considered related to the injection procedure, very common: anterior chamber inflammation, eye pain, increased intraocular  pressure,  punctate  keratitis,  vitreous  floaters  and  vitreous  opacities;  common:  abnormal

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

sensation in eye, cataract, conjunctival haemorrhage, conjunctival hyperaemia, conjunctival oedema, conjunctivitis,  corneal  dystrophy,  corneal  epithelium  defect,  corneal  epithelium  disorder,  corneal oedema, dry eye, endophthalmitis, eye discharge, eye inflammation, eye irritation, eye pruritus, eye redness, eye swelling, eyelid oedema, lacrimation increased, macular degeneration, mydriasis, ocular discomfort, ocular hypertension, periorbital haematoma, photophobia, photopsia,  retinal haemorrhage, vision blurred, visual acuity reduced, visual disturbance, vitreous detachment, and vitreous disorder; uncommon: asthenopia, blepharitis, conjunctivitis allergic, corneal deposits, eye haemorrhage, eyelids pruritus, keratitis, vitreous haemorrhage, pupillary reflex impaired, corneal abrasion, retinal exudates, eyelid  ptosis,  retinal  scar,  chalazion,  corneal  erosion,  decreased  intraocular  pressure,  injection  site reaction, injection site vesicles,  retinal detachment, corneal disorder, retinal artery occlusion, retinal tear, ectropion, eye movement disorder, eyelid irritation, hyphaema, pupillary disorder, iris disorder, ocular icterus, anterior uveitis, deposit eye, iritis, optic nerve cupping, pupillary deformity, retinal vein occlusion, and vitreous prolapse.

Ear and labyrinth disorders (uncommon: deafness, Meniere's disease aggravated, vertigo).

Cardiac  disorders  (uncommon:  palpitations).  Vascular  disorders  (uncommon:  hypertension,  aortic aneurysm). Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders  (common:  rhinorrhea;  uncommon: nasopharyngitis). Gastrointestinal disorders (uncommon : vomiting, dyspepsia). Skin and subcutaneous  tissue  disorder  (uncommon:  contact  dermatitis,  eczema,  hair  colour  changes,  rash, pruritus, night sweats). Musculoskeletal  and  connective  tissue  disorders  (uncommon:  back  pain).  General  disorders  and administration  site  conditions  (uncommon:  fatigue,  rigors,  tenderness,  chest  pain,  influenza  like illness).  Investigations  (uncommon:  increased  gamma-glutamyltransferase).  Injury,  poisoning  and procedural complications (uncommon: abrasion) · Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events Serious  ocular  Adverse  Events  reported  in  Macugen  treated  patients  included  endophthalmitis  (12 cases,  1%),  retinal  haemorrhage  (3  cases,  &lt;1%),  vitreous  haemorrhage  (2  cases,  &lt;1%)  and  retinal detachment (4 cases, &lt; 1%). The serious ocular events were principally judged by the investigator to be  related  to  the  injection  procedure  and  not  to  the  study  drug  itself.  A  low  number  of  traumatic cataracts  were  reported  in  the  pivotal  studies,  all  of  which  were  iatrogenic  in  nature.  All  of  these patients subsequently had a cataract extraction. Among  patients  experiencing  any  of  these  complications,  only  one  (the  AE  being  a  vitreous haemorrhage) sustained severe vision loss ( ≥ 6 lines) as compared to vision prior to the event. All  adverse  events  and  ocular  adverse  events  were  analysed  by  the  time  period  of  occurrence:  in relation to injections n°'s 1-3, 4-6 and 7-9. The incidence of adverse events was slightly higher in the pegaptanib-treated patients during the first 3 injections (74-75%) compared to those occurring during injections 4-6 (66-69%) or 7-9 (62-68%). The same decrease over time was seen in the sham-treated patients. In general terms, dose related AEs were not noted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Following the CHMP opinion of 15 September 2005 for Macugen, cases of anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, including angioedema, in patients following administration of pegaptanib along with various medications administered as part of the injection preparation procedure, have been reported. In particular, 5 serious cases and 2 moderate cases of anaphylaxis/hypersensitivity with a clear temporal relationship to Macugen injection have been reported in the US over the course of 5 months. A direct causal relationship to Macugen or any of the various medications administered as part of the injection preparation procedure, or to other factors has not been established in these cases (see SPC sections 4.4 and 4.5).

## · Laboratory findings

Not analysed.

## · Safety in special populations

SAEs were analysed with respect to age and gender. There was an increase in SAEs with increasing age across all treatment arms, No gender-related differences of SAEs were identified.

- Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PDT was allowed only once prior to the study, at baseline upon entry into the study, and during the course  of  the  study  (post-baseline).The  administration  of  PDT  with  verteporfin  was  allowed  for patients with predominately classic lesions, the only lesion subtype for which it was approved at the time  of  study  planning.  Prior  PDT  was  a  stratification  factor  during  randomization,  ensuring  the proportion of patients who had prior PDT was balanced across treatment groups. Based on exploratory analyses there was no evidence of a significant adverse interaction between concomitantly administered pegaptanib sodium and PDT with verteporfin.

## · Discontinuation due to adverse events

In the combined pivotal studies, few patients on either active or sham treatment discontinued from the study (from 8% to 13%) and these were distributed proportionally between the treatment groups. Most patients  discontinued  for  reasons  other  than  adverse  events;  the  most  common  reason  being  patient request. The proportion of patients who discontinued study treatment due to adverse events was low and similar in the pegaptanib sodium treatment groups (1-2%) and sham group (1%). The incidence of ocular  AEs  leading  to  study  discontinuation  was  higher  in  the  active  treatment  arms  compared  to sham, as would be expected given the generally higher incidence of ocular AEs in the active arms.

The injection procedure should be carried out under aseptic conditions, which includes the use of surgical hand disinfection, sterile gloves, a sterile drape and a sterile eyelid speculum (or equivalent) and the availability of sterile paracentesis (if required). Adequate anaesthesia and a broad-spectrum topical microbicide should be administered prior to the injection (see SPC section 4.2).

Safety during the second year of the trial Three hundred seventy four (374) patients received continuous treatment with Macugen for up to 2 years (128 at 0.3 mg, 126 at 1 mg, and 120 at 3 mg). The overall safety data were consistent with the Year 1 safety data, and no new safety signals emerged. The frequency of endophthalmitis and retinal detachment remained around 1% - 2%. The rate of withdrawals continued to be low also during the second year of treatment. In the 128 patients who were treated with the recommended dose of 0.3 mg for up to 2 years (total number of injections in second year = 913, mean number of injections in the second year = 6.9), there was no evidence of increased in frequency of adverse events compared to those seen during the first year. · Post marketing experience See previous section on serious adverse events. · Discussion on clinical safety A sufficient exposure to the study medication has been achieved. Overall pegaptanib sodium injection was well tolerated at all doses studied with low proportions of patients discontinuing treatment due to adverse  events.  Due  to  the  low  systemic  exposure  following  intravitreous  injection,  there  was  no apparent evidence that treatment with pegaptanib sodium is associated with the systemic safety issues. Overall, the frequency of serious systemic AEs is not in excess of what can be expected in the elderly study population with typical concomitant diseases. This part of safety file does not raise any specific concerns. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There is a small risk of endophthalmitis associated with the intravitreal injection procedure; 0.1 % per injection for Macugen (see SPC secftion 4.4). Endophthalmitis is a potentially devastating SAE and is a  major concern. The applicant has committed to follow up the occurrence of retinal detachment in future studies and during post-marketing.

Overall,  the  rate  of  ocular  serious  adverse  effects  appears  acceptable  provided  that  the  intraocular injections are performed under aseptic conditions to reduce the risk of endophthalmitis. The real risk of  traumatic  ocular  adverse-events  (such  as  traumatic  cataract,  intraocular  bleeding)  might  be underestimated since the studies were performed mostly in excellence centers and by ophthalmologists trained in IVT injections, which will not necessarily be the case after release of the product. Moreover, haemorrhage,  retinal  tears  and  artery  occlusions  raise  concerns  since  they  are  injection  related  and with  the  foreseen  multiple  procedures  they  may  shift  the  benefit/risk  balance  during  long-term

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treatment with pegaptanib. Second year safety data of the pivotal studies was requested and provided reassurance in this respect. Most AEs were less common in year 2 than in year 1.

Following  the  injection,  transient  increases  in  intraocular  pressure  were  seen  in  Macugen  treated patients.  Therefore,  the  perfusion  of  the  optic  nerve  head  and  intraocular  pressure  should  be monitored.  Elevation  of  intraocular pressure should  be  managed  appropriately  post  injection. Moreover patients should be closely monitored for endophthalmitis in the two weeks following the injection. Patients should be instructed to report any symptoms suggestive of endophthalmitis without delay.  Immediate  (on  the  day  of  injection)  and  delayed  intravitreous  haemorrhages  may  occur following pegaptanib injections  (see SPC sections 4.2 and 4.4).

The  potential  for  hypersensitivity  of  intravitreous  injections,  either  of  antibiotics  or  of  biological products, is not well known. Post-marketing reports of cases of anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, including angioedema,  in  patients following  administration of  pegaptanib  along  with  various medications administered as part of the injection preparation procedure, have been reported. A direct relationship  to  Macugen  or  any  of  the  various  medications  administered  as  part  of  the  injection preparation  procedure,  or  to  other  factors  has  not  been  established  in  these  cases.  The  SPC  and package  leaflet  have  been  revised,  requiring  careful  evaluation  of  the  patient's  medical  history  for hypersensitivity  reactions  prior  to  performing  the  intravitreal  procedure,  and  introducing  specific warning and further information about undesirable effects. The applicant also committed as  follow-up measures to  seek  expert  advice  on  these  hypersensitivity  cases  and    on  the  risk  of  hypersensitivity reactions to latex for e.g.  gloves  when used during this kind of ocular procedure and to amend the epidemiological studies to collect systemic anaphylactic/hypersensitivity reaction information. Macugen is  contraindicated  in  case  of  active  or  suspected  ocular  or  periocular  infection  or  known hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients (see SPC section 4.3). Macugen has not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment. However, no special considerations are needed in this population (see SPC section 4.2). Macugen has not been adequately studied  in  patients  with  creatinine  clearance  &lt; 20 ml/min.  No  special  considerations  are  needed  in patients  with  creatinine  clearance  above  20  ml/min  (see  SPC  section  4.2).  Macugen  has  not  been studied  for  use  in  patients  below  the  age  of  18  years.  No  special  considerations  on  posology  and method of administration are needed for elderly patients or in relationship to gender. The applicant did not provide (studies are ongoing) any clue concerning the necessity (and safety) of continuing treatment after 102 weeks. It is clear from the results that the disease is still active after 54 weeks  (CNV  and  total  lesion  size  are  progressing,  vision  is  decreasing)  and  that  the  treatment  is symptomatic, without any evidence of curative effect on the disease. Therefore, the total number of intravitreal injections that might be tolerated before there is an unacceptable increase in serious local AEs is not known. Drug  interaction  studies  have  not  been  conducted  with  Macugen.  Pegaptanib  is  metabolised  by nucleases and therefore cytochrome P450 mediated drug interactions are unlikely. Two early clinical studies conducted in patients who  received Macugen  alone and in combination  with  PDT (photodynamic therapy) revealed no apparent difference in the plasma pharmacokinetics of pegaptanib (see SPC section 4.5). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Macugen has not been studied in pregnant women. Pegaptanib produced no maternal toxicity and no evidence of teratogenicity or foetal mortality in mice at intravenous doses of 1 to 40 mg/kg/day. Reduced body weight (5%) and minimal delayed ossification in forepaw phalanges were observed, only at exposure levels based on AUC of over 300 fold greater than that expected in humans. These finding are therefore considered to be of limited clinical relevance. In the 40 mg/kg/day group, pegaptanib concentrations in the amniotic fluid were 0.05% of the maternal plasma levels. There are no reproductive toxicity studies in rabbits.  No data are available to evaluate male or female mating or fertility indices (see SPC section 5.3).

The potential risk to humans is unknown. The systemic exposure to pegaptanib is expected to be very low after ocular administration. Nevertheless, Macugen should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit to the mother justifies the potential risk to the foetus (see SPC section 4.6).

It  is  not  known  whether Macugen is excreted in human milk. Macugen is not recommended during breast-feeding  (see SPC section 4.6).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Patients may experience temporary visual blurring after receiving Macugen by intravitreal injection. They should not drive or use machines until this has resolved (see SPC section 4.7).

Overdosage with Macugen has not been reported in clinical trials (see SPC section 4.9).

## 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment

## Quality

Quality aspects are satisfactory for a product of this type. It is developed, manufactured and controlled in a way that indicates satisfactory uniformity from batch to batch. This in turn should give rise to a reliable  and  consistent  performance  in  the  clinic,  reproducing  the  results  of  the  clinical  trials  upon which evidence of efficacy and safety is based.  There  are  no  unresolved  quality  issues  that  have  a negative impact on the benefit/risk balance.

## Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

Macugen  is  a  pegylated  modified  oligonucleotide  that  binds  with  high  specificity  and  affinity  to extracellular Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF)165 inhibiting its activity. VEGF is a secreted protein that induces angiogenesis, vascular permeability and inflammation, all of which are thought to contribute to the progression of the neovascular (wet) form of (AMD). VEGF165   is the VEGF isoform believed  to  be  preferentially  involved  in  pathological  ocular  neovascularisation.  The  selective inhibition in animals with pegaptanib proved as effective at suppressing pathological neovascularization  as  pan-VEGF  inhibition,  however  pegaptanib  spared  the  normal  vasculature whereas pan-VEGF inhibition did not. Non-clinical  data  revealed  no  special  hazard  for  humans  based  on  conventional  studies  of  safety pharmacology,  repeated  dose  toxicity  and  genotoxicity.  There  are  no  studies  on  the  carcinogenic potential of pegaptanib. Pegaptanib produced no maternal toxicity and no evidence of teratogenicity or foetal mortality in mice at  intravenous  doses  of  1  to  40  mg/kg/day.  Reduced  body  weight  (5%)  and  minimal  delayed ossification in forepaw phalanges were observed, only at exposure levels based on AUC of over 300 fold  greater  than  that  expected  in  humans.  These  finding  are  therefore  considered  to  be  of  limited clinical relevance. In the 40 mg/kg/day group, pegaptanib concentrations in the amniotic fluid were 0.05% of the maternal plasma levels. There are no reproductive toxicity studies in rabbits. No data are available to evaluate male or female mating or fertility indices. Efficacy Medicinal product no longer authorised

Macugen was studied in two controlled, double-masked randomised studies (EOP1003; EOP1004) in patients with neovascular AMD. A total of 1208 patients were enrolled and 1190 were treated (892 Macugen, 298 sham) with  a  median  age  of  77  years.  Patients  received  a  mean  of  between  8.4-8.6 treatments out of a possible 9 total across all treatment arms in the first year. Patients were randomised to receive sham or 0.3 mg, 1 mg or 3 mg pegaptanib administered as intravitreal injections every 6 weeks  for  48  weeks.  Verteporfin  photodynamic  therapy  (PDT)  was  permitted  in  patients  with predominantly  classic  lesions  at  the  discretion  of  the  investigators.  The  two  trials  enrolled  patients including  all  neovascular  AMD  lesion  subtypes  (25%  predominantly  classic,  39%  occult  with  no classic  and  36%  minimally  classic),  lesion  sizes  up  to  12  disc  areas,  of  which  up  to  50%  could  be comprised of subretinal haemorrhage and/or up to 25% fibrotic scar or atrophic damage. Patients had up to one prior PDT and baseline visual acuity in the study eye between 20/40 and 20/320.

The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients losing less than 15 letters of visual acuity from  baseline  up  to  54  weeks  assessment.  At  one  year,  pegaptanib  0.3  mg  exhibited  a  statistically significant treatment benefit for the primary efficacy endpoint; proportion of patients losing less than 15 letters of visual acuity (prespecified pooled analysis, pegaptanib 0.3 mg 70% versus sham 55%, p = 0.0001; EOP 1003 pegaptanib 0.3 mg 73% versus sham 59%, p = 0.0105; EOP1004 pegaptanib 0.3 mg 67% versus sham 52%, p =  0.0031). Pegaptanib 0.3mg showed treatment benefit regardless of baseline lesion subtype, lesion size and visual acuity as well as age, gender, iris pigmentation and prior and/or baseline PDT usage.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

At  the  end  of  the  first  year  (week  54),  approximately  1050  of  the  original  1200  patients  were  rerandomized to either continue the same treatment or to discontinue treatment through week 102. On average,  the  treatment  benefit  was  maintained  at  102  weeks  with  continuing  preservation  of  visual acuity  for  patients  re-randomized  to  continue  pegaptanib.  Patients  who  were  re-randomized  to discontinue pegaptanib after one year, lost visual acuity during the second year.

Data over a two-year period indicate that Macugen treatment should be initiated as early as possible. In advanced disease the initiation and continuation of Macugen therapy should consider the potential for useful vision in the eye.  Macugen therapy administered to both eyes concurrently has not been studied.

## Safety

In the 295 patients who were treated with the recommended dose of 0.3 mg for one year, 84% of the patients experienced an adverse event attributed by the investigators as being related to the injection procedure, 3% of the patients experienced a Serious Adverse Event potentially related to the injection procedure, and 1% experienced an adverse event potentially related to the injection procedure that led to  study  treatment  interruption  or  discontinuation.  Twenty  seven  percent  (27%)  of  the  patients experienced an adverse event attributed by the investigators as being related to the study drug; 1% of the  patients  experienced  a  Serious  Adverse  Event  potentially  related  to  study  drug,  and  0.3% experienced  an  adverse  event  potentially  related  to  the  study  drug  that  led  to  study  treatment interruption or discontinuation.

- An educational plan for physicians and health care providers which is aimed at risk minimisation and to support the safe and effective use of the product. This plan shall consist of measures aiming to minimise adverse events associated with the intravitreous injection procedure (e.g. endophthalmitis) through adequate education about:

The  potential  for  hypersensitivity  of  intravitreous  injections,  either  of  antibiotics  or  of  biological products, is not well known. Post-marketing reports of cases of anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions, including angioedema,  in  patients following  administration of  pegaptanib  along  with  various medications administered as part of the injection preparation procedure, have been reported. A direct relationship  to  Macugen  or  any  of  the  various  medications  administered  as  part  of  the  injection preparation procedure, or to other factors has not been established in these cases. Risk management plan The Applicant has provided a risk management plan that includes: · Continued  monitoring  of  the  safety  data  with  detailed  evaluation  of  all  intravitreous  injection procedure  related  adverse  events  of  several  ongoing  clinical  trials  that  will  increase  the  number  of patients treated with pegaptanib within the next five years to 2,870, representing 31,309 pegaptanib sodium injections, most of them given over the course of 1 year or more; · Two  epidemiological studies, one based on Medicare data in the USA,  the other an epidemiological cohort study in the EU that may define risk factors and subgroups of patients with a higher risk of adverse events; Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -The intravitreal procedure as it was performed in the pivotal clinical studies
- -Use of antibiotics
- -Sterile techniques to minimize risk of infection
- -Use of povidone iodine
- -Use of anesthetic to ensure patient comfort
- -Performing lid scrubs
- -Techniques for the intravitreal injection
- -Management of endophthalmitis
- -Management of IOP
- -Understanding the risk factors involved in developing endophthalmitis
- -Reporting of serious adverse events
- An  educational  plan  for  patients  which  is  aimed  at  risk  minimisation  and  to  support  safe  and effective use for the product. This plan shall consist of measures to provide adequate education on:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Key signs and symptoms of serious adverse events
- -When to seek urgent attention from the health care provider

In addition, the applicant has committed to implementation of the educational plans nationally based on these elements, and to provide these elements as elaborated to the competent authorities prior to marketing for checking and agreement.

The Member States will ensure that the education plans for physicians and health care providers, and patients  contain  the  key  elements  as  detailed  in  the  RMP  and  are  suitable  for  minimising  adverse events associated with the intravitreous injection procedure (e.g. endophthalmitis)  prior to marketing.

Furthermore,  the  applicant  committed  to  provide  a  proposal  for  a  methodology  to  assess  the effectiveness of risk minimisation measures across the EU, including milestones for such assessment. This  should  be  in  line  with  the  CHMP  Guideline  on  Risk  Management  Systems  for  Medicinal Products for Human use and should be submitted within 30 days after the Commission Decision. The RMP should be updated as recommended in the CHMP Guideline on Risk Management Systems for Medicinal Products for Human use,  and submitted at the same time as PSURs, when new information is  received,  within  60  days  of  an  important  milestones  being  reached  or  the  results  of  a  study becoming available  (see follow-up measures timeline), and upon request of a Competent authority.

The injection  procedure  is  considered  a  matter  of  safety  concern  given  the  occurrence  of  alarming injection-related  ocular  serious  adverse  effects  (SAEs).  Overall,  these  SAEs  led  to  few  incidents  of severe visual loss or treatment discontinuations and may not, by themselves, reverse the benefit/risk ratio. The procedure of intravitreous injection of Macugen could induce anaphylactic/hypersensitivity reactions. A direct relationship to Macugen or any of the various medications administered as part of the injection preparation procedure, or to other factors has not been established in the cases reported.

Lastly,  the  applicant  committed  to  update  the  RMP  to  include  specific  surveillance  measures  for anaphylactic/hypersensitivity reactions, and to provide 6-monthly Periodic Safety Update Reports to the EMEA including a section devoted to the issue of anaphylaxis/hypersensitivity. Benefit/risk assessment Clinically, a 1-year treatment with pegaptanib, 0.3 mg or 1.0 mg every 6 weeks intravitreously in the affected  eye,  increases  the  chances  of  not  losing  more  then  3  lines  of  vision  (=  responder  rate)  in active exudative AMD as compared with sham. Since the 0.3 mg and 1 mg doses produced almost identical  results,  the  selection  of  the  0.3  mg-dose  for  market  authorisation  is  justified,  although  the very low efficacy of the 3.0-mg dose, and the lack of dose-response relationship, are puzzling. There is  no  way  of  telling  whether  a  lower  dose  or  a  longer  treatment  interval  could  not  have  achieved similar effects as those obtained at Week 54 in EOP 1003 and 1004. The results obtained during the second year of the study, during which patients were re-randomised to either  continue  or  stop  study  medication,  are  still  statistically  significant  although  less  convincing mainly due to an unexpected behaviour of the control group in one of study (EOP 1003). However, patients who stopped active treatment after one year had a much faster deterioration in the affected eye than those who continued on active treatment. The safety and efficacy of Macugen beyond two years have  not  been  demonstrated.  The  applicant  has  committed  to  optimise  the  recommendations  for treatment duration. The clinical  effect  of  pegaptanib  in  all  subtypes  of  AMD  (predominantly  classic,  minimally  classic and  occult)  over  1  year  approximates  that  of  reference  photodynamic  therapy  (Visudyne,  centrally authorised) in the subtypes where the latter is indicated. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Treatment with Macugen  is for intravitreal injection only and should be administered by ophthalmologists  experienced in intravitreal injections.

In conclusion, the benefit/risk balance is positive. Although the absolute benefit in terms of slowing the  loss  in  visual  acuity  may  be  modest,  the  severity  of  the  disease  and  the  paucity  of  current treatments must  be  taken  into account. There  is risk of intraocular adverse  events,  notably endophthalmitis, especially if rigourous injection techniques are not followed; this risk should be kept under  control  with  the  RMP  proposed  by  the  Applicant,  and  according  to  the  conditions  and restrictions for safe and effective use put in place and addressed to the marketing authorisation holder and the Member States.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Recommendation

'Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the benefit/risk ratio of Macugen in the treatment of for the treatment of neovascular (wet) age-related macular degeneration was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.

<!-- image -->