---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:36:50
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/monotard-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: monotard-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.2789382
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-23 01:52:03.366811
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

Medicinal Product no longer authorised This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Monotard.  For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8. 1. Introduction Diabetes  mellitus  is  a  group  of  metabolic  diseases  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia  resulting  from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both. Acute, life-threatening consequences of diabetes are  hypoglycaemia,  and  hyperglycaemia  with  ketoacidosis  or  non-ketotic  hyperosmolar  syndrome. Long-term complications  of  diabetes  include  retinopathy  with  potential  loss  of  vision,  nephropathy leading to renal failure, and peripheral neuropathy causing foot ulcers, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and sexual dysfunction. The disease is also accompanied by an increased incidence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular, peripheral vascular and cerebrovascular disease. Type  1  diabetes ,  which  usually  is  of  childhood  or  adolescence  onset,  accounts  for  5  to  10%  of diagnosed diabetes; it is characterised by loss of insulin production due to destruction of pancreatic ß cells as a result of an autoimmune response or idiopathic causes. Patients with Type 1 diabetes depend on exogenous insulin for survival. Type 2 diabetes , which usually is of adult onset, is by far the more common form of diabetes. In the Western  World,  it  constitutes  approximately  90%  of  all  cases  of  diabetes.  Type  2  diabetes  is characterised by impaired insulin secretion, insulin  resistance, increased  hepatic glucose  output and lipid  disorders. Patients with type 2 diabetes generally do not require insulin treatment for survival, although  a  substantial  number  (20-30%)  of  patients  need  insulin  to  achieve  acceptable  metabolic control. This  application  seeks  marketing  authorisation  for  human  insulin  for  the  treatment  of  patients  with diabetes mellitus. The active substance of Monotard is human insulin manufactured by recombinant DNA technology in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The formulation is a neutral suspension designed for long duration of action. Monotard  is  intended  for  marketing  in  dose  strengths  of  40  IU/ml  and  100  IU/ml  in  2  different presentations as follows: Monotard 40 IU/ml, 10ml vial Monotard 100 IU/ml, 10ml vial. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The formulation, designed for long duration of action, is a suspension of crystalline (rhombohedral) and  amorphous  insulin  at  neutral  pH.  The  ratio  of  crystalline  to  amorphous  insulin  is  7:3.  The formulation contains the following agents for functions as follows: zinc (protracting agent - stabilizes the crystals and amorphous insulin), sodium chloride (isotonic), sodium acetate (buffer) and methyl para-hydroxybenzoate (preservative). Monotard is presented in 10 ml vials in two strengths: 40 IU/ml and 100 IU/ml. The vial is a glass container  sealed  with  a  laminated  isoprene/bromobutyl  rubber  stopper  (disc)  and  snap-off  cap composed of aluminium and plastic. The glass container is produced from type I Ph.Eur. colourless glass. Active substance The active substance of Monotard, insulin human (rDNA) complies with Ph.Eur. monograph 1999:838 with additional tests as follows:

Identification by Amino acid composition

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Nitrogen content

## Total viable count (CFU/g)

Medicinal Product no longer authorised DNA content Methods  of  analysis  for  the  additional  tests  developed  by  the  applicant  are  fully  described  with relevant validations. Development Genetics Human insulin  is  produced  using  a  genetically  modified  strain  of Saccharomyces  cerevisiae .    The strain carries a plasmid, which codes for the expression of a single chain insulin precursor attached to a pre-pro leader region of the yeast mating factor (MF α 1) gene. The  yeast  transformant  used  to  produce  the  insulin  precursor  is  a  transformant  of Saccharomyces cerevisiae carrying the expression plasmid described above. The applicant has presented the complete DNA sequence of the plasmid. The sequencing presented is assembled from published sequences and in-house sequence determinations as relevant. The gene has also been fully characterised from isolated plasmids  from  long-term  production  scale  fermentation  and  cell  bank  (Original  Mother  Culture (OMC)). Constructional  stability  has  been  investigated  in  production  strain,  prolonged  and  very  long  term fermentation and cell bank (OMC). Cell bank system The cell bank system consists of Original Mother Culture (OMC), New Mother Culture (NMC), MCB and  WCB.  Satisfactory  details  of  the  preparation  of  the  different  types  of  cell  banks  have  been provided and a clear description given of the numbering and origin of the various cell banks and their sublots. Production of active substance The encoded product of secretion during fermentation is a single chain insulin precursor consisting of the first 29 amino acid residues of the insulin B chain linked with three amino acids to the insulin A chain.  This  single  chain  precursor  is  converted  enzymatically  to  an  insulin  methyl  ester,  which  is subsequently hydrolysed to yield human insulin, consisting of two chains (A and B) linked together with disulphide bridges. The purification process employs several chromatography and precipitation steps  for  isolation  of  the  precursor,  the  intermediates,  and  the  active  substance  respectively.  This process is well established and it should be noted the applicant has manufactured that human insulin rDNA over a period of many years during which time a number of improvements have been made. Validation data have been provided for the fermentation, recovery and purification processes. In each case, critical parameters in these processes have been identified and investigated. Satisfactory  analytical  data  are  provided  for  10  recently  produced  batches  of  human  insulin demonstrating a high degree of consistency in the manufacturing process. Stability of active substance The  applicant  has  provided  results  of  testing  of  20  batches  from  the  ongoing  stability  programme. Testing parameters include dry substance, insulin polymer, insulin dimer, A21 desamido insulin, other related  substances  and  assay.  The  data  confirm  that  active  substance  is  stable  for  60  months  when stored at the recommended storage temperature. Other ingredients All excipients comply with Ph.Eur. specifications. Product development and finished product Development Pharmaceutics

The  current  formulation  represents  an  accumulation  of  experience  the  applicant  has  gained  with  a wide  variety  of  insulin  products  over  the  years  dating  back  to  the  early  1950's.  The  present formulation  was  developed in connection with the  switchover from  animal to semisynthetic human

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

insulin  in  the  early  1980's  and  the  introduction  of  genetically  engineered  human  insulin  in  the  late 1980's. There have been no changes to the formulation since then.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Emphasis has been placed on correct insulin crystal size and form in the product. This is  achieved through  a  combination  of  optimised  zinc  concentrations  in  the  formulation  and  through  a  carefully defined and controlled manufacturing process. Compatibility  of  the  container  components  and  product  is  shown  to  be  satisfactory  via  stability studies. Sterilisation by filtration is essential given the heat sensitivity of the active ingredient. Manufacturing process Crystalline  and  amorphous  fractions  are  prepared  separately.  The  amorphous  fraction  is  then transferred to the crystalline fraction resulting in a formulated bulk. Crystalline fraction Insulin and buffer solutions are made separately and sterilized by filtration before mixing. The mixture is  then  seeded  with  insulin  microcrystals  and  allowed  to  crystallise.  After  crystallisation  sterile solutions  containing  zinc,  preservative  and  base  are  combined  with  the  sterile  crystal  suspension  to form the crystalline fraction. Amorphous fraction Solutions  containing  preservative,  insulin  and  buffer  are  prepared  separately  and  combined  with stirring. The resultant solution is sterile filtered into a pressure tank and sterile filtered zinc solution added resulting in the formation of an amorphous precipitate of insulin. Formulated bulk The  amorphous  fraction  is  transferred  into  the  filling  tank  holding  the  crystalline  fraction,  and  the mixed formulated bulk is filled aseptically into the final vial container. Filling occurs in a grade A zone. Vials are inspected individually by manual or automated inspection. Due to the nature of this application i.e. transfer  of  MRP product to the centralised procedure, and based  on  the  extensive  experience  the  applicant  has  with  their  products,  no  new  validation  studies have been initiated for this application. An overview of the processes used together with a description of  the  critical  production  parameters  is  provided.  Summary  results  have  also  been  provided  for Monotard  products  manufactured  at  the  approved  sites  and  in  different  batch  sizes.  Available  data show a consistent, well-controlled manufacturing process. Monotard complies with the requirements of the following Ph.Eur. Monographs: 01/2002:0854 Insulin Preparations, Injectable 1999:0837 Insulin Zinc Injectable Suspension In addition to monograph tests the products are tested by in-house methods for crystal size, identity and content of preservative. Full methodologies have been provided for all in-house methods. A complete justification of the tests employed has been provided. Batch  analysis  data  have  been  provided  for  3  recently  produced  batches  of  each  presentation.    All batches comply with their respective specifications. Stability of the Product Stability reports are provided covering the different strengths and production sites for Monotard. Results  have  been  generated  by  validated,  stability  indicating  methods  and  indicate  satisfactory stability. These results support the shelf life stated in the SPC. Viral Safety and TSE risk assessment

A number of animal derived raw materials are used in the production of human insulin, rDNA. These are peptone, beef extract and pepticase which are used in the preparation and storage of cell banks, L-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

threonine and trypsin used in the purification process to convert human insulin precursor to human insulin  methyl  ester.  Bovine  insulin  microcrystals  are  used  for  seeding  the  crystalline  fraction.  Lthreonine  is  sourced  from  avian  feathers  and  porcine  gelatine,  trypsin  from  porcine  pancreas,  and bovine insulin from bovine pancreas.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pepticase falls outside the scope of the TSE Guideline as it is derived from casein from milk from healthy cows only and no other ruminant materials are used in its preparation. For  peptone  (CEP-2000-175)  and  beef  extract  (CEP-2000-181)  Certificates  of  Suitability  of  the EDQM have been submitted. Although  a  certificate  of  suitability  has  been  provided  by  the  applicant  for  bovine  insulin  from German sourced pancreas (RO-CEP 200-135-Rev OO), suitability of the material for its intended use in  the  finished  product  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  chance  of  contamination  of  German sourced  pancreases  used  to  produce  the  current  batch  of  microcrystals  is  remote.  In  addition,  the manufacturing process for bovine insulin is stated to provide a total reduction of 8.7 logs for BSEagents in the early steps of insulin extraction. Therefore, it is considered that the risk of transmission of  BSE  is  highly  unlikely.  However,  the  applicant  should  undertake  to  source  glands  from  lands categorised as GBR 1 or 2 in future. The risk of transmission of TSE from Monotard to human beings has been appropriately addressed in accordance  with  CPMP/CVMP  Note  for  Guidance  for  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting  animal spongiform encephalopathy via medicinal products (EMEA/410/01). Viral safety issues have been addressed and compliance with relevant guidelines are considered to be met. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Satisfactory  evidence  is  provided  that  product  manufacture  is  well  controlled,  that  consistency  of production is achieved and that a stable product results. The requirements of the relevant directives and guidelines are met. The pharmaceutical portions of the SPC, package insert and product label are supported by the information provided in the dossier. Several minor quality issues will be addressed by the applicant on an ongoing (post-approval) basis. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Monotard  is  a  neutral  suspension  of  the  intermediate  acting  amorphous  (30%)  and  the  long  acting crystalline (70%) human insulin. The addition of zinc provides the basis of the protracting principle. The  preclinical  evaluation  of  the  present  product  is  based  on  the  documentation  for  the  active ingredient insulin human. The programme includes recent studies performed with the insulin analogue insulin aspart. In several of these studies, insulin human was used as a reference substance. Pharmacodynamics · Primary pharmacology programme. The programme includes studies performed in the eighties demonstrating the similarity between insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin human, later studies supplementing above studies and recent studies where insulin human was used as a reference substance for insulin analogues. · In vitro studies Insulin is a hormone composed of two polypeptides (two protein chains named A and B chains having respectively  30  and  21  amino-acids).  Two  disulfide  bonds  link  these  two  chains.  The  structure  of  the insulin  is  similar  of  those  of  several  other  hormones  or  growth-factors  (including  insulin-like  growth factors  IGF-1 and IGF-2). IGF-1 and IGF-2 have some affinity for the insulin receptor, however both growth factors have their own receptors. The insulin and IGFs receptors both belong to the tyrosine kinase family receptors. The activation of the receptors is obtained when the endogenous ligand occupies the receptor.  Once  activated  the  signal  transduction  produced  by  these  receptors,  which  mediates  the physiological  action  of  the  hormone,  starts  with  an  autophosphorylation  of  the  receptor.  The in  vitro

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

studies  explored  the  affinity  of  insulin  analogues  for  other  receptors  belonging  to  the  tyrosine  kinase family.

| Affinity for Insulin Receptor   | Affinity for IGF1-Receptor   |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| =100%                           | 0.03%                        |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  receptor  binding  activity  of  insulin  human  was  studied  in  connection  with  the  pre-clinical development of the insulin aspart (see table 1 below). Table 1: Determination of the receptor affinity of insulin human (rDNA). · In vivo studies The effect on blood glucose in diabetic rats after subcutaneous administration was studied in diabetic rats which received by a single subcutaneous injection either insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin or vehicle. The effect on blood glucose was measured by blood sampling. Insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin showed dose and time dependant antidiabetic effect. The pharmacological effect of insulin human 40 U/ml was studied in a cross-over assay in rabbits. A standard crossover study (British Pharm., 1980) of the hypoglycaemic effect after SC administration in Rabbits (n=36) was done. There was no difference between equivalent preparations made from human insulin or semi-synthetic insulin. · Safety pharmacology programme. In the Irwin test, a few mice showed a slight reduction in exploratory and spontaneous activity. In the Animex test, which is more sensitive, mice showed a decrease in motor activity at the highest dose (5 U/kg). Reduced performance in the rotarod test was also observed in mice at the highest dose (5 U/kg) in one study, but no effects were observed at 100 U/kg in a later study. The locomotion activity in rats were slightly reduced at 100 U/kg, which was the only dose tested. Newer studies support the original ones. The  time  from  disappearance  to  reappearance  of  the  righting  reflex  (sleeping  time)  induced  by pentobarbital in mice was prolonged after treatment with 5 U/kg. The same applies to hexobarbital after treatment with 100 U/kg; the effect was reversed with glucose administration. A dose of 100 U/kg after administration of ethanol significantly increased the mortality and sleeping time. No antagonistic effect on pentylenetetrazol-induced convulsions in mice was observed at 100 U/kg, and this treatment did not act as a  pro-convulsant  either.  Insulin  human    did  not  show  any  inhibitory  effects  on  acetic  acid  induced writhing in mice at 100 U/kg (P-27), indicating absence of analgesic potential. The Body temperature in mice  was  unaffected  by  100  U/kg  (P-28).  Neither  insulin  human  nor  semi  synthetic  insulin  human produced any 'curarizing' effect on neuromuscular transmission after treatment of rats up to 5 U/kg IV. No effects attributed to treatment were observed in an in vitro preparation of guinea-pig ileum and vas deferens . No effects on cardiovascular and respiratory system attributed to treatment were observed in cats and in pigs. The gastro-intestinal motility of mice was unaffected. A transient fall in diuresis was observed in rats, however this effect was reversed after SC administration of glucose. A bromsulphtalein-test showed no indications of pathological effects to liver parenchyma in pigs. Blood platelets of human Rich Platelet Plasma were not affected after in vitro treatment with insulin human. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. Pharmacokinetics No specific pharmacokinetic studies on zinc insulin human have been carried out. The semi-synthetic Monotard  has  been  compared  to  other  insulin  products    in  a  standard  crossover  design  (British Pharm., 1980). Monotard preparations showed a significant prolonged hypoglyceamic effect compared to pork insulin MC. There were no significant difference between the product Monotard containing the human insulin and the product Monotard containing the porcine insulin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  a  recent  study,  semi-synthetic  insulin  and  zinc  suspended  semi-synthetic  insulin  were  compared with their porcine MC counterparts (Nonaka et al. , 1997). Groups of six male fasted rabbits received a subcutaneous injection (0.5 U/kg) of either insulin human, Monotard HM or the corresponding porcine insulin  MC  product.  After  dosing  with  insulin  human,  blood  was  sampled  at  a  shorter  schedule; therefore the results were not statistically comparable with Monotard.

<!-- image -->

|             | Monotard   | Monotard            | Fast acting insulin human (rDNA)   | Fast acting insulin human (rDNA)   | Fast acting insulin human (rDNA)   | Fast acting insulin human (rDNA)   |
|-------------|------------|---------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Parameter   | Man        | Rabbit (3) 0.5 U/kg | Man 022/UK 0.1 U/kg                | Rabbit (3) 0.5 U/kg                | Dog NN 960548 1U/kg                | Rat NN 960550 6U/kg                |
| t ½ (min)   | 540 (1)    | 512                 | 122                                | 144                                | 57                                 | 23                                 |
| C max (pM)  | -          | 874                 | 102                                | 761                                | 2871                               | 18000                              |
| t max (min) | 180 (2)    | 90                  | 145                                | 60                                 | 60                                 | 15                                 |

(2) Bilo et al. 1987.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The serum glucose profile of Monotard HM versus Monotard MC (see Figure 1 below) resembles the above study until 6 hours except from a small significant difference after 2 hours in the later study (p&lt;0.1).  A  significant  difference  between  6  and  8  hours  after  dosing  has  been  found  (p&lt;0.05  and p&lt;0.1). However an ANOVA did not show any difference between the products. Except from a low significant  difference  after  2  hours  (p&gt;0.1),  the  RIA  and ∆ RIA  values  of  serum  insulin  after administration  of  either  HM  and  MC  products  were  similar  (see  Figure  1  below).  There  were  no overall  significant  differences  between  the  two  Monotard  products  when  serum  insulin  levels  were analysed using ANOVA. Some basic pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated and listed in Table 2 below. Figure 1:  Serum  levels  of  glucose  and  insulin  after  injection  of  Monotard  (semi-synthetic insulin) compared to Monotard MC in the Rabbit. Some basic pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated and listed in Table 2 below. Table 2: Pharmacokinetic parameters (1) Hildebrandt et al. 1984.

(3) Nonaka et al. 1997.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Toxicology

## · Single dose toxicity studies.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Mice and Rats were given a single dose of insulin human subcutaneous at dosage up to 4000 U/kg. In higher dosage groups insulin human was compared to semi-synthetic insulin. Apart from few sporadic hypoglycaemic reactions on the day of dosing, no treatment related signs were seen. No significant difference between insulin human and insulin semi-synthetic was observed. · Repeated doses toxicity. The subacute toxicity was examined in rats and dogs during a 4weeks SC study in Wistar Rats and a 13 weeks SC study in Beagle Dogs. Insulin human was administrated subcutaneous for 1 year to Sprague Dawley Rats. At necropsy, there was an increased incidence of mammary gland cyst and mammary tumours were found at microscopic examination.  The  incidence  of  total  number  of  mammary  tumours  as  well  as  fibroadenomas  and adenocarcinomas were however not significant from the control group. There were no other treatmentrelated effects in any organ, including the pituitary. Beagle  dogs  were  given  insulin  human  1  U/kg  twice  daily  SC  for  12 months.  Besides  one  case  of abnormal weight gain, there were no other important effects of the treatments. · Genotoxicity . The genotoxic potential of insulin human was evaluated through a bacterial reverse mutation test in 4 strains  of Salmonella  typhimurium ,  a  clastogenic  activity  test  in  cultured  human  lymphocytes,  a mutagenic activity test on the HGPRT-locus in chinese hamster V79 cells and a micronucleus test in bone marrow erythrocytes. In all the tests insulin human was found non-mutagenic. Insulin  human  was  included  as  reference  substance  in  a  gene  mutation  study  in  mouse  lymphoma L5178Y cells (TFT-resistance). Negative findings were obtained with no signs of cytotoxicity. · Carcinogenicity. MCF-7  human  breast  cancer  cells  were  incubated  with  different  concentrations  of  insulin  aspart, insulin human and an experimental insulin analogue. Dose response curves from seven studies were the same for insulin aspart and insulin human, whereas the experimental insulin analogue had at least 10-times their mitogenic potential. In an exploratory 12-month test and in the formal 12-month toxicity study in the Sprague-Dawley rat the effects of chronic administration of insulin aspart and insulin human on mammary tissues in the Rat were explored.  In  these  studies  some  animals  developed  neoplasms  of  mammary  tissue.  All  animals  in  all treatment groups showed hyperplasia of mammary glandular epithelial cells. In both tests most mammary gland  tumours  were  fibroadenomas  all  had  a  typical  histological  appearance.  The  small  number  of adenocarcinomas had remained local and had not metastasised. The pituitary glands appeared normal. A study exploring the effects of repeated subcutaneous injection of insulin aspart and insulin human for 52 weeks in rats has been conducted. This study has been performed in Sprague-Dawley rats. A doserelated increase in palpable subcutaneous masses has been observed at 30 and 75 U/kg twice daily. A statistically significant (p&lt;0.01) increased incidence of female animals bearing mammary gland tumours at  75  U/kg/bid were found. The increase was evident in benign/malign combined as well as in malign tumours  alone.  No  evidence  of  mammary  gland  hyperplasia  or  of  tumours  was  seen  in  the  test  up  to 12 months in the dog. Particularly under certain experimental conditions insulin may induce mammary tumours in the female Sprague  Dawley  rat  (a  sensitive  species,  strain  and  sex)  probably  related  to  a  mitogenic  and  growthpromoting action of insulin mediated by the insulin receptor. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley  rats.  In  one  12  month  study,  there  was  a  statistically  significant  increase  of  female  animals bearing  benign  and  malign  mammary  gland  tumours  at  the  highest  dose.  There  was  no  increase  of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12 month dog study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Reproduction Toxicity.

There was no statistically significant difference between the immunogenicity in rabbits of insulin human and semi synthetic human insulins. These insulins were found to be significantly less immunogenic than 5 times crystallised pork insulin. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Fertility  and  Embryo-Foetal  Development  studies  have  been  conducted  in  the  Sprague  Dawley  Rat. Fertility was not affected. Males showed slight reduction in the epididymal sperm count. Dams treated with  high  doses  (200  U/kg)  of  insulin  human  showed  pre-  and  post-implantation  loss,  and  a  specific pattern of anatomical abnormalities of the foetuses was seen. The findings are regarded as a consequence of the severe maternal hypoglycaemia. The pre-  and  post-natal  development  of  Sprague  Dawley  rats  born  from  pregnant  females  exposed  to insulin human has been studied. Maternal hypoglycaemia with a few deaths and effects on weight gain and food consumption were observed in the dams. Newborn pups showed slightly increased weight gain, which had become normalised by weaning. There were a few other variations in F1 animals but no major effect was found. Embryo-foetal  development  of  rabbits  born  from  pregnant  females  exposed  to  insulin  human  has  also been studied. The high doses of insulin led to increased food consumption and accelerated weight gain, which persisted to the end of the experiment. There was a dose-related reduction in plasma glucose. In the mid-  and  low  doses  it  had  recovered  by  4h  after  the  first  dose.  Top-dose  group  (5  U/kg)  showed embryonic deaths and related depression of litter size and weight. At 1.5 U/kg and above, foetuses showed skeletal abnormalities. These effects were considered to be due to the induced maternal hypoglycaemia. In Segments I/II study, fertility was not affected in rats given insulin human. Males had a slightly reduced epididymal sperm count. Pre- and post-implantation loss was increased and a proportion of foetuses had characteristic  abnormalities  attributed  to  reduction  of  maternal  blood  glucose.  In  an  embryo-foetal development study in rabbits, an increase in early embryonic deaths with associated decrease in litter size and  litter  weight  was  observed  at  10  U/kg.  A  dose-dependent  increase  in  foetuses  with  skeletal abnormalities was seen. During gestation, abortion and foetal death and malformations were seen, but only during severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women. · Local Tolerance. The local tolerance was studied in rabbits after IM injections of insulin human. It was concluded that insulin  human  caused  damages  which  were  similar  to  those  found  after  injection  of  isotonic  saline solution. A  test  for  local  irritation  in  rabbits  showed  that  there  were  no  differences  in  the  damages  caused  by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human. · Immunotoxicity studies. Insulin  antibodies,  even  in  moderate  and  low  amounts,  may  prevent  rapid  rise  in  free  blood  insulin, thereby  leading  to  higher  postprandial  glucose  levels,  or  cause  increased  risk  of  hypoglycaemia  when insulin is released from circulating insulin antibody complexes. The purity of the injected insulin has been shown to be of crucial importance on the amount of insulin antibody formed. Thus, 5-times crystallised porcine insulin induces more insulin antibodies than the same preparation containing mono component insulin. The  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  has  been  studied  in  Rabbits.  Freund's  adjuvant  and  20  U  of respectively insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin and 5 times crystallized porcine insulin were injected intramuscularly to groups of rabbits twice a week. Serum insulin binding was estimated until 97 days. No statistically  significant  differences  between  the  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  and  semi-synthetic insulin  was  found,  whereas  they  both  were  demonstrated  to  be  significantly  less  immunogenic  that  5times crystallized porcine insulin. It was concluded, that insulin human fulfils the demand of low potential to induce insulin antibodies in accordance with other mono component insulins.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No specific  studies  on  the  immunogenicity  of  administration  of  zinc  insulins  to  laboratory  animals have  been  carried  out.  However  Monotard,  insulin  human,  is  based  on  the  highly  purified  mono component insulin human and hence expected to have a very low immunogenic potential.

The goal of insulin  treatment  is  to  mimic  the  physiologic  pattern  of  insulin  secretion,  which  under normal conditions consist of a basal secretion and meal related short peaks. The most commonly used insulin regimen is the so-called basal-bolus regimen in which basal insulin requirements are provided by one or two injections of long-acting or intermediate-acting insulin and mealtime requirements are

Medicinal Product no longer authorised · Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk Assessment. Insulin  human  is  considered  readily  degradable,  hence  do  not  suggest  any  environmental  risk  for clinical  use.  The  containers  and  devices  in  which  it  is  supplied  are  appropriate  for  disposal  by  the means normally employed for simple medical devices. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects The  main  purpose  in  the  original  studies  for  primary  and  secondary  pharmacodynamics  was  to demonstrate  the  similarity  between  the  new  insulin  human  and  marketed  semi  synthetic  insulin. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology  studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. As the majority of the insulin human preparation is of same composition as the semi synthetic insulin preparations,  no  pharmacokinetic  studies  were  conducted  in  the  original  preclinical  programme. Linearity concerning AUC/dose was confirmed in different species, meaning that there was no drug accumulation. No  specific  safety  pharmacology  studies  on  Monotard  have  been  carried  out.  Effects  seen  in  the original and newer safety pharmacology studies on insulin human can all be related to hypoglycaemia. No  specific  studies  were  conducted  on  toxicity  of  Monotard,  as  the  active  component  is  insulin human. The toxic effects seen in the single dose and repeated dose toxicity studies of insulin human were attributed to the hypoglycaemic activity and thus an exaggerated pharmacological effect caused by  the  high  doses  of  the  insulin.  Increased  weight,  depressed  activity,  convulsions  and  death  were some of these effects. The noted effects on embryos and foetuses were only seen at severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women. All conducted genotoxicity studies were negative for mutagenic potential. An increase in the number of  benign  mammary  adenomas  and  fibroadenomas  has  been  shown  in  Sprague  Dawley  rats.  It  is concluded  that  the  increased  incidence  of  mammary  tumours  seen  in  rats  is  probably  caused  by mitogenic and growth-promoting action via the insulin receptor, but is probably also related to the fact that Sprague Dawley rats are especially sensitive and were given large doses. There was no increase of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12 month dog study. Finally;  a  test  for  local  irritation  in  rabbits  showed  that  there  were  no  differences  in  the  damages caused by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low. 4. Clinical aspects Diabetes is a group of metabolic disorders characterised by hyperglycaemia due to defects in insulin secretion and/or insulin action. The two most common forms of diabetes mellitus are type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is characterised by an absolute deficiency of insulin due to destruction of the pancreatic β -cells. Although the rate of β -cell destruction is variable, all type 1 diabetic patients will eventually  require  exogenous  insulin  for  survival.  In  contrast,  type  2  diabetes  is  characterised  by insulin  resistance,  relative  impairment  of  insulin  secretion  and  increased  hepatic  glucose  output.  In general,  patients  with  type  2  diabetes  do  not  require  exogenous  insulin  for  survival.  Nevertheless, during  the  course  of  the  disease,  a  large  minority  of  these  patients  will  be  treated  with  exogenous insulin to correct persistent hyperglycaemia.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

provided  by  meal  related  injections  of  fast/rapid-acting  soluble  human  insulin/insulin  analogues. Instead  of  separate  injections  of  (intermediate)  long-acting  and  fast-acting  insulins,  the  two  insulin preparations may be mixed (by the patient or as ready-made premixed insulin) before injection. It is generally  accepted  that  the  basal-bolus  regimen  offers  the  best  glycaemic  control.  However,  many patients,  especially  type  2  diabetic  patients  who  produce  significant  amounts  of  insulin  themselves, may  be  adequately  controlled  on  twice-daily  injections  of  (intermediate)  long-acting  insulins  or mixtures of fast-acting and (intermediate) long-acting insulins. Although this regimen may not offer optimal glycaemic control, patient compliance is generally is better for this simpler regimen than for the  multiple  injections  regimens.  Therefore,  for  some  patients,  the  twice-daily  regimen  may  be  an acceptable alternative to the basal-bolus regimens.

| Study                   | Population (Number of subjects)                                        | Design                                                | Dose regimens                                                                                                                                              |
|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Frier et al. 1984       | Healthy males (10 subjects)                                            | Randomised, cross-over, single-dose, single-centre    | One single dose of Monotard, human insulin zinc suspension crystalline 0.2 U/kg and Monotard MC(highly purified porcine insulin zinc suspension) 0.2 U/kg. |
| Bilo et al . 1987       | Healthy males (8 subjects)                                             | no Randomised, cross-over, single-dose, single-centre | One single dose of human insulin NPH (3 different formulations), human insulin zinc(two different formulations). All doses 0.33 IU/kg.                     |
| Owens 1986              | Healthy males (6 subjects)                                             | Randomised, cross-over, single-dose, single-centre    | Monotard (human insulin zinc) 0.1, 0.15 and 0.3 U/kg and porcine insulin zinc 0.1, 0.15 and 0.3 U/kg.                                                      |
| Hildebrandt et al. 1984 | Male and female patients with insulin- dependent diabetes (9 subjects) | Single-dose, single-centre                            | 125-I labelled Monotard (human insulin zinc) 6, 12, 24 and 36 U.                                                                                           |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Intensified  insulin  therapy  can  reduce  the  incidence  of  complications,  and  delay  the  progression  of existing complications in Type 1 and 2 diabetes Clinical pharmacology Four  pharmacodynamic  and  pharmacokinetic  studies  (Table  3)  have  been  listed  as  important references by the clinical expert: three in healthy subjects and one in type 1 diabetic patients. The last study is primarily a pharmacokinetic study. Table 3: Clinical pharmacodynamy trials Pharmacodynamics in healthy subjects The  first  study  ( Frier et  al. )  compared  the  pharmacodynamic  and  pharmacokinetic  properties  of human  insulin  zinc  suspension  crystalline  and  Monotard  MC  (highly  purified  porcine  insulin  zinc suspension). In a randomised cross-over study ten healthy non-obese fasting male subjects received a subcutaneous  injection  in  the  anterior  abdominal  wall  of  either  insulin  product.  The  dose  was  0.2 U/kg.  Blood  glucose,  plasma  insulin  and  plasma  C-peptide  levels  were  obtained  prior  to  drug administration and for a 24-hour period following injection.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 2:  Mean (SEM) blood glucose, plasma insulin and plasma C-peptide following injection of either human insulin zinc suspension crystalline or highly purified porcine insulin zinc suspension (e.g. Monotard MC).

<!-- image -->

In  this  study,  the  porcine  insulin  zinc  suspension  (Monotard  MC)  was  not  compared  with  the equivalent  human  insulin  Monotard,  but  with  a  human  insulin  zinc  suspension  product  which  is entirely crystalline in its formulation.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The decrease in blood glucose was similar from 0 to 3 hours, but at 4 and 7 hours, blood glucose was significantly  lower  after  porcine  insulin  injection.  The  nadir  occurred  at  20  hours,  and  the  blood glucose had not returned to baseline at 24 hours. With regard to plasma C-peptide, nadir was reached at  5  hours  for  both  insulin  types.  Mean  concentrations  were  significantly  lower  following  porcine insulin  injection  at  several  time  points.  It  appears  from  the  figures  that  the  blood  glucose  lowering effects  are  quite  similar.  The  hypoglycaemic  action  starts  within  1-2  hours  and  lasts  for  at  least  24 hours.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The second study ( Bilo et al. ) investigated the pharmacodynamic and the pharmacokinetic properties of  five  different  intermediate-long  acting  human  insulins.  Eight  healthy  non-obese,  fasting  male subjects received a subcutaneous injection in the front of the thigh with the five insulin products in random order. The dose administered to these subjects was 0.33 U/kg. For each subject the injections were separated by at least one week. Blood glucose levels were maintained at fasting level for an 8hour period by a manual euglycaemic clamp, to prevent endogenous insulin secretion. Blood glucose, plasma insulin and plasma C-peptide levels were obtained prior to drug administration and for the 8hour period following injection.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The mean plasma C-peptide remained below fasting concentrations. The glucose requirement from 0-2 hours was statistically significantly higher after administration of the NPH insulins compared to the zinc insulins (including Monotard, insulin human). Due to the short observation time, the duration of action  could  not  be  assessed.  From  this  study  it  appears  that  the  NPH  insulin  types  have  a  more pronounced action during the first hours after injection than the zinc insulin types. The  third  study  ( Owens )  compared  the  pharmacodynamic  properties  of  two  products  (Monotard) containing  respectively  porcine  and  human  insulin  in  six  healthy  male  patients.  All  subjects  were given three doses of each insulin type on different days. The doses were 0.1, 0.15 and 0.3 U/kg given as subcutaneous injections in the anterior abdominal wall. The study also included a control day with no treatment. Blood glucose, plasma insulin and plasma C-peptide levels were obtained prior to drug administration and for 11 hours following injection. Both insulin types resulted in a hypoglycaemic response that started within the first 1-2 hours and reached maximum after about 4 hours. For the rest of the 11-hour study period, the response remained stable for the 0.15 and 0.3 U/kg dose levels, and there was only a moderate recovery towards normoglycaemia for the 0.1 U/kg dose. From this study it seems that the maximum effect is reached about 4 hours after injection. In the only study where subjects were monitored over a period of 24h (Frier et al. ), neither blood glucose nor Cpeptide had returned to baseline levels at 24h. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic data were obtained from the four studies performed in young healthy subjects and insulin-dependent diabetic patients (see table 3). · Absorption and bioavailability Hildebrandt et al. studied the absorption of Monotard, insulin human, at different dose levels in nine insulin-dependent diabetic patients with a mean age of 40.7 years. The doses were 6, 12, 24 and 36 U administered subcutaneously in each subject on four consecutive days, alternating between the thighs. The insulin used was 125-I labelled. The disappearance from the subcutaneous depot was measured externally by gamma counters. A dose-dependent absorption was found with significantly decreasing absorption rates of increasing doses. The times for half of the initial activity to disappear were 9.0 h (6 U), 8.9 h (12 U), 10.9 h (24 U) and 14.8 h (36 U). A  biphasic  pattern  was  seen  in  the  insulin  concentration-time  profile  for  both  porcine  zinc  insulin (Monotard MC) and the human zinc insulin in the study performed by Frier et al. . In the second study (Bilo et  al. )  insulin  levels  were  measured  following  injection  of  five  different  insulins.  After Monotard,  insulin  human,  injection  insulin  levels  were  observed  to  increase  about  two  hours  after injection (Figure 3).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Plasma insulin concentrations Monotard insulin human ( ∆

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Owens  measured  the  plasma  insulin  levels  reached  after  the  administration  of  human  zinc  insulin (Monotard, insulin human) and porcine zinc insulin (Monotard MC). At the two lower dose levels, maximum insulin concentrations were seen 2.5-5 h after injection, followed by a gradual fall over the remaining  period.  At  the  high  dose  level,  insulin  levels  reached  a  plateau  about  three  hours  after injection and started to fall only at the end of the study period. · Distribution No formal  distribution  studies  were  performed  with  human  insulin  human.  Insulin  is  not  bound  to plasma proteins unless circulating antibodies directed against insulin are present. · Elimination Metabolism Metabolism  of  insulin  human  was  not  formally  investigated.  From  previously  published  data  it  is known that insulin is catabolised by various proteases. The degradation products are not active. Excretion The terminal half-life of insulin following a subcutaneous administration is determined by the rate of absorption from the subcutaneous tissue since the half-life in the blood stream is very short (only a few minutes). The mean terminal half-life for insulin human is 220 minutes. Figure 4:  Pharmacokinetic profile of Actrapid, insulin human Mean Serum Insulin (mU/l)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Pharmacokinetics in the target population

## Diabetic patients

Medicinal Product no longer authorised In study 024/UK the pharmacokinetic profile of insulin human in type 1 diabetic patients was shown to be similar to the pharmacokinetic profile in healthy volunteers. When  insulin  human  was  injected  30  minutes  before  a  meal  Tmax  was  80  minutes  whereas  it  was reached  after  97  minutes  when  insulin  human  was  administered  at  mealtime.  The  maximum concentration  (Cmax)  was  36  mU/l  when  injected  at  meal  and  39.9  mU/l  when  injected  30  minutes before  meal.  The  half-lives  for  insulin  human  measured  after  the  different  times  of  administration were equal to 169 and 193 minutes respectively. · Pharmacokinetics in special population Patients with impaired renal or hepatic function The  applicant  has  not  submitted  any  data  on  the  pharmacokinetics  in  patients  with  impaired renal/hepatic  function.  It  is  known  that  the  liver,  the  kidneys  and  the  muscles  are  primary  sites  of insulin  degradation.  Renal  and  hepatic  impairment  may  reduce  insulin  degradation  and  thus  reduce insulin requirements. Pregnancy and lactation No studies have been performed. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of complications during pregnancy and congenital malformations in the baby. Optimising metabolic control before and during pregnancy can reduce this risk. For most of the patients with type 2 diabetes and all patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin is the only way of optimising metabolic control. Insulin can be administered during pregnancy and lactation. Pharmacokinetics in children. No specific study performed with Monotard has been conducted in children. · Interaction studies. No  formal  interaction  studies  have  been  performed.  There  are  no  literature  reports  of  direct pharmacokinetic interactions between insulin and other products. The products which interfere with glucose metabolism through various mechanisms are well identified. It is well established that phosphate-buffered insulin types should never be mixed with Monotard. In such  case,  the  phosphate  precipitates  the  zinc  liberating  the  zinc  insulin  to  the  free  form  (White et al , 1991 and others). This physicochemical interaction may induce severe hypoglycaemic episodes. Finally, Klauser et al. 1988 studied the pharmacodynamics effects and pharmacokinetics parameters observed after the injection  of  different  types  of  insulin,  either  injected  separately  or  mixted  in  the same  injection.  Eight  type  1  diabetic  patients  received  four  different  subcutaneously  injected preparations  of  human  insulin:  Monotard  and  insulin  human  (soluble  fast-acting  human  insulin)  as separate  injections,  Monotard  and  insulin  human  as  mixture,  NPH-insulin  and  insulin  human  as separate injections,  and  NPH-insulin and insulin human as mixture. The dose administered was 0.4 U/kg (two thirds intermediate- or long-acting and one third fast-acting insulin). After administration of the insulins, euglycaemia was maintained by infusion of glucose. The glucose infusion  rate  was  significantly  lower  following  administration  of  Monotard  and  fast-acting  insulin human as mixture compared with the same insulins given as separate injections. The same applied to the  free  insulin  levels.  There  were  no  statistically  significant  differences  between  the  two  NPHinsulin/insulin  human injection procedures.  Other authors  have found similar  results (e.g. Olsson et al. 1987 and Heine et al. 1984). · Conclusion on pharmacokinetic studies.

Monotard  is  a  long-acting  human  insulin.  It  is  a  zinc  suspension,  which  consists  of  a  mixture  of amorphous  (30%)  and  crystalline  (70%)  particles.  The  documentation  of  the  time  aspects  of  the pharmacodynamics of Monotard is quite sparse. Onset of action is within 2½ h, and the peak effect is reached after about 4 hours or later. The duration of action is poorly documented, but probably about 24h.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No specific pharmacodynamic/kinetic data concerning Monotard are available with regard to the effect of  age,  gender,  ethnic  origin,  hepatic  and  renal  impairment.  Like  with  all  subcutaneously  injected insulins,  the  terminal  elimination  half-life  is  determined  by  absorption  rather  than  elimination.  The terminal  elimination  half-life  of  Monotard  has  not  been  documented.  The  elimination  half-life  of intravenously  administered  human  insulin  is  short  (minutes).  Human  insulin  is  eliminated  through degradation in various organs and tissues. There are no active metabolites. Numerous drugs interact with insulin on the dynamic level by affecting glucose metabolism.

Another  double-blind  randomised  cross-over  study  by Tunnbridge et al. 1989 compared  the metabolic  control  achieved  after  a  twice  daily  administration  of  insulin  NPH  or  Monotard  given together  with  fast-acting  soluble  human  insulin.  Eighty-nine  patients  participated  in  the  study  (82 completed it). Each of the two treatment periods lasted 5 months.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised There are no known pharmacokinetic interactions with other products. An important physicochemical incompatibility exists with phosphate-buffered insulin types. These products should never be mixed with Monotard as the phosphate will precipitate the zinc in Monotard liberating the zinc insulin to the free form. In addition, mixing Monotard with fast-acting soluble human insulin may decrease the rate of absorption of the fast-acting insulin. Clinical efficacy Main study (phase III = therapeutic confirmatory trials). Studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients. · Renner et al. unpublished. The first  study  ( Renner et  al. unpublished )  was  a  double-blind  randomised  multicentre  cross-over trial.  This  study  was  aimed  at  comparing  the  effect  on  nocturnal  glucose  regulation  of  a  bedtime injection of Monotard with the effect observed with a porcine zinc insulin in type 1 diabetes patients on intensified insulin therapy (with NPH insulin failure). The treatment periods lasted 3 weeks each. The primary efficacy parameters were fasting blood glucose values (FBG) and area under the blood glucose concentration-time curve (AUC) between 10 p.m. and 8 a.m. It had been planned to include 68 patients into the trial, 101 were randomised, 71 were evaluable for efficacy. As  regards  fasting  blood  glucose,  a  significant  difference  was  noted  between  the  treatment  groups (p&lt;0.001). A lower fasting blood glucose (162mg/dl ± 72) has been achieved after a treatment with the porcine zinc insulin group as compared to the human zinc insulin group (207mg/dl ± 83). With regards to  areas  under  the  nocturnal  blood  glucose  concentration-time  curve  an  advantage  for  the  porcine insulin was observed. The frequency of hypoglycaemic reactions and daily insulin doses were similar. Adverse events occurred with a slightly lower frequency with Monotard. · Tunnbridge et al. 1989. The  second  study  ( Tunnbridge et  al. 1989 )  compared  the  effect  of  Monotard  and  a  long-acting protracted insulin (a formulation consisting of a suspension of crystalline (rhombohedral) insulin at neutral pH) administered in a twice-daily regimen, mixed with fast-acting human insulin on fasting blood glucose. It was a 6-month double blind crossover study in 66 type 1 diabetes patients. Fasting blood glucose obtained after the administration of the long-acting protracted insulin regimen was significantly lower than with the Monotard regimen (6.6±0.8 vs. 8.2 ± 0.5 mmol/l) (no further significant differences between these two long-acting insulins were noted on the 8-point blood glucose profile). However a significant difference between the two insulins was not observed for those patients with fasting blood glucose previously over the median (patients enrolled in this study had previously been enrolled in a similar study comparing NPH insulin and Monotard, see Tunnbridge et  al. 1989 below). Overall blood glucose control, fructosamine and HbA1c were similar for both treatments. The evening dose of the long-acting protracted insulin was slightly but significantly lower than the evening Monotard  dose  (14.9  ±0.8  vs.  15.5  ±  0.8  IU)  confirming  the  lowering  effect  of  the  long-acting protracted insulin on fasting blood glucose. However, the incidence of serious hypoglycaemic effects was  significantly  higher  with  the  long-acting  protracted  insulin  compared  to  Monotard,  with  the majority of nocturnal events occurring between 5 a.m. and breakfast. · Tunnbridge et al. 1989.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Fasting blood glucose did not differ between  the two  regimens; neither did blood glucose concentrations  at  any  time  point.  In  addition  HbA1c,  fructosamine,  insulin  dose  and  frequency  of hypoglycaemia were similar for both treatments.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised · Mellvig et al. 1990. A fourth study ( Mellvig et al. 1990 ) compared the metabolic control and the glucose profiles obtained after the administration of Monotard or a long-acting protracted insulin administered as basal insulin at bedtime in a basal bolus regimen in 15 diabetic adolescents aged 12-19. Three of the patients had already used the multiple injection regimen. The study had a double-blind cross-over design with each period lasting 3 months. The mean levels of fasting blood glucose were high (10.8mmol/l for Monotard) but on the other hand, HbA1c decreased significantly during the study period. The insulin dose tended to increase when the conventional regimen was replaced by the multiple injections regimen, and patients weight increased as  well.  The  basal  insulin  portion  constituted  approximately  40%  of  the  daily  insulin  dose.  The number  of  hypoglycaemic  episodes  was  higher  with  Monotard  in  comparison  with  the  long  acting protracted insulin (but the difference was not found to be significant). · Martina et al. 1989. A final  study  performed  in  type  1  diabetic  patients  ( Martina et  al. 1989 )  compared  the  metabolic control obtained after a treatment with a long-acting protracted insulin and Monotard. Sixteen type 1 diabetic  patients  were  given  either  the  long-acting  protracted  insulin  or  Monotard  at  bedtime  and human insulin at lunch and dinner. The insulin injection regimen was adjusted for the Italian  meal pattern with high caloric intake at lunch and at dinner. After a treatment period of 8 weeks with either the long acting protracted insulin or Monotard as basal insulin the subjects were switched over to the other  basal  insulin  treatment  for  another  8  weeks.  No  differences  between  the  treatments  were revealed for blood glucose profiles, fructosamine, HbA1c, and insulin dose. No safety data are reported in this publication. Studies performed in type 2 diabetic patients. Sane et al. 1992 investigated in an open uncontrolled study the 1 year metabolic control obtained after the  administration  of  either  Monotard  or  a  long  acting  protracted  insulin  in  combination  to  oral hypoglycaemic agents in type 2 diabetic patients. Seventeen type 2 diabetes patients poorly controlled on  oral  therapy  have  been  enrolled  in  the  study.  The  endpoints  used  in  this  study  to  assess  the metabolic control were fasting blood glucose, diurnal blood glucose and HbA1c. Metabolic control was significantly improved with both Monotard and the long-acting protracted insulin at 3 and 12 months of  therapy  (the  difference  was  not  found  to  be  significant).  No  severe  hypoglycaemic  episodes occurred. Discussion on clinical efficacy The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  insulin  has  been  established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  life saving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is  required  by  many  patients  with  type  2 diabetes. It  is  not  possible  to  mimic  the  physiological  plasma  insulin  profiles;  human  insulin  tends  to  selfassociate in a hexameric form after injection into the subcutaneous issue resulting in a relatively slow absorption. Fast/rapid-acting insulin human may be given intravenously (e.g. in diabetic ketoacidosis) and intramuscularly but is predominantly administered subcutaneously. Monotard is for subcutaneous administration. No standard scheme of administration exists and doses to obtain an optimal glycaemic control  vary  individually.  Several  large  studies  have  demonstrated  that  best  results  not  only  on glycaemic control but also on long-term microvascular complications are obtained in both type 1 and type  2  diabetic  patients  with  intensified  regimens,  i.e.  either  with  an  insulin  pump  providing continuously subcutaneous insulin infusion or by injecting human insulin three or more times to the meals guided by frequent blood glucose monitoring in addition to a long- or very-long acting insulin injected  once  or  twice  daily  covering  the  basal  insulin  requirements  (see  for  further  reference:  The Diabetes control and complications trial research group: The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on  the  development  and  progression  of  long-term  complications  in  insulin  dependent  diabetes mellitus.  N  Engl  J  Med  1993, 329 :14-23  and  UKPDS  group:  Intensive  blood  glucose-control  with

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes. Lancet 1998. 352 :837-53.)

Medicinal Product no longer authorised A number of different insulin regimens have been proposed for treatment of diabetes. It is generally accepted that the so-called basal-bolus insulin regimen (one or two injections of long-acting insulin covering  basal  insulin  requirements  in  combination  with  generally  three  injections  of  fast-acting insulin  to  cover  meal-related  insulin  requirements)  generally  yields  the  best  glycaemic  control  in diabetes.  However a number of patients, especially patients with type 2 diabetes can be adequately regulated  by  twice  daily  injections  of  long  acting  insulin  with  or  without  concomitant  injection  of soluble insulin. The publications support the efficacy of Monotard both regarding the use in a conventional twice daily regimen as well as its use as basal insulin in the basal bolus regimen and confirm its pharmacokinetic properties. Clinical safety The data concerning the safety profile of Monotard have been obtained from the published efficacy studies  mainly  including  data  on  Monotard  containing  semi-synthetic  human  insulin,  which  was marketed until 1988 and from periodic safety reports concerning Monotard containing insulin human (rDNA) marketed since 1988. Post-marketing experience An extensive post-marketing experience (more than 31  million patient years of  exposure)  has been gathered  with  human  insulin  since  1988  when  the  first  genetically  engineered  human  insulin  was marketed. Two periodic safety update reports (PSURs) covering the period from March 1993 to end of June 2000 have been assessed. Since the report from Teuscher and Berger (Hypoglycaemia unawareness in diabetics transferred from beef/porcine  insulin  to  human  insulin.  Lancet  1987,  ii.382-5)  there  had  been  focus  on  diminished awareness of hypoglycaemia after changing from animal insulin to human insulin. A review of clinical and epidemiological studies prepared by the applicant could not support this hypothesis, neither could an update of this paper including literature research up to May 1997 could either. The  most  common  reactions  were  hyper-  and  hypoglycaemia,  injection  site  reaction  and  pain, therapeutic response decreased, allergic reaction and rash or pruritus. During the reporting period, two changes have been made in the summary of product characteristics for safety reasons: a more detailed description of the symptoms of hypo- and hyperglycaemia and a more  detailed  description  of  possible  generalised  hypersensitivity  reactions.  Apart  from  these amendments, no regulatory or manufacturer actions have been taken for safety reasons. Discussion on clinical safety Based on the review of the safety data from the extensive post marketing experience, no new safety issue to be included in the product information was identified. The most frequent adverse reactions are hypo-or hyperglycaemia. The safety profile of Monotard is well characterised. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  Safety  and  Batch  to  batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  test  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The active constituent of Monotard is insulin human manufactured by recombinant DNA technology. Monotard  is  a  neutral  suspension  of  the  intermediate  acting  amorphous  (30%)  and  the  long  acting crystalline  (70%)  human  insulin.  Newer  studies  support  the  conclusion  from  the  original  ones  that insulin  human  and  insulin  semi-synthetic  have  identical  blood  sugar  lowering  effect.  No  specific safety studies on zinc insulin human were carried out. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies on insulin human can all be related to hypoglycaemia. There was no conduct of specific toxicology studies for Monotard, the studies reported are those for insulin  human.  The  toxic  effects  seen  in  the  single  dose  and  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were attributed to  the  hypoglycaemic activity. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and  fibroadenomas  has  been  shown  in  Sprague  Dawley  rats.  In  one  12  month  study,  there  was  a statistically  significant  increase  of  female  animals  bearing  benign  and  malign  mammary  gland tumours at the highest dose. It is concluded that the increased incidence of mammary tumours seen in rats  is  probably  caused  by  mitogenic  and  growth-promoting  action  via  the  insulin  receptor,  but  is probably also related to the fact that Sprague Dawley rats are especially sensitive and were given large doses. There was no increase of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12 month dog study. It is concluded that newer studies conducted since the original marketing authorisation for insulin human support the older documentation and do not give reason for new safety concerns. Efficacy Monotard is  a  long-acting  human  insulin.  The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  insulin  has  been established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  life  saving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is required by many patients with type 2 diabetes A number of different insulin regimens have been proposed for treatment of diabetes. It is generally accepted that the so-called basal-bolus insulin regime (one or two injections of NPH insulin covering basal insulin requirements in combination with three injections of fast-acting insulin to cover mealrelated  insulin  requirements)  generally  yields  the  best  glycaemic  control  in  diabetes.  However  a number of patients, especially patients with type 2 diabetes can be adequately regulated by twice daily injections of long-acting insulin with or without concomitant injection of fast-acting soluble insulin. Monotard  has  been  authorised  for  many  years  and  its  use  is  well-established.  The  provided publications support of the efficacy of Monotard both regarding the use in a conventional twice daily regimen as well as its use as basal insulin in the basal bolus regimen and confirm its pharmacokinetic properties. Safety Based on the review of the safety data from the vast post marketing experience, no new safety issues were revealed that should be included  in the  present  summary of product  characteristics.  The  most frequent  adverse  reactions  are  hypo-or  hyperglycaemia.  The  safety  profile  of  Insulatard  is  well characterised and acceptable. Benefit/risk assessment Based  on  the  submitted  documentation  on  pharmacodynamic,  pharmacokinetic  and  clinical  data  as well  as  the  well-established  use  of  Monotard,  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  Monotard  is  considered adequately demonstrated. Recommendation Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Monotard in the treatment of diabetes mellitus was favourable.