---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:01:51
document_pages: 28
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/neospect-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: neospect-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 12.7845465
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-31 03:15:34.790496
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures, which have been finalised before 1 June 2003. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Introduction NeoSpect  is  a  diagnostic  medicinal  product  containing  the  active  substance  depreotide  INN  as  the trifluoroacetate  salt  indicated  for  the  scintigraphic  imaging  of  suspected  malignant  tumours  in  the lung, in combination with a CT scan or chest X-ray, in patients with solitary pulmonary nodules. NeoSpect  is  presented  as  a  powder  for  solution  for  injection,  as  a  kit  for  diagnostic  use  after reconstitution/radiolabelling with sodium pertechnetate ( 99m Tc) injection.  On reconstitution, technetium ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  is  formed,  which  contains  within  the  cyclic  hexapeptide  domain  of  the  peptide component, a pharmacophore which binds to the somatostatin receptor (SSTR) of tumour cells. Radiotracers and nuclear medicine technology may be used to detect many cancers in their early stages by recognition of tumour-specific binding sites.  Several types of tumour have been identified as exhibiting high  expression  of  receptors  for  somatostatin  (SST).    The  SST  receptor  is  a  membrane-adapted glycoprotein that  appears  to  be  present  in  a  significant  number  of  human  malignancies  including  both small  cell  lung  cancer  (SCLC)  and  non-small  cell  lung  cancer  (NSCLC).    This  hyper-expression  by tumour cells should allow differentiation between normal and cancerous tissue.  After specific binding by the  peptide component of 99m Tc-labelled NeoSpect, selective imaging can in theory be achieved in the standard  way  by  means  of  a  gamma  camera,  the  principle  instrument  currently  in  use  for  imaging  in nuclear medicine. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition NeoSpect is presented as a sterile, freeze-dried powder of depreotide trifluoroacetate (TFA) (47 µg) in 5ml Type I (Ph.Eur) glass vials sealed with grey, siliconised, butyl rubber stoppers.  The product also contains:  sodium α -D-glucoheptonate  dihydrate  as  a  bulking  agent  and  aid  in  radiolabelling;  stannous chloride dihydrate as a reducing agent; disodium edetate as an aid in radiolabelling; hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide for pH adjustment. Active substance Depreotide (INN) is a synthetic 10 amino acid peptide with the chemical name cyclo(-L-homocysteinylN-methyl-L-phenylalanyl-L-tyrosyl-D-tryptophyl-L-lysyl-L-valyl), (1 → 1')-sulfide with 3 [ (mercaptoacetyl)amino ] -L-alanyl-L-lysyl-L-cysteinyl-L-lysine amide, trifluoroacetate salt. Its structure is: S-CH2-COβ -Dap-Lys-Cys-Lys-NH2, TFA salt Cyclo(-homocys-N-Me-Phe-Tyr-D-Trp-Lys-Val) Synthesis of depreotide involves solid-state synthesis of two intermediate peptides on resins. Each bound peptide is then cleaved from the resin, deprotected and purified by preparative HPLC. The two peptide intermediates  (P334  and  P802),  which  are  checked  for  identity  and  purity,  are  then  coupled  and  the resulting peptide is deprotected to produce depreotide.  Depreotide is purified by preparative HPLC and lyophilised to produce depreotide trifluoroacetate.

Proof of structure has been demonstrated by mass spectrometry (fast atom bombardment and electrospray ionisation),  H-NMR  spectroscopy  (which  confirms  the  assigned  amino  acid  sequence  and  structure), amino acid analysis (a standard technique used for analysis of peptides), elemental analysis and peptide optical purity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The specification proposed for the active substance, depreotide trifluoroacetate, is comprehensive and has been  revised  during  the  evaluation  procedure.    Several  identity  tests  are  required  to  conclusively demonstrate  the  identity  of  the  active  substance.    The  specification  also  now  includes  tests  and  limits (which have been justified) for: content and purity of peptide; depreotide content; trifluoroacetate content; known and unknown peptide impurities; amino acid enantiomeric impurities; other impurities; residual solvents  (acetonitrile,  dichloromethane,  diethyl  ether,  triethylamine,  trisopropylsilane  and  total);  water content; mass balance; bioburden limit, and endotoxin content.  Further information was provided on the toxicity of trisopropylsilane in order to justify the limit proposed.  Batch analyses data have been provided for three batches of the active substance and these demonstrate compliance with the revised specification.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A discussion of potential impurities is included.  Reference is also made to published literature.  The possible  formation  of  diastereoisomers,  both  deletion  and  truncated  sequences,  and  incomplete deprotection is discussed.  The formation of diastereoisomers of depreotide during synthesis can result from  using  optically  impure  amino  acid  derivatives.    The  starting  materials  are  therefore  checked  for optical  purity.    Other  supporting  data  have  indicated  that  the  method  of  synthesis  does  not  cause racemization of the amino acids.  Racemization only becomes a problem in prolonged slow coupling reactions but in the case of depreotide none of the reactions is prolonged or slow.  Therefore the potential for racemization is stated to be minimal.  A test for optical rotation is therefore not included in the drug substance specification. Impurities found include: · Two  primary  synthetic  impurities,  impurity  'o'  and  impurity  'p'  -  they  are  limited  in  the specification at levels which have been justified by toxicology studies. · Six  primary  degradation  products  were  identified  and  coded  as  'd',  'e',  'f',  'g',  'h'  and  P1066. Degradants  'd',  'e',  'f',  'g',  have  been  ascribed  to  oxygenation  products.  They  are  controlled individually in the specification. The degradant 'h' has been ascribed to a base hydrolysis product of  depreotide  and  the  limit  of  1.0%  is  justified  and  acceptable.    Tentative  proposals  to  assign  a structure  to  'h'  have  been  attempted,  but  as  this  impurity  is  only  present  in  small  amounts  in thermally  degraded  or  base  hydrolysed  samples,  further  determination  of  its  structure  and/or identity  is  not  possible.    The  primary  degradation  product  in  depreotide  is  the  disulfide  dimer P1066. It has been characterised by MS, HPLC, H-NMR and arises from oxidation of depreotide, which probably occurs between the time of preparative HPLC purification and lyophilisation.  A limit for impurity P1066 of &lt; 1.5% is proposed and justified. · Additional impurities/degradants found are 'k', 'q', 'r', and 'u'. The proposed limit of NMT 0.2% for 'other greatest single unknown' impurity is supported by the batch data presented. Batch analyses data were presented from one commercial scale batch (7g) and three pilot scale batches (2g)  used  for  clinical  studies.  All  pilot  batches  met  the  initially  proposed  specification.    As  the specification has been revised during the course of the procedure, a follow-up measure is included that further batch analyses data be provided from future commercial scale batches in order to fully justify the amended specification now agreed. The stability of the active substance has been investigated (using one commercial and five pilot scale batches) at &lt; -10°C with accelerated studies at 5°C + 3°C.  Stress conditions included exposure to acid and base, light, peroxide treatment and elevated temperatures.  Results of photostability studies indicated that the drug substance must be stored protected from light.  The proposed storage statement of '&lt;-10°C protected  from  light'  is  justified,  as  the  peptide  purity  of  all  batches  monitored  indicated  a  significant reduction in peptide purity after 6 months when drug was stored at 5°C + 3°C.  A commitment was given to provide stability data for a further two commercial scale batches and to place one commercial scale batch on stability trial yearly thereafter.  The proposed retest period for the drug substance is 24 months with retesting for purity immediately before use after 12 months and this has now been justified, (with the follow-up measure described above).

## Other ingredients

The  excipients  stannous  chloride  dihydrate,  disodium  edetate,  concentrated  hydrochloric  acid  and sodium  hydroxide  comply  with  the  corresponding  current  specifications  of  the  PhEur.    Water  for

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

injections used as a solvent in the manufacture of the product prior to its freeze drying also conforms to the current PhEur monograph.

Non-pharmacopoeial excipients are sodium α -D-glucoheptonate dihydrate and nitrogen (which is used as an inert atmosphere in the vials).  Their quality is adequately controlled by the in house specifications.

## Product development and finished product

Performing the labelling with sodium pertechnetate eluates from five European and three US generator manufacturers have tested robustness of the product in clinical use.  All were found to be acceptable.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The formulation used in the pivotal clinical trials carried a nominal label claim of 50 micrograms of active substance per vial, instead of 47 micrograms which is currently proposed for marketing.  Earlier trials  used a formulation which was modified in 1995 to improve radiochemical purity, by reducing the quantity of sodium α -D glucoheptonate dihydrate from 50 mg to 5 mg per vial and adding sodium edetate  at  100  µg  per  vial.  It  should  also  be  noted  that  clinical  trial  batches  involved  the  earlier reconstitution process of incubation of the reconstituted solution at ambient room temperature. In 1996 the procedure was modified to incubate the reconstituted product in boiling water, which reduced by 3-5% the level of Tc non-mobile species (degradation products). The  optimal  concentration  of  depreotide  before  reconstitution  was  investigated.    It  was  shown  that lyophilised  depreotide  formulated  at  a  content  in  the  region  of  50  µg/vial  showed  the  best radiochemical purity over 6.5 hours post-reconstitution. The choice and characteristics of the chosen excipients are satisfactorily shown to be appropriate for their intended use.  Sodium α -D glucoheptonate dihydrate and sodium edetate serve as aids in radiolabelling. As a chelating agent, edetate may compete with depreotide for technetium, leading to a poor radiochemical yield of technetium depreotide. Its effect on radiochemical purity (RCP) and stability was assessed and use of 100 µg was shown to be most suitable. Stannous chloride dihydrate reduces 99m Tc from the 7+ oxidation state in pertechnetate to the 5+ oxidation state favourable for binding to nitrogen  and  sulphur  atoms.    The  quantity  of  this  ingredient  is  crucial  in  reducing  pertechnetate, leading to efficient formation of technetium depreotide.  A level of 50 µg vial was originally chosen as being the most suitable, although this has been revised during the evaluation process (see below). Presentation  of  the  product  in  a  ready-to-use  solution  form  is  not  feasible  due  to  its  poor  aqueous stability.  Given the heat labile nature of the drug substance (a peptide), the product is sterilised by filtration,  filled  aseptically  (through  a  0.22  µm  filter  with  relevant  control  of  bioburden  and  bubble point  filter  integrity  testing)  into  pre-sterilised  vials  and  then  lyophilised  using  a  well  defined  and validated cycle.  The bulk solution sterile filtration process results in some binding of depreotide to the filters and as a result of this either the label claim had to be reduced (from the 50 µg/vial originally proposed) or a manufacturing overage added.  The applicant chose the first option, reducing the label claim to 47 µg/vial.  Given that the clinical studies were all conducted with product containing this quantity and in effect nothing has changed except the nominal expression of content, this is without any material effect on the clinical (diagnostic) efficacy or safety of the product. Depreotide  injection  is  reconstituted  with  sodium  pertechnetate  ( 99m Tc)  injection  containing  up  to 50mCi (1870MBq) of techetium-99m activity. The  radiochemical  purity  (RCP)  of  only  80%  (by  HPLC)  does  not  adversely  affect  the  biological performance of 99m Tc-depreotide.  Preparations of 80% and 95% RCP were shown to have equivalent tumour targeting in tumour bearing nude mice and receptor-binding values. The labelling of depreotide injection with 99m Tc is a critical process. The reconstituted product must be incubated in a boiling water bath or heat block with sodium pertechnetate ( 99m Tc) injection in normal saline for 10 minutes in order to optimize the formation of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide injection. Development of the reconstitution process and its likely effect on the radiochemical purity and peptide composition  have  been  investigated with respect to incubation time, incubation temperature, reconstitution volume, activity level stopper content and dilution.  Findings regarding storage of the reconstituted product showed that the vials should be stored upright.

The radiochemical purity of the reconstituted product stored in a polypropylene syringes for up to five hours was found to be satisfactory (80% maintained over the five hours).  No appreciable adsorption of the drug substance to the syringe was found after 5 hours of storage.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

The reconstituted product (technetium) 99m Tc-depreotide is shown to be present in two isomeric forms in technetium  depreotide  injection,  as  the  ' syn '  and  ' anti '  isomers.    It  was  found  that  the  ratio  was consistent from lot to lot and from preparation to preparation.  Satisfactory diagrams of structures are also provided.

The  specifications  for  the  finished  product  have  been  refined  during  the  review  process  and  are  now satisfactory to control the quality of this product.  Separate specifications are used for the kit and for the reconstituted solution for administration.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised For the kit - The identification testing of the peptide cation has been improved by the addition of an HPLC test to the MS method.  Likewise, an identity test ( 19 F NMR) has been added for the trifluoroacetate anion. The limits for the content of depreotide (base) are 47 µg/vial + 7.5% (43 to 50 µg/vial), although this will be tightened further if data from future batches permits. The limits for the excipients, and likewise for the impurities/degradation products have been tightened and justified during the evaluation procedure and are now  considered  acceptable  by  the  majority  of  CPMP  Members.    (However,  see  section  5,  overall conclusions on Quality.)  Both pH limit and the limit for headspace oxygen (NMT 0.5%) are supported by batch  analyses  and  stability  data.    The  associated  test  methods  in  these  specifications  have  been adequately validated and are acceptable for a product of this type.  Batch analyses data are still required to be submitted for the first two commercial batches released in Europe. For  the  reconstituted  solution  -  The  tests  include  determination  of  the  radiochemical  impurities  (by HPLC) for which the limits proposed have been justified.  Peptide purity/impurities are also determined in the  reconstituted  and  boiled  kit.   The  limits  proposed  have  been  supported  by batch  analyses  data  and reference to toxicological studies. Stability of the Product Stability studies have been conducted on the product (kit) at &lt;-10°C with an accelerated storage condition at 5°C + 3°C.  Storage at &lt;-10°C is required as a result of radiochemical purity not meeting specification at the elevated temperature.  Stress studies involved exposure of the product to extremes of light and heat and these conclude that the kit is sensitive to high temperatures. Degradation  products  which  were  typically  present  in  technetium 99m Tc-depreotide  solution  are 99m Tc 'non-mobiles', which are degradation products which are not mobile in a chromatographic sense, that is, they remain at the baseline.  These non-mobiles were present initially at concentrations in the region of 46%, although they reached 6-8% after 5 hours storage at room temperature.  In addition 99m Tc hydrophilic impurities  ( 99m Tc-pertechnetate,  glucoheptonate  and  edetate)  were  present  at  3%  but  there  was  no apparent trend for these to increase.  Monitoring of the impurities species 'k', 'z' and other greatest single unknown impurity did not commence until 20-23 months into the stability programme. Four time-points were monitored either on a monthly or two monthly basis to provide information.  All met the proposed specification. Results  for P1066  were  well  within  specification  at  24  months.    Based  on  the  batch  data  presented consideration should be given to tightening the specification for P1066, species 'k' and 'z' when more experience is gained.  It should be pointed out that the main degradant P1066 is not expected to form a complex with 99m Tc.  Technetium 99m Tc depreotide exists as two isomers - ' syn ' and ' anti ',  and during storage  the  ' syn '  isomer  increases  slightly.    Both  isomers  have  a  high  binding  affinity  with  the somatostatin receptors.  The HPLC method is used to determine both isomers. A  shelf  life  of  24  months,  when  the  finished  product  is  stored  at  &lt;-10°C,  was  proposed.    Numerous changes  took  place  during  the  stability  programme  which  included  upgrades  to  analytical  methods, change of radiometric detector, change to reconstitution/incubation process for the reconstituted product, change in primary storage condition for the stability protocol, etc.  Additional data were generated (during the procedure) from approximately 24 months into the stability programme for pilot scale batches to cover these changes.  The proposed shelf life of 24 months is not yet supported, but an 18 month shelf-life could be granted on the basis of the data provided to date, although a follow-up measure is agreed that further data is still required from the first three commercial batches released in Europe.

As the product is to be stored at ≤ -10°C and shipped at &lt;+8°C a freeze-thaw cycling stability study was performed ( ≤ -10°C to +5 +3°C) and the results demonstrate that the product can withstand several freezethaw cycles.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Stability of the reconstituted product

In-use studies were carried out at ambient temperature using both TLC and HPLC methods to determine the purity. The finished product is allowed to equilibrate to room temperature prior to reconstitution and after reconstitution the product is stored 'at ambient room temperature'.  As this is not in line with the ICH guideline on stability testing of new active substances and medicinal products, a new study at 25°C was initiated and the results provided demonstrate that the reconstituted product is stable for 5 hours at 25°C.  An additional study clearly demonstrates that the reconstituted product should not be refrigerated prior to use.  The SPC and labels include instructions to store the reconstituted solution for injection for no more than 5 hours at 15 - 25°C, but storage in a refrigerator is not specifically contra-indicated.

The uptake of 99m Tc-depreotide by rat pancreatic and human SCLC tumour xenografts was measured in mice and rats respectively, following doses of 1.0 µg peptide/kg iv, the syn and anti isomers and different radiochemical purities of the peptide were also tested, as was the inhibitory potential of octreotide.  The results of these studies demonstrate that slight changes in radiochemical purity have little impact on SSTR affinity, the anti isomer has higher affinity than the syn (being approximately 6 times more potent) and that excess octreotide inhibits this binding (74%) of both the syn and anti isomers which indicates that both isomers have a high degree of specificity for interaction with somatostatin receptors.  The results also

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics Natural somatostatin (SST) is a cyclic tetradecapeptide produced by the hypothalamus and pancreas. SST is known to modulate growth hormone release and inhibit the release of thyrotropin.  Additional physiologic activities include inhibition of the release of glucagon, insulin and gastrin.  In the GIT, SST decreases intestinal absorption,  blood  flow  and  mucosal  cell  proliferation.    Receptors  for  SST have been found in the CNS, pituitary, pancreas,  and  in the  mucosa  of  the  GIT.    Five  subtypes  of human  SST  receptors  (SSTR)  have  been  cloned,  SSTR  1-5.    Some  tumours  and  their  metastases express SSTR to a greater extent than normal tissue, these include; small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), non-small  cell  lung  cancer  (NSCLC),  endocrine  pancreatic  tumours,  metastatic  carcinoids,  growth hormone-producing pituitary adenomas, paragangliomas, lymphomas (mainly Hodgkin's), astrocytomas and meningeomas as well as part of the colorectal, breast and prostate cancers. The depreotide trifluoroacetate in the  Kit for the Preparation  of Technetium  ( 99m Tc) depreotide is a synthetic,  linear  tetrapeptide  attached  to  one  of  the  residues  of  a  cyclic  hexapeptide,  which  in  turn contains an amino acid sequence similar to the presumed bioactive sequence of native SST.  Upon reconstitution with Sodium Pertechnetate Tc 99m Injection and heating, a co-ordination complex forms with amino acid residues in the linear tetrapeptide.  The Technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide will bind to the SSTR expressed with high density on certain tumour types, and the γ -radiation emitted (with short t½) will  aid  in  the  scintigraphic  imaging  of  these  tumours.    The  proposed  clinical  intravenous  dose  of 99m Tc-depreotide  is  47  µg  (originally  nominally  50  µg)  peptide.    Since  the  product  is  a  diagnostic imaging agent, a single administration is envisaged. Pharmacodynamic effects relating to proposed indications: A number of studies have been submitted which illustrate the binding of depreotide, and its syn and anti isomers (present in the ratio syn/anti =  0.074) to SSTR and the use of 99m Tc-depreotide in binding and imaging studies. Binding affinity studies were carried out against a variety of human tumour cell lines, tumour explants and cloned receptor sub-types.  Findings suggest that 99m Tc-depreotide has the highest affinity for human SCLC (85% saturation of binding sites) and  NSCLC, followed by the lymphomas (50% saturation of binding sites).  Inhibition/correlation of binding by 125 I-SST and 111 In-octreotide indicate the specificity of 99m Tc-depreotide  to  SSTR.    In  the  cell  lines  expressing  specific  receptor  subtypes,  it  was  shown  that 99m Tc-depreotide is specific for SSTR subtypes 2, 3, 5 and not SSTR subtypes 1 and 4.  In the human SCLC cell line NCI-H69 expressing SSTR at high density (2482 fmol/mg membrane protein) depreotide inhibited 125 I-SST  binding  with  IC50  =  6.1  nM.    Overall 99m Tc-depreotide  had  high in  vitro binding capacity to human breast cancer, small cell lung tumours and lymphoma but lower binding capacity to non-small cell lung cancer, colon and pancreatic cancer.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

support  a  receptor-peptide  interaction  as  the  mechanism  by  which 99m Tc-depreotide  may  target receptor-expressing carcinomas of the lung clinically.  In addition, the tumour/blood and tumour/muscle ratios  and  the  gamma  scintigraphy  pictures  suggest  a  potential  for  good  differentiation  of  tumour  in clinical trials.

The pharmacodynamic testing programme has demonstrated the high affinity binding of 99m Tc-depreotide to SSTR, in vitro and in vivo and the potential of this product in the proposed indication.  Many of the in vitro studies  use  one  point estimates to calculate Bmax and Kd due mainly to insufficient tissue being available.  Whilst this is not an ideal situation, it is accepted that a more than accurate estimation would not have been possible in the experimental settings outlined.

Biodistribution of 99m Tc-depreotide was monitored in the above studies by tissue sampling and by gamma scintigraphy.  In rats, distribution is mainly to the kidneys and urine, except in ERD where the liver is the main target  organ,  distribution  is  largely  unaffected  by  labelling  except  from  a  slight  increase  in  liver exposure. 99m Tc-depreotide was also detected in the spinal and long bones as well as the bone marrow, but was not quantified.  Urinary excretion is estimated at 27%, faecal at 21%.  The rabbit and monkey showed similar distribution patterns to the rat.

Medicinal product no longer authorised General pharmacodynamics: The binding of technetium 99m Tc-depreotide to SSTR in human microvascular endothelial cell (HMVEC) membranes from both lung and dermal tissue was estimated by single point analysis and was similar to that seen with lymphoma cell lines. A direct comparison of the effect of depreotide and SST on arginine-induced glucagon release in rat was performed.  Depreotide at a dose of 1 µ g/kg (1x maximal human dose, MHD), or 3 µ g/kg (3x MHD), does not inhibit the arginine-induced glucagon release.  However, depreotide doses of 15 x MHD suppress glucagon release, on average, by 24%.  In order to obtain the same pharmacological effect as SST, depreotide had to be administered at 50 x MHD.  Thus, depreotide is clearly less potent than SST. The effects of the product on the CNS, cardiac and respiratory system were not investigated in safety pharmacology studies. Pharmacokinetics Biodistribution, metabolism and excretion of 99m Tc-depreotide administered intravenously were investigated in rat, rabbit and monkey.  The kinetics and biodistribution of unlabeled (i.e. [ 3 H]-labelled) peptide were also investigated since more than 85% of the clinical dose is unlabelled peptide. Biodistribution: Analyses capable of resolving the syn and anti isomeric forms of 99m Tc-depreotide were conducted using RP-HPLC/ITLC-SG methods. The studies in the rat suggest that depreotide is rapidly cleared from the plasma and that exposures are similar in males and females.  The T½GLYPH&lt;31&gt; of the 3 H-depreotide is nearly four times and the T½GLYPH&lt;31&gt; nearly twice that of 99m Tc-depreotide (6.8 vs. 1.8 min and 58 vs. 34 min respectively).  This is thought to be due to the greater  number  of  ionisable  groups  on  the 3 H-depreotide.  This is  not  considered  significant  since 3 Hdepreotide was not used in safety studies.  Studies were carried out at two dose levels (1 &amp; 20 µ g/kg) and essentially equivalent values for these key pharmacokinetic parameters are obtained using either dose. Consistent with this, the blood elimination curves for the 1 µ g/kg and 20 µ g/kg dose levels in male rats are super-imposable.  Based on these studies, it is concluded that the pharmacokinetic properties of 99m Tc-depreotide are not dose-dependent. A further  study  was  carried  out  in  rats  with  experimental  renal  dysfunction  (ERD),  i.e.  renal  ligation. Exposure to 99m Tc-depreotide was greatly increased, mainly due to a 5-fold reduction in clearance and a subsequent high uptake into the liver and skeleton.  This would suggest that elimination is primarily renal and that no secondary or compensatory excretion pathway is available. In two additional studies six NZW rabbits (3m, 3f) and one female rhesus monkey received 1.0 GLYPH&lt;31&gt;g/kg iv, the pharmacokinetic parameters suggest similar handling of 99m Tc-depreotide to the rat model, i.e. rapid distribution and clearance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

99m Tc-depreotide  was  incubated  with  human  (healthy  volunteer)  whole  blood  which  was  subsequently fractionated.  It was found that the bulk of the 99m Tc-depreotide remained in the plasma (97.27%), while the rest (1.25%) was associated with blood cells, platelets etc.

## Metabolism:

After 99m Tc-depreotide  was  incubated  in  rat  and  human  plasma,  approximately  70%  total  peptide  was recovered, &lt;2% in either species was parent peptide.  The remainder was seen as ''oxidative'' products on RP-HPLC, but no further identification was carried out.

A series  of  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were  carried  out  in  the  rat,  in  all  cases  the  animals  were given 99m Tc-depreotide reconstituted in decayed generator eluate or a suitable control.  In two studies, rats received doses of 0-30-100 µg/kg/day iv for 10 days and 14 days respectively.  In a third study rats received doses of 0-40-100 µg/kg/day iv for 14 days.  Results were similar for all three studies. There were no drug-related deaths or changes in body weight gain.  Clinical observations were normal apart from occasional injection site discoloration/haematoma.  Some fluctuations in haematology and clinical  chemistry  parameters  were  seen,  most  notably:  an  apparent,  slight,  dose  related  increase  in RBC, Hb and Hct in females; a slight reduction in LDH in treated males; a slight reduction in CPK and  increase  in  AP  in  treated  females.    A  reduction  in  the  albumin/globulin  ratio  and  in  total cholesterol,  associated  with  a  fall  in  relative  liver  weight  was  seen  in  top  dose  females  in  the  first study  only,  this  is  thought  to  be  drug  related  but  was  not  repeatable  and  is  therefore  probably  not biologically  significant.    Apart  from  this  liver  weight  change,  all  necropsy  findings  were  within normal parameters.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In a study in rats (1.0-20 µg/kg iv) no metabolites were detected in the bile.  In the plasma several more lipophilic structurally related metabolites were identified by RP-HPLC.  Approximately 20% of the dose is eliminated in the urine in four hours, and this includes several more hydrophilic species identified by RP-HPLC.  The main metabolite seen on incubation of 99m Tc-depreotide in rat plasma in vitro was not detected in the plasma or urine of humans or in the plasma, bile or urine of rats.  This metabolite was produced by incubation of 99m Tc-depreotide with rat kidney homogenate, but not with kidney slices or with kidney homogenate treated with aprotinin.  Since metabolism following in  vivo administration accounts for &lt;1% of the injected dose, the significance of the observed metabolism after prolonged incubation with rat plasma or with kidney homogenates is debatable. Toxicology The scientific literature provides ample evidence for the role of SST as a physiologic mediator (and hence for the presence of SSTR) in the rat, rabbit and man. Studies also show that SST and SSTR are involved in similar biochemical and biological processes in these species, and that the data provided support the use of rats and rabbits as appropriate animal models to assess the toxic potential of 99m Tcdepreotide. Single dose toxicity In Swiss albino mice body weight was not affected up to 14 days after administration of 0-300-1000 µg/kg iv 99m Tc-depreotide.  Some lethargy &amp; piloerection were seen immediately post-dose.  Although splenic atrophy was observed in males this was without gross or histological correlates.  Low group sizes  could  be  the  reason  for  the  missing  significant  difference  in  spleen  weight.    No  significant changes  were  seen  in  haematology,  clinical  chemistry  or  organ  weights,  and  there  were  no macroscopic  or  microscopic  findings.    Therefore  the  no-observable-effect-level  (NOEL)  was  1000 µ g/kg iv. In NZW rabbits administered 0-200-600 µg/kg iv, some statistically significant fluctuations in clinical chemistry parameters were noted, but these were not considered biologically significant (most notably a  reduced  CPK,  LDH  and  BUN).    Haematology,  organ  weights  and  macroscopic  and  microscopic observations were normal in all groups.  The NOEL was 600 µ g/kg iv. These studies (conducted according to GLP) suggest that there is no acute toxicological hazard to man from the use of 99m Tc-depreotide in the proposed indication. Repeated dose toxicity

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

In  three  studies  in  rabbits,  the  animals  (6/sex/group)  received  0-100-400  µg/kg/day iv  for  10  or  14 days and 0-30-100 µg/kg/day iv for 14 days.  Results were similar for all three studies.  There were no drug-related  deaths  or  changes  in  body  weight  gain.    Clinical  observations  were  normal  apart  from occasional  injection  site  discoloration/haematoma.    Some  fluctuations  in  haematology  and  clinical chemistry parameters were seen, most notably: an apparent, slight, an increase in RBC, Hb and Hct in top dose females; a slight reduction in LDH in treated males; a slight reduction in CPK, SGOT and SGPT in treated females.  A reduction in the albumin/globulin ratio, associated with a fall in relative liver weight was seen in top dose females in the second study, a lesser fall in liver weight was seen in the third study which was not associated with reduced albumin, this is thought to be drug-related but not biologically significant.  Apart from this liver weight change, all necropsy findings were within normal parameters.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised In both species small changes in RBC, Hb, Hct, CPK and albumin in females and reduced LDH in males,  occurred  only  at  100X  MHD  and  are  therefore  not  considered  as  clinically  relevant.    The NOEL (no-observable-effect-level) in all the studies was at least 100 times the anticipated human dose of 1 µ g/kg. Genotoxicity Depreotide  and 99m Tc-depreotide  were  not  mutagenic  in  the  bacterial  reverse  mutation  assay  ( S. typhimurium and E.  coli WP2uvrA)  or  in  the  mammalian  cell  forward  mutation  assay  (mouse lymphoma L5178Y TK+/- cell line) in the presence or absence of metabolic activation. Furthermore, 99m Tc-depreotide did  not  induce  any  genotoxic  effects in  vivo in  the  bone  marrow micronucleus test at high doses (4 mg/kg iv) . Carcinogenicity No data were submitted concerning the carcinogenic potential of 99m Tc-depreotide.  This is considered acceptable because the product is intended for single use in the clinical setting, is not mutagenic or clastogenic and there are no structural alerts. Reproduction toxicity No  studies  were  submitted  concerning  the  potential  reproductive  toxicity  of 99m Tc-depreotide. However, as the administration of a radionuclide to a pregnant woman would result in exposure of the foetus to a radiation dose, a contraindication has been included in section 4.3 of the SPC for pregnancy and lactation.  Section 4.6 of the SPC also emphasises this contraindication and that, as it is not known whether 99m Tc-depreotide  is  excreted  in  human  milk,  administration  is  contraindicated  during lactation. Local tolerance and immunotoxicity A  perivascular  irritation  study  was  carried  out  in  NZW  rabbits.    There  was  no  dermal  erythema, oedema, vascular  congestion,  epithelial  erosion,  or  local  leukocytic  infiltration.    On  a  scale  of  1-4, 99m Tc-depreotide was assigned an irritation index of +0.3 with respect to vehicle and is thus considered as non-irritant. 99m Tc-depreotide was non-antigenic in a standard guinea pig systemic antigenicity model. The compatibility of 99m Tc-depreotide with human blood was tested in vitro .  Anti-coagulated human blood  or  human  serum  was  mixed  with 99m Tc-depreotide  to  a  final  concentration  of  2-4-fold anticipated clinical levels.  There was no difference seen between vehicle and peptide, all measured parameters  (Hb,  Hct,  RBC,  WBC,  platelets,  sedimentation  rate,  total  protein)  were  within  normal ranges suggesting that the product is compatible with human blood. The  local  tolerability  of  the  product, 99m Tc-depreotide,  is  considered  adequate  for  the  proposed indication.

## Ecotoxicity

The environmental effects of potential release are predicted to be minimal and of no concern.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects

It was shown in both in vivo and in vitro studies that 99m Tc-depreotide and both its isomers have high affinity to various tumours and tumour cell lines expressing SSTR.  It was also shown that depreotide had higher affinity for SSTR subtypes 2, 3 and 5.  The high binding affinity of 99m Tc-depreotide to the SSTR 3 may be clinically relevant since this subtype 3 appears to be over-expressed in many tumours. Furthermore the spectrum of tumours targeted by this radio-pharmaceutical is not affected by isomer conversion in vivo .  The data demonstrate that 85% and 94% radiochemical purity 99m Tc-depreotide were equally effective in terms of somatostatin receptor affinity.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Although no safety pharmacology studies were carried out the overall data do not give rise for concerns. No  drug  interaction  studies  have  been  performed,  which  is  acceptable,  considering  the  proposed indication. Although there were species dependent difference in some pharmacokinetic parameters, 99m Tc-depreotide was rapidly cleared from the blood pool (t1/2a from  1.6 to 2.4  min)  and  nearly completely from  blood (&gt;98%)  within  4  hours  in  all  three  species  investigated.    Furthermore,  the  volume  of  the  central compartment  exceeded  the  estimated  blood  volume,  and  the  volume  of  distribution  at  steady  state approximated a volume in excess of the extra cellular fluid volume, indicating widespread distribution (particularly to the kidneys, liver and GIT).  The majority of the radioactivity is eliminated via the urine. Less  than  2%  of 99m Tc-depreotide  binds  to  blood  cells  and  plasma  proteins  and  no  alterations  in haematological parameters were noted. There was evidence of the formation of more lipophilic and more hydrophilic species, but metabolites were not further characterised. The compound accumulated in renally impaired animals.  Although the human data indicate that there is no need to reduce the dose in renally impaired patients (see Part IV.A), the following warning has been included in the SPC, under Section 4.4 Special warnings and special precautions for use 'Care should be exercised in patients with impaired renal function, due to lower renal excretion and probable increase in exposure to radioactivity.' In  single  and  repeat  (up  to  14  days)  dose  toxicity  studies,  clinically  relevant  toxic  effects  were  not observed doses up to 100 times the anticipated human dose of 1 µ g/kg. No studies were submitted concerning the potential reproductive toxicity of 99m Tc-depreotide. Since, the use of the product results in administration of a radionuclide, contraindications for both pregnancy and lactation has been included in the SPC. 99m Tc-depreotide was not genotoxic in vitro or in vivo . No data  were  submitted  concerning  the  carcinogenic  potential  of 99m Tc-depreotide.  This  is  considered acceptable because the product is intended for single use. 99m Tc-depreotide was non-irritant in rabbits and non-antigenic in guinea pigs. The environmental effects of potential release are predicted to be minimal and of no concern. The species used in studies for Part III of the dossier represent laboratory animals of known quality and homogeneity,  commonly  used  in  pharmacological/toxicological  research,  which  were  shown  to  be relevant to the product and indication.  All pivotal safety studies were conducted according to GLP with the exception of 10-day repeated dose toxicity studies in rats and rabbits.  The scientific standards and the performance  of  these  studies  are  sufficient  to  assess  the  toxicological  effects  of 99m Tc-depreotide  in laboratory animals and suggest a good safety profile for the drug's use in man. 4. Clinical aspects

## Clinical pharmacology

The  Applicant  conducted  5  studies  in  healthy  volunteers  and  in  patients  with  renal  or  hepatic impairment:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Study number                       | Type of study                             | Doses peptide/ 99m Tc-depreotide intravenous injection   | Subjects                                           |
|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Study 829-13                       | Phase I Pharmacodynamic                   | 50 µ g peptide / 0 MBq                                   | 9 healthy volunteers                               |
| Study 829-10                       | Phase I Pharmacokinetic                   | 35-50 µ g peptide / 307-400 MBq                          | 17 healthy volunteers                              |
| Study 829-12                       | Phase I Pharmacokinetic                   | 50 µ g peptide / 303-566 MBq                             | 23, of these 12 healthy volunteers and 11 patients |
| Studies: 829-23, 829-22& 829-30Iia | Phase II Optimal dose Radiation dosimetry | 10, 20 or 50 µ g peptide / 185, 370 or 740 MBq           | 46 patients                                        |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pharmacodynamics Study  829-13 evaluated  the  pharmacodynamic  effects  of  unlabelled  depreotide  and  octreotide  on  the glucose tolerance response in 9 normal volunteers receiving 50 µ g of each peptide intravenously and after no injection, followed by an oral glucose tolerance test.  These results suggest that depreotide, does not alter the physiological response to a glucose challenge. Pharmacokinetics Study  829-10 evaluated  the  biodistribution,  uptake  and  clearance  half-times  in  healthy  volunteers Seventeen healthy volunteers received approximately 50 µ g depreotide labelled with approximately 370 MBq  99m Tc.  Two  subjects  could  not  be  evaluated  for  clearance  or  dosimetry  due  to  incomplete  data collection and three subjects were not included in the analyses due to suspected errors in the analyses of the  samples.    Most  of  the  results  are  calculated  from  data  of  12  subjects.    Serial  blood  samples  were collected at  multiple time points post-injection up to 24 hours, and urine was collected over 24 hours. Whole body scintigraphy at 10 minutes, 1, 2, 4 and 18-24 hours post-injection was performed in order to assess whole body biodistribution of 99m Tc-depreotide. Blood activity levels following intravenous injection exhibited a triphasic decay with a rapid decline in radioactivity with a half-life of 3.7 minutes (median), followed by a more gradual decline with a half-life of 35.2 minutes (median), and a slow decline with a half-life of 17.9 hours (median).  Urinary excretion accounted for 5.3 - 7.7% of the total injected dose (ID), and the average renal clearance of radioactivity was 0.255 ml/min/kg.  The total clearance was calculated to be 3.89 ml/min/kg. The  body  weight-normalised  volume  of  distribution  at  steady  state  and  volume  of  distribution  of  the central  compartment  were  3.12  l/kg  and  0.154  l/kg,  respectively.    Serial  scintigraphic  body  images indicated the highest activities (% ID) in the kidneys (13%), liver (10%), pelvic area (6.3%), and lungs (6.12%)  at  10  minutes  post-injection,  and  during  the  first  24  hours  relative  activity  in  these  regions remained nearly constant. Study 829-12 aimed to evaluate the pharmacokinetics and radiation dosimetry of 99m Tc-depreotide.  Of 23 subjects  12  healthy  volunteers  (6  men  and  6  women),  4  patients  with  renal  impairment  (2  men  and  2 women), 5 patients with hepatic impairment (4 men and 1 women) and 2 patients having lung cancer (both  men)  received  50 µ g  peptide  labelled  with  555-740  MBq 99m Tc  intravenously.  Blood  and  urine samples  were  collected  and  scintigraphic  body  images  were  obtained  during  the  first  24  hours. Metabolites  in  plasma  and  urine  were  determined  by  gamma-counting  of  the  RP-HPLC  separated fractions.  Plasma  protein  binding  of 99m Tc-depreotide  was  determined  by  gel  exclusion  column chromatography.  Antibodies at baseline and three week post-injection plasma samples was determined by an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) sensitive for IgG and IgM.

Plasma radioactivity indicated triphasic decay, with mean half-life values of 4.4 minutes, 48.7 minutes and 19.8 hours.  Systemic clearance was 2.01 ml/minute/kg and renal clearance was 0.34 ml/minute/kg. This  relatively  low  renal  clearance  indicated  extra-renal  elimination.    The  volume  of  distribution  was large (1.5 l/kg) and exceeded total body water volume.  Urinary excretion accounted for 1-18% of the injected dose.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Plasma  protein  binding  and  HPLC  analyses  of  plasma  and  urine  samples  indicated  that  &gt;90%  of  the radioactivity eluted from the columns in fractions corresponding to the parent drug, thus little circulating plasma radioactivity represents metabolites.  The majority of radioactivity in urine also eluted in HPLC fractions  corresponded  to  those  of  the  parent  drug.    Mean  plasma  protein  binding  was  12.1%  and  the patients were comparable to healthy volunteers.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In these studies 99m Tc-depreotide did not cause any generation of human IgG or IgM depreotide-specific antibodies. Further discussion of the impurities in the radioactive solution and their distribution to non-target organs was requested during the evaluation procedure.  The impurities were not intentionally included in the technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  administered  in  the  human  studies.    However,  the  impurities  are typically  present  in  all  preparations  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  based  on  release  and  stability testing performed by the applicant, suggesting that the clinical preparations would have contained a typical impurity profile for technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide.  Thus, while not specifically monitored, it is likely that technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide administered to clinical subjects would contain representative impurities  and  the  biodistribution  of  those  impurities  would  have  been  included  in  the  dosimetry calculations. The  sponsor  has  compared  biodistribution  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  (in  the  AR42J  tumor xenograft  nude  mouse  model)  of  80%  radiochemical  purity  by  HPLC  (20%  impurities)  and  95% radiochemical purity by HPLC (5% impurities).  Both preparations met the NLT 90% radiochemical purity limit as determined by TLC. No  significant change in biological  performance  and biodistribution  was  noted  between  the  80%  and  95%  radiochemical  purity  by  HPLC  preparations. Also, in vitro studies  demonstrated  that  both  80%  and  95%  radiochemical  purity  by  HPLC preparations have equal affinity for somatostatin receptors by AR42J tumour membrane preparations. Thus, the presence of 20% impurities in the technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide had negligible impact on binding affinity and biodistribution in animal and in vitro studies. In summary, the impurities have been present in preparations used for clinical studies for calculation of human biodistribution of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide. Dose response studies Optimal dose, radiation dosimetry and imaging time The  aim  of study  829-23 was  to  assess  the  optimal  dose  ranges  for  the  peptide  and 99m Tc.    Three different doses of the peptide, 10, 20 or 50 µg were labelled with three different levels of radioactivity -  either  185,  370  or  740  MBq  (5,  10  or  20  mCi).    The  study  was  designed  as  a  multi-centre, randomised, and parallel  group  3  X  3  factorial  design  in  45  patients  with  clinically  documented  or suspected somatostatin receptor-expressing tumours. 99m Tc-depreotide images were evaluated relative to OctresScan  images.  Similar results were obtained with all doses with no safety advantages of the lower doses.  The 50 µ g peptide dose labelled with 740 MBq (20 mCi) was selected as the optimal dose because 50 µ g provides a larger capacity to carry the radiolabel as it decays than lower doses, and 50 µ g is the minimal dose that can be used to make a rugged kit practical for clinical use.  The 740 MBq (20 mCi) 99m Tc dose was chosen because it falls within the lower end of the standard 99m Tc dose range  which  is  555-1110  MBq  (15-30  mCi),  was  a  safe  dose  in  terms  of  radiation  dosimetry  and produces a photon flux necessary for Spect imaging.  With a lower dose patients would have to be scanned for longer periods and difficulties in lying still may cause 'blurred' scintigraphic images. Radiation  absorbed  doses  were  calculated  on  the  basis  of  blood  activities,  urine  activities  and  gamma camera  data  from  study  829-12  after  injection  of 99m Tc-depreotide  to  22  subjects  (11  subjects  and  11 patients (5 with liver disease, 4 with renal disease and 2 with lung cancer).  The MIRD method of the Society of Nuclear Medicine was used for absorbed dose calculations. Only small differences, which were not significant, were seen between the estimated organ doses for normal and diseased patients.

The  biodistribution  of  total  activity  at  10  minutes  post-injection  showed  the  highest  values  for  the abdomen (59%).  The highest values were for the liver (15.3%) and kidneys (7.4% in left and 8.2% in right),  and  the  lowest  for  the  thyroid  (0.4-0.8%).  A  range  of  3.5-5.8%  was  associated  with  the  lungs. During  the  24  hours  post-injection  period,  activity  remained  nearly  constant  in  these  regions.    Tissue

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

distribution of 99m Tc-depreotide in renally or hepatically impaired patients or in patients with lung cancer was  similar  to  the  tissue  distribution  seen  in  healthy  subjects  although  the  numbers  of  patients  were limited.  The cumulative urinary excretion was in the range of 4.2% to 22.7% with an average value for urinary excretion of 10.4%.  The mean overall elimination half-life was 5.1hr (0.5-15.6hr).

The  highest  organ  doses  were  calculated  for  the  kidneys  (0.090  mGy/MBq),  the  spleen  (0.042 mGy/MBq) and the testes (0.031 mGy/MBq).  The dose estimates for all other organs were lower than 0.03 mGy/MBq.  The effective dose equivalent was 0.023 mSv/MBq.

<!-- image -->

| Tissue      | Estimated Absorbed Radiation Dose from 740 MBq NeoSpect (mGy)   | Estimated Absorbed Radiation Dose from Chest CT (mGy)   | Estimated Absorbed Radiation Dose from Spiral CT (mGy) 4   |
|-------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Lungs       | 10                                                              | no 19.2 - 24.4                                          | 10 - 16                                                    |
| Bone Marrow | 16                                                              | 3.95 - 5.79                                             | 3.3 - 4.7                                                  |
| Breast      | 1 3                                                             | 23.5 - 27.1                                             | 9.7 - 14                                                   |
| Thyroid     | 18                                                              | 1.93 - 3.06                                             | 2.3 - 5.2 5                                                |

The overall mean elimination half-life for Technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide calculated from dosimetric data was 5.1 hours.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The average maximum uptake in the testes was estimated to be 1.3% ID.  Activity was taken up and retained in the marrow in all subjects with a substantial bone marrow residence time (2.82 hours), but modest dose of 0.021 mGy/MBq with large inter-individual variation. During the evaluation procedure, comparative data for conventional CT, spiral CT and NeoSpect were presented.  The results are shown in Table 1.  The proposed indication for NeoSpect is scintigraphic imaging of  suspected  malignant  SPNs  in  combination  with  CT  scan  or  chest  X-ray.    The  radiation dose from NeoSpect alone does not appear to pose a safety risk for radiation-induced injury to tissues and  following  the  addition  of  the  radiation  dose  from  a  CT  scan,  the  risk  still  remains  within  the accepted  limits.    Using  spiral  CT  instead  of  conventional  CT  may  be  an  alternative  approach  to keeping the radiation dose to a minimum. Table 1. Comparison of Radiation Doses to Tissues from NeoSpect, Chest CT, and Spiral CT Scans 3 The estimated absorbed radiation dose for breast is ~0.001 mGy/MBq (data for breast not included in Table 2). 4 Data extracted from Expert statement, attachment 4 'Organ doses in spiral CT of the chest ' . 5 Dependent on the actual slice location in the lower part of the collum area. In study 829-22 the imaging time was of no consequence for image quality in 13/26 patients with lung cancer while images obtained between 30 mins - 2 hours after injection were optimal in all the other 13 patients.  Most images considered optimal by the investigator were obtained between 3 and 5 hours after injection in study 829-30IIa. In  conclusion,  studies  in  healthy  volunteers  and  in  patients  demonstrated  that  technetium  ( 99m Tc) depreotide  confers  3-compartment  pharmacokinetics  with  a  distribution  half-life  of  less  than  5 minutes, a terminal half-life of about 20 hours and a steady state volume of distribution of 1.5-3 L/kg. Total clearance averaged 2-4 ml/min/kg while renal clearance averaged about 0.3ml/min/kg and thus accounts  for  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  rapid  blood  clearance.  External  whole-body  gamma scintigraphy showed highest localisation of radioactivity in the abdomen (in the liver and kidneys) but this did not appear to affect the imaging capacity of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide for the lungs. The visualisation  of  lung  cancer  lesions  by  scintigraphy  is  based  on  higher  tumour  uptake  relative  to normal lung tissue i.e., background. This would result in a higher radiation dose to the normal lung in patients however the absorbed dose calculation (0.014 mSv/MBq) does not suggest any burden.

A statistically  significant  difference  for  total  clearance  between  men  and  women was  seen in study 829-12, although as this resulted from one high value it is not considered to be clinically relevant.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Tissue  distribution  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  in  patients  with  impaired  renal  or  hepatic function,  or  in  lung  cancer  patients,  was  not  appreciably  different  from  that  observed  in  healthy subjects although the smaller numbers of patients in the specific groups precluded adequate statistical evaluation.

Typically  &gt;90%  of  the  plasma  radioactivity  corresponds  to  the  parent  drug  with  absence  of metabolites. Plasma protein binding of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide was about 12%.

| Study number    | Type of study                                                   | Doses peptide/ 99m Tc depreotide intravenous inj.   | No. of patients                                           | Study design                            | Study design                                       | Study design                           |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
|                 |                                                                 |                                                     |                                                           | longer reference method                 | comparator                                         | evaluation of 99m Tc depreotide images |
| Study 829-30IIa | non- controlled, phase II, O, SC, 1 dose safety                 | 50 µ g / 592-814 MBq                                | no 13, 12 patients with NSCLC were evaluated for efficacy | histopatho- logy                        | FDG-PET                                            | investigator read                      |
| Study 829-22    | non- controlled, phase II, MC, 1 dose, unblinded, non-R, safety | 30-50 µ g / 240-851 MBq                             | 141, 111 patients were evaluated for efficacy             | all confirmato ry diagnostic procedures | other different confirmatory diagnostic procedures | investigator read                      |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Using  ELISA  sensitive  for  IgG  and  IgM,  no  antibodies  were  detected  (single  injections  in  18 volunteers and more than one injection in 13 of these). The  clinical  pharmacology  of 99m Tc-depreotide  has  been  adequately  studied.    Appropriate  special precautions have been included in the SPC for renal and hepatic impairment. Clinical efficacy The clinical trials were performed according to GCP standards. Main studies

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Study number   | Type of study                                                     | Doses peptide/ 99m Tc depreotide intravenous inj.   | No. of patients                                      | Study design            | Study design                                                                                | Study design                                       |
|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
|                |                                                                   |                                                     |                                                      | reference method        | comparator                                                                                  | evaluation of 99m Tc depreotide images             |
| Study 829-34A  | non- controlled, phase III, MC, 1 dose, comparative trial, safety | 18.3-50.0 µ g / 548-1103 MBq                        | 128, 112 patients were evaluated for efficacy        | histopatho- logy        | authorised CT 3 blinded readers and investigator read                                       | 3 blinded readers and investigator read            |
| Study 829-34B  | non- controlled, phase III, MC, 1 dose, comparative trial, safety | 20.0-50.0 µ g / 448-1214 MBq                        | 142, 114 patients were evaluated for efficacy        | longer histopatho- logy | CT 3 blinded readers and investigator read                                                  | 3 blinded readers and investigator read            |
| Study 829-P    | non- controlled, phase III, MC, 1 dose, comparative trial         | 18.3-50.0 µ g / 448-1214 MBq                        | no 127 patients from the two above mentioned studies | histopatho- logy        | CT 3 blinded readers and investigator read conducted in the two above mentioned studies 111 | 3 blinded readers in presence of CT or chest X-ray |
| Study P829-30A | product non- controlled phase III, MC, 1 dose,                    | 7-50 µ g / 455-870 MBq                              | 117, 115 patients were evaluated for efficacy        | FIC diagnosis           | In pentre- otide investigator read                                                          | investigator read 3 blinded readers                |
| Study P829-30B | non- controlled, phase III, MC, 1 dose,                           | 12.5-50 µ g / 403-995 MBq                           | 135, 128 patients were evaluated for efficacy        | FIC diagnosis           | 111 In pentre- otide investigator read                                                      | investigator read 3 blinded readers                |
| Study 829-40   | Non- controlled, phase III,MC                                     |                                                     |                                                      | Histopatho logy         |                                                                                             | 3 blinded readers in presence of CT or chest X-ray |

MC: multi  centre;  SC:  Single  centre;  O;  open  label;  R:  randomised;  FIC  diagnosis:  final  institutional clinical diagnosis;

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

- The total number of patients included in the studies:

712 + 59 patients

- Patients evaluated for efficacy:

637 +49 patients

- Patients with known or suspected cancer of the lung:

348 patients

The  Phase  III studies  829-34A  and  829-34B were  identical  with  respect  to  study  objectives  and enrolled  together  258  patients  with  suspected  lung  cancer.    Patients  diagnosed  with  the  clinically relevant criteria of solitary pulmonary nodules (SPN) were included in the analysis presented in the study 829-P.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Both  studies  used  a  within-patient  comparative  design  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  of 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy for the detection/localisation of the main presenting lesion in patients with a suspicion of lung cancer.  The patients underwent planar imaging in multiple views as well as SPECT and whole body  imaging.    Images  were  assessed  by  the  investigator  as  well  as  by  three  independent  nuclear medicine  practitioners,  who  were  blinded  to  all  other  clinical  information.    All  patients  had  CT imaging  performed,  also  assessed  by  three  independent  radiologists  who  were  blinded  to  all  other clinical information.  The scintigraphic images were evaluated as being positive or negative for the regions  right/left  upper  and  lower,  right  middle,  right/left  hilar  and  mediastinum.    Efficacy  was evaluated by calculation of the sensitivity, specificity and agreement of 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy, relative to histopathological diagnosis of the main presenting lung lesion.  The investigator using the histopathological  results  determined  lesion  location.    The  sensitivity  and  specificity  of 99m Tcdepreotide was compared to CT imaging, relative to histopathological diagnosis. The  efficacy  population  comprised  all  patients  who  were  enrolled  and  who  received  the 99m Tcdepreotide and successfully completed both scintigraphy and CT imaging, and for whom there was an available histopathological diagnosis for the main presenting region - in total 212 patients. The normal approximation to the binomial was used to test the hypothesis: H0 : π T ≤ 0.7  versus the one-sided alternative H1 : π T &gt; 0.7 where π T is the proportion of patients with agreement between technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide results and histopathology results.  Overall p-values were calculated for the majority blind read and the investigator read result.  The value of 0.7 (rather than the initial value of 0.8) was chosen because agreement rates between histopathology and CT are said to be no better than 65%. Because performance of CT was a prerequisite for histopathology the comparison between technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide and CT was kept as a secondary efficacy endpoint.  The sensitivity and specificity of CT relative to histopathology were calculated for the main presenting lesion. In order to take prevalence of the disease into account the negative predictive value (NPV) and the positive predictive value (PPV) of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide relative to histopathology results for the main presenting lesion were calculated using positive and negative likelihood ratios (PLR &amp; NLR) so PPV &amp; NPV were defined as follows: PLR = sensitivity/1-specificity NLR = 1-sensitivity/specificity PPV = prevalence x sensitivity/ (1-prevalence)(1-specificity) + (prevalence x sensitivity) NPV = (1-prevalence)(specificity)/prevalence x(1-sensitivity) +(1-prevalence)(specificity) Positive and negative predictive values were calculated for a range of prevalence of disease that might be characteristic of different populations being evaluated for the possibility of intra-thoracic malignancy.  For fixed  values  of  sensitivity  and  specificity  PPV  is  an  increasing  function  of  prevalence  and  NPV  is  a decreasing function of prevalence. Agreement between the three 'blind' readers of Technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide images was evaluated using the kappa statistic where a value of 0 indicates no agreement and 1 very good agreement.

McNemar's test was used to compare the sensitivity and specificity of Technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide with CT for the main presenting lesion.

The Wilcoxon Signed Rank test was used to analyse the change from pre-injection to each post-injection time point across all patients for vital signs and laboratory tests.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

In the pivotal studies, subgroup analysis of patients presenting with SPN was performed (post-hoc).

Subgroup analysis was also performed in the pivotal studies in patients with renal or hepatic impairment and based on demographic subdivisions of age, gender and race.

Table 2. Efficacy  Results  for 99m Tc-depreotide  scintigraphy  (from  the  Clinical  Expert Report)

| Read             | Sensitivity   | Specificity   | Agreement   | TP   | TN   | FP   | FN   | ALL   |
|------------------|---------------|---------------|-------------|------|------|------|------|-------|
| Blinded Majority |               |               |             |      |      |      |      |       |
| Study 829-34A    | 82.1%         | 60.7%         | 76.8%       | 69   | 17   | 11   | 15   | 112   |
| Study 829-34B    | 85.0%         | 57.1%         | 81.6%*      | 85   | 8    | 6    | 15   | 114   |
| both combined    | 83.7%         | 59.5%         | 79.2%*      | 154  | 25   | 17   | 30   | 226   |
| Investigator     |               |               |             |      |      |      |      |       |
| Study 829-34A    | 96.4%         | 53.6%         | 85.7%*      | 81   | 15   | 13   | 3    | 112   |
| Study 829-34B    | 97.0%         | 57.1%         | 92.1%*      | 97   | 8    | 6    | 3    | 114   |
| both combined    | 96.7%         | 54.8%         | 88.9%*      | 178  | 23   | 19   | 6    | 226   |

In  study  number  829-P  the  analyses  included  the  same  SPN · patients  divided  into  2  subgroups: patients with SPN and patients with non-calcified SPN &lt; 3cm in diameter.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Data are presented for the main presenting lesion relative to histopathological results. * p&lt;0.05 Using  histopathological  diagnosis  as  the  gold  standard,  sensitivity  and  specificity  were  calculated, showing a larger number of false negatives read for the blinded read than for the investigator. There were 17/226 false positive cases  for the blinded read and  19/226 false  positive  cases  for the investigators  read.    The  false  positive  cases  were  attributed  to  granulomas  (n=7),  sarcoid  (n=3), haematoma  (n=1),  inflammation  (n=3),  pneumonia/abscess  (n=2),  and  fibrosis  (n=1).    Thirteen/17 cases,  considered  false  positive  in  the  blind  read,  were  also  considered  false  positive  by  the investigator read. Agreement  was  defined  as  the  percentage  of  correct  diagnoses  by 99m Tc-depreotide  using  the histopathological diagnosis as gold standard. The agreement rate for the blind read was 79.2% and the agreement rate for the investigator read was 88.9%. Positive predictive values (PPV) for the investigator read were between 49 and 69% and between 46 and 67% for the majority blind read for prevalence between 30 and 50%.  Negative predictive values (NPV) for the investigator  read  was  between  94  and  98%,  and  the  majority  blind  read  had  a  NPV between 79 and 90% for prevalence in the range of 30 to 50%. Overall  kappa  statistics  for  pair-wise  comparisons  of  blind  readers  (0.725)  was  indicative  of  a substantial inter-reader agreement. Subgroup evaluation (post-hoc) Subgroup analysis based on demographics (age &gt; vs. ≤ 65yr, sex, race), renal and hepatic function and nature and size of the main presenting lesion were performed with the same end points. Size of the primary lesion: In  the  pivotal  studies  829-34A  &amp;  B,  patients  were  subgrouped  between  patients  with  non-calcified solitary pulmonary  nodulus  (SPN)  1-3cm  diameter  and  non-calcified  SPN ≤ 6cm  diameter. (Calcification is usually non-malignant and it is important to see how sensitivity and specificity vary with size.)

The  analyses  show  that  for  the  blind  read  the  pooled  subgroup  for  patients  with  SPN  1-3  cm  is approximately  15%  lower  than  that  for  all  SPN  patients.  For  the  investigator's  read  the  subgroup

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

sensitivity  is  very  similar  to  that  for  all  SPN.    With  regard  to  specificity,  the 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy was very similar for both subgroups as well as for both reads.

Table 3. Efficacy results for 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy in patients with  SPN  Combined data from studies 829-34A and 829-34B

| Read                  | Sensitivity   | Specificity   | Agreement   | T   | TN   | FP   | FN   | ALL        |
|-----------------------|---------------|---------------|-------------|-----|------|------|------|------------|
| Blinded Majority Read |               |               |             |     |      |      |      | authorised |
| all SPN patients      | 79.0%         | 66.7%         | 76.4%       | 7   | 18   | 9    | 21   | 127        |
| SPN 1-3 cm            | 64.8%         | 68.0%         | 65.8%       | 3   | 17   | 8    | 19   | 79         |
| SPN ≤ 6 cm            | 76.1%         | 69.2%         | 74.9%       | 6   | 18   | 8    | 21   | 114        |
| Investigator Read     |               |               | longer      |     |      |      |      |            |
| all SPN patients      | 96.0%         | 59.3%         | 88.2%       | 9   | 16   | 11   | 4    | 127        |
| SPN 1-3 cm            | 94.4%         | 60.0%         | 83.5%       | 5   | 17   | 10   | 3    | 79         |
| SPN ≤ 6 cm            | 95.5%         | 61.5%         | 87.7%       | 8   | 16   | 10   | 4    | 114        |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Age, gender, race and disease history: Agreement rate  and  sensitivity  were  similar  in  the  two  age  subgroups,  both  for  the  blind  read  and investigator  read  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  results  respectively.    Specificity  results  differed possibly because of number inequality (blind read 30 vs. 68.8%).  Agreement rates, specificity and sensitivity  were  similar  for  males  and  females.    There  were  no  differences  between  Caucasian  and non-Caucasian patients however there was imbalance in sample size. While  the  data  collected  do  not  indicate  that  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  would  perform  less effectively in patients with impaired renal or hepatic function the numbers were small. Comparison of 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy to CT: Separate analysis comparing sensitivity and specificity for blind read 99m Tc-depreotide and blind read CT, using histopathology as a reference method, were performed for all patients and SPN subgroups. Sensitivity  for  the  CT  scan  majority  blind  read  was  95.7%  for  all  lesions,  and  &gt;96%  for  all  SPN subgroups, whereas the corresponding sensitivity for the 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy was significantly  lower  (p  &lt;  0.05)  for  all  SPN  (solitary  pulmonary  nodules)  subgroups.    Specificity, however, was significantly lower for CT than for 99m Tc-depreotide.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4. Comparison of 99m Tc-depreotide to CT (Majority Blind Read)

|                                        | Sensitivity                            | Specificity                            | TP                                     | TN                                     | FP                                     | FN                                     |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) | Main presenting lesions (all patients) |
| 99m Tc-depreotide                      | 83.7%                                  | 59.5%                                  | 154                                    | 25                                     | 17                                     | 30                                     |
| CT                                     | 95.7%                                  | 4.8%                                   | 176                                    | 2                                      | 40                                     | 8                                      |
| SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           | SPN Subgroup                           |
| 99m Tc-depreotide                      | 79.0%                                  | 66.7%                                  | 79                                     | 18                                     | 9                                      | 21                                     |
| CT                                     | 97.0%                                  | 7.4%                                   | 97                                     | 2                                      | 25                                     | 3                                      |
| SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  | SPN Subgroup (1-3 cm)                  |
| 99m Tc-depreotide                      | 64.8%                                  | 68.0%                                  | 35                                     | 17                                     | 8                                      | 19                                     |
| CT                                     | 96.3%                                  | 8.0%                                   | 52                                     | 2                                      | 23                                     | 2                                      |
| SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   | SPN Subgroup ≤ 6 cm)                   |
| 99m Tc-depreotide                      | 76.1%                                  | 69.2%                                  | 67                                     | 18                                     | 8                                      | 21                                     |
| CT                                     | 96.6%                                  | 7.7%                                   | 97                                     | 2                                      | 25                                     | 3                                      |

| All SPN:                     | Sens.                   | Spec.                   | Agreem.                 | TP                      | TN                      | FP                      | FN                      | Total                   |
|------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| CT alone                     | 97%                     | 7.4%                    | 78%                     | 97                      | 2                       | 25                      | 3                       | 127                     |
| 99m Tc-depreotide with CT    | 93%                     | 63%                     | 86.6%                   | 83                      | 17                      | 10                      | 7                       | 127                     |
| 99m Tc-depreotide with x-ray | 96.7%                   | 73.1%                   | 91.4%                   | 87                      | 19                      | 7                       | 3                       | 116                     |
| Non-calcified SPN <3cm:      | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: | Non-calcified SPN <3cm: |
| CT alone                     | 96.3%                   | 8.0%                    | 68.4%                   | 52                      | 2                       | 23                      | 2                       | 79                      |
| 99m Tc-depreotide with CT    | 88.9%                   | 64.0%                   | 81.0%                   | 48                      | 16                      | 9                       | 6                       | 79                      |
| 99m Tc-depreotide with x-ray | 94.2%                   | 75.0%                   | 88.2%                   | 49                      | 18                      | 6                       | 3                       | 76                      |

Medicinal product no longer authorised 99m Tc-depreotide  images  were  read  in  the  presence  of  CT  scans  or  chest  X-rays.    CT  scans  were available for all patients (n=127) but chest X-rays were not available for 11 patients (n=116). From a  total  of  127  patients  included  in  the  analyses,  65%  (82  patients)  had  SPN ≤ 3  cm  and  39 patients  had  SPN &gt;3 ≤ 6  cm.  The  majority  of  lesions  were  non-calcified  (90%).  The  prevalence  of malignancy was 70% (100/127 patients) with adenocarcinoma (28%) and squamous cell carcinoma (27%) being the most commonly diagnosed tumour types. CT scan alone has a high sensitivity but a very low specificity. 99m Tc-depreotide scans in the presence of  CT scan resulted in  high sensitivity  and  a  remarkable rise  in  specificity  (from  7%  to  63%).  The sensitivity  and  specificity  of 99m Tc-depreotide  with  use  of  chest  x-rays  were  97%  and  73%, respectively. The difference in specificity between CT scan alone and 99m Tc-depreotide scan with CT scan or chest x-ray, resulted in an upward shifted PPV curve with fewer false positive results, when 99m Tc-depreotide were included in the diagnostic work-up. The negative predictive values for 99m Tc-depreotide in the presence of CT scan or chest x-ray is high (between 90% and 98%) in the range of prevalences from 30-50%, indicating that a patient in this population, with a positive 99m Tc-depreotide scan with a supportive CT scan or chest x-ray, has a high likelihood of malignancy. Table 5. Efficacy results of blind readers: sensitivity, specificity, and agreement (relative to histopathology) (Study 829-P)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The prevalence of malignancy was 79% in study 829-P.  It was considered by the applicant that the only way to ethically conduct a study in a population having a lower prevalence of malignancy was to conduct the trial in a geographical location where granulomatous disease is prevalent, and this was done in Phoenix, Arizona, a region where coccidioidomycosis is endemic.  30 consecutive patients were studied (2 under the 829-22 protocol and 28 under the 829-34 protocol) with SPN referred to herein  as  the  'Phoenix  cohort…'.    Their  results  show  that  their  population  had  a  prevalence  of malignancy  of  only  43.3  %.    Nevertheless,  in  that  population,  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide scintigraphy had a sensitivity and specificity of 92% and 88.2% respectively.

<!-- image -->

|                     | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   |
|---------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Subgroup            | Accuracy                 | Sensitivity              | Specificity              | TP                       | TN                       | FP                       | FN                       | Total                    |
| Majority Blind Read | 85.7% (72.1%,93.6 %)     | 87.5% (66.5%,96.7 %)     | 84.0% (63.1%,94.7 %)     | 21                       | 21                       | 4                        | 3                        | 49                       |
| Investigator Read   | 87.8% (74.5%,94.9 %)     | 91.7% (71.5%,98.5 %)     | 84.0% (63.1%,94.7 %)     | 22                       | 21                       | 4                        | 2                        | 49                       |

Medicinal product no longer authorised During the evaluation procedure it was considered necessary to investigate by further study in a low prevalence population whether NeoSpect ( 99m Tc-depreotide) can reduce the need for biopsy in such a population, with particular reference to whether sensitivity and specificity is a function of tumour size distribution. An  additional  clinical  trial  (829-40)  was  therefore  performed  in  the  south-western  USA.    In  this geographical region, a prevalence of malignancy similar to that observed in the Phoenix cohort was anticipated. In  a  multicenter,  open-label  clinical  study,  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scintigraphy  was  to  be compared to histopathological results in patients presenting with an SPN of size less than 4 cm and suspicious  for  malignancy.    The  study  was  designed  to  demonstrate  with  80%  power  that  the diagnostic accuracy of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy was greater than 70%.  A total of 50 to 55 patients were to be enrolled.  Each patient was to receive an intravenous injection of 555 - 740 MBq  (15-20  mCi)  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  (approximately  50 µ g  depreotide  peptide).    The primary  efficacy  criterion  was  the  accuracy  of  the  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scintigraphy  read blindly  in  combination  with  CT  scan  and/or  chest  x-ray  relative  to  the  histopathologic  diagnosis (benign/malignant) for the suspicious SPN.  Secondary efficacy analyses were performed to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy read blindly in combination  with  CT  scan  or  chest  x-ray  for  the  identification  of  malignant  solitary  pulmonary nodules.  Secondary analyses of sensitivity, specificity and accuracy according to lesion size were also performed. A  total  of  59  patients  presenting  with  a  suspicious  solitary  pulmonary  nodule  &lt;  4  cm  in  greatest diameter  were  enrolled  at  a  total  of  10  investigative  sites.    Of  these  59  patients,  49  were  able  for evaluation for efficacy analysis (fulfilled selection criteria, completed technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide imaging  and  histopathological  assessment).    Of  the  efficacy  population  of  49  patients,  46  (94%) presented with an SPN ≤ 3 cm and only 2 of these were &lt; 1 cm.  The prevalence of malignancy in the 49 patients was 49% (24 patients). Of the 24 patients positive for malignancy by histopathology, 11 patients  (45.8%)  had  adenocarcinoma,  4  (16.7%)  had  squamous  cell  carcinoma,  7  (29.2%)  had unspecified  NSCLC  and  2  (8.3%)  had  SCLC.    Fourteen  of  the  malignancies  were  graded,  mostly Grade 2 (5 of 14) and 3 (7 of 14). The  results  of  the  comparison  of  the  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scintigraphy  read  blindly  in combination with CT scan and/or chest x-ray relative to the histopathologic diagnosis are summarised in Tables 6, 7,8. Table 6.  Results for All Lesions: Mean (95%CI) Subgroup Accuracy Majority Blind Read 85.7% (72.1%,93.6 %) Investigator Read 87.8% (74.5%,94.9

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7.  Results for Lesions ≤ 3 cm: Mean (95%CI)

|                   |                      | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   | Diagnostic Performance   |       |
|-------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-------|
| Subgroup          | Accuracy             | Sensitivity              | Specificity              | TP                       | TN                       | FP                       | FN                       | Total |
| Majority          | 84.8%                | 85.7%                    | 84.0%                    | 18                       | 21                       | 4                        | 3                        | 46    |
| Blind Read        | (70.5%,93.2 %)       | (62.6%,96.2 %)           | (63.1%,94.7 %)           |                          |                          |                          |                          |       |
| Investigator Read | 87.0% (73.0%,94.6 %) | 90.5% (68.2%,98.3 %)     | 84.0% (63.1%,94.7 %)     | 19                       | 21                       | 4                        | 2                        | 46    |

<!-- image -->

|                | Diagnostic Performance              |
|----------------|-------------------------------------|
| Subgroup       | PPV NPV                             |
| All Lesions    | 84.0% 87.5%                         |
|                | (63.1%,94.7%) (66.5%,96.7%)         |
| Lesions ≤ 3 cm | 81.8% 59.0%,94.0% 87.5% 66.5%,96.7% |

<!-- image -->

In  the  829-34  trials,  the  histopathologically  positive  cases  were  squamous  cell  carcinoma  (34%), adenocarcinoma  (32%),  other  NSCLC  (21%),  SCLC  (6%)  and  other  malignancies  (7%).    This  is consistent with the common histological types found in patients with primary NSCLC (approximately 30%  squamous  cell  carcinoma,  30%  adenocarcinoma  and  10%  LCLC).    Fewer  SCLC  cases  were included  than  are  typically  encountered  in  general  practice  (about  20%)  although  clinical  and preclinical data suggest that technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy can detect  SCLC  in addition to NSCLC .   It is noted that patients were enrolled in the clinical trials evaluating technetium ( 99m Tc)

Medicinal product no longer authorised Table 8.   Majority Blind Read, Sample-Based Postitive and Negative Predictive Values: Mean (95%CI) Diagnostic Performance The new clinical data from study 829-40 show that there was a total of 31 patients with lesions equal to  or  less  than  2  cm.    There  were  9  true  positives,  18  true  negatives,  2  false  positives  and  2  false negatives.  Sensitivity was 81.8%, specificity 90.0% with an agreement rate of 87.1%. There were 15 patients with nodules greater than 2 cm and equal to or less than 3 cm.  In this group, sensitivity was 90.0%, specificity was 60.0% and accuracy 80.0%. Study  829-40  confirmed  that  the  specificity  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scintigraphy  remains high even in a population with a low prevalence of malignancy.  The high negative predictive value demonstrates  that  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scintigraphy  can,  with  high  confidence,  rule  out malignancy in this population.  The subgroup analysis of the patients with lesions not greater than 3 cm also confirms the value of the test in this population. A comparison of the results of the 829-40 study with the Phoenix cohort shows that the results of both studies are similar. In  the  829-40  study,  the  3  false  negatives  were  an  adenocarcinoma  (3  cm  by  CT),  an  unspecified NSCLC  (1.9  cm  by  CT)  and  an  SCLC  (1.0  cm  by  CT).    The  4  false  positives  were a coccidioidomycosis, 2 cases of pneumonia and an unspecified benign lesion. In the latter  case, although the biopsy result was reported as benign this patient underwent surgical wedge resection of the left lower lobe nodule based on the abnormal technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide result The surgical specimen was positive for adenocarcinoma.  (Because this result was obtained after the study database was locked, it is not accounted for in the analysis, which assumed this case to be a false positive result).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

depreotide scintigraphy for the detection of lung cancer because there was a suspicion of lung cancer and not because they had known or suspected neuroendocrine cancer.

Efficacy data from the new clinical trial 829-40 of 49 patients has shown that in a population with a prevalence  of  malignancy  of  49%,  the  accuracy,  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy remains high at 85.7%, 87.5% and 84% respectively with PPV of 84% and NPV  of  87.5%.    In  addition,  the  negative  predictive  value  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide scintigraphy remains high in patients with an SPN of size less than 2 to 3cm.  The agreement rate between  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  scans  and  histology  of  85.7%  had  a  lower  95%  confidence limit of 72.1% which exceeded the rate of 70% specified in the protocol at the 0.05 significance level.

<!-- image -->

The  trials  are  well  designed  but  with  a  relatively  small  number  of  patients.  For  evaluating  the sensitivity  and  specificity  for  the  proposed  indication  of 99m Tc-depreotide  scan,  histopathological diagnosis of the main presenting lesion has been defined appropriately.  In study 829-40 histology was predominantly  obtained  by  fine  needle  aspiration  (FNA)  with  5  out  of  49  patients  having  open thoracotomies.    Since  thoracotomy  is  considered  to  be  the  gold  standard  (5-8%  false  negative  rate reported  for  FNA),  it  is  recommended  that  patients  with  a  negative  FNA  should  be  followed  up clinically.  CT scan and chest X-ray are generally accepted for the primary evaluation and follow-up of lung cancer, and as comparative methods.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Although in study 829-40 it was not possible to indicate the utility of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide in the  right  lower  lobe  (the  5  nodules  detected  in  the  right  lower  lobe  were  all  benign),  in  the  pivotal trials (829-34A &amp; 829-34B) the false negative rate for the right lower lobe was the same as for all othe lung regions.  (Right lower lobe 13.5%: all other regions 13.2%) Although  the  829-40  protocol  did  not  define  an  analysis  for  CT  scan  alone  versus  histopathology, some indication of the specificity of the CT (45% spiral CT and 52.7% with contrast) can be obtained from the recent data.  Of the 49 patients included in the efficacy patient population, 45 patients had a CT scan performed, and all 45 patient CT scan results were abnormal.  Based upon review of the 45 patient  CT  scan  reports,  the  following  data  were  obtained.    These  results  are  relative  to  the histopathology data: True positive CT scan reports = 9 True negative CT scan reports = 1 False positive CT scan reports = 8 False negative CT scan reports   = 3 Indeterminate CT scan reports = 24 The follow calculations are based on the patients with a determinate CT examination: CT scan report data alone vs. histopathology: Sensitivity = TP/TP + FN =  9/9 + 3 = 9/12 =75% Specificity = TN/TN + FP = 1/1 + 8 =  1/9 = 11% Accuracy = TP + TN/ TP+TN+FP+FN = 10/ 21 = 48% PPV = 53% NPV = 25% It is noted that all but one SPN were non-calcified lesions. It appears that the specificity reported for CT is within a wide range, probably depending on several factors but overall the impression is that currently CT scan even with contrast has high sensitivity but low specificity . The ability of low dose spiral CT to achieve high sensitivity and specificity for SPN detection has not yet been demonstrated conclusively. FDG-PET, has a high sensitivity and specificity for characterization of SPNs, with a lower radiation exposure but the technique is expensive and not widely available throughout Europe.  The general applicability of MRI for the characterization of SPNs is unknown.

Although  CT  scans  are  a  very  sensitive  diagnostic  tool  for  patients  suspected  of  lung  cancer,  the specificity appears to be low, so patients in most cases undergo an invasive procedure to achieve a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

final diagnosis. 99m Tc-depreotide scan in conjunction with CT scan or chest x-ray has the same high sensitivity,  but  the  specificity  is  significantly  increased  from  11%  up  to  84%  (CI  63.1  -  94.7%)  by decreasing the number of false positive and increasing the number of true negatives in patients with SPNs.

In conclusion, these studies provide evidence that 99m Tc-depreotide scan may contribute in the routine clinical setting to differentiate benign from malignant SPNs, when evaluated in conjunction with CT scan or chest X-ray.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Supportive studies Study  829-30/IIA was  a  prospective,  single  centre  trial  to  evaluate 99m Tc-depreotide  scan  of  12 patients with histological proof of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The efficacy parameter was the  agreement  rate  between  the  investigator  read 99m Tc-depreotide  results  and  histopathology  with respect to presence of disease. 99m Tc-depreotide scans were also compared with FDG-PET results. One or more lesions were present in 99m Tc-depreotide scan in all the patients. 99m Tc-depreotide results and FDG-PET results agreed in 44 lesions of a total of 54 lesions detected by either modality, while 4 lesions were detected by FDG-PET only, and 6 lesions were detected by 99m Tc-depreotide only. TNM classification was identical for the two modalities in 10 of 12 cases, but was incomplete in both modalities. Thus  in  a  small  selected  group  of  patients  with  histological  proof  of  non  small  cell  lung  cancer (NSCLC) 99m Tc-depreotide  was  as  efficacious  for  imaging  NSCLC  as  FDG-PET.    However,  the number of patients in this study were few and selected, and no firm conclusions can be drawn. Study 829-22 was a multi-centre, non-randomised, open study conducted in patients having a tumour, known  or  expected  to  express  SSTR.  The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  evaluate  the  ability  of 99m Tcdepreotide to detect and localise the tumour sites and to assess its general safety after administration of 10-50 µg peptide labelled with approximately 555 MBq 99m Tc.  Early and delayed planar, SPECT and whole body imaging were performed during 3 hours post-injection. Efficacy  was  assessed  by  comparing  the  scintigraphic  results  with  all  other  clinically  relevant diagnostic and follow-up procedures (CT, biopsy/surgery, MRI, bone scan and other) that contributed to the patient's disease.  The investigator at each study centre evaluated the images. Of a total of 141 patients included, 111 were evaluated for efficacy (only these had all the clinically relevant  parameters  measured). 28  patients  had  confirmed  or  suspected  lung  cancer  and  efficacy results were available for 26/28 of these.  Scans were correlated to CT in 24 patients, biopsy/surgery in 4 patients and bone scans in 3 patients. The  results  of  the 99m Tc-depreotide  images  were  in  accordance  with  the  confirmatory  diagnostic procedures in 20/26 (i.e. 76.9%) patients with proven lung cancer. 99m Tc-depreotide images correlated with CT scans in 18 of 24, and provided additional information in all 6 cases were the two modalities did not correlate. For  early  and  delayed  imaging  performed  within  the  3  hours  post-injection  period,  no  appreciable difference  was  reported.  In  general,  the  image  quality  was  better  for  the  delayed  images  (i.e.  90 minutes post-injection). Two additional studies (P829-30A &amp; P820-30B) were identical with respect to aims, study design and procedures, patient population, efficacy and safety assessments, and analyses.  The aims of these studies (uncontrolled and not randomised) were to evaluate the ability of 99m Tc-depreotide to detect and localise somatostatin receptor expressing neuroendocrine tumours as compared to 111 In pentreotide (OctreoScan) and to evaluate the general safety of 99m Tc-depreotide scintigraphy.  Blinded reads were performed  by  three  independent  nuclear  medicine  physicians,  and  were  compared  to  the  final institutional diagnosis (FIC), which was considered definitive.

Of  the  252  patients  included  in  the  studies,  34  patients  had  confirmed  or  suspected  primary neuroendocrine lung tumours, and these patients were evaluated for efficacy.  Efficacy was evaluated by comparing the agreement rate, sensitivity and specificity of 99m Tc-depreotide and 111 In pentreotide using FIC diagnosis as reference method.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For the 34 patients the agreement rate for both blind read and (investigator read) technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide was 79% (27/34), the sensitivity 82% (23/28) and the specificity 66% (4/6).  Agreement rate,  sensitivity  and  specificity  were  all  higher  (not  statistically  different)  for  indium  ( 111 In) pentetreotide.

## Discussion on clinical efficacy

Medicinal product no longer authorised The number of subjects in the pivotal studies is relatively small however these were well conducted. The  statistical  methodology  was  changed  after  study  commencement  because  a  cut-off  point  was chosen based upon an observed agreement rate between CT scan results and histopathology results to be no higher than 65% as documented in the literature. Technetium ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  images  for  the  combined  pivotal  studies  in  patients  with  suspected lung tumours resulted in an agreement rate that was significantly higher than 70%, a figure chosen because of the literature agreement rates between CT and histopathology.  Sensitivity at 83.7% was less than CT and specificity at 59.5% greater than CT. While the specificity is far from ideal even high values for both sensitivity and specificity are of limited value if the predictive value is not appropriate. The  calculated  PV  and  PPV  indicate  that  at  a  disease  prevalence  of  30-50%  a  negative 99m Tcdepreotide scan has a high probability of correctly diagnosing non-malignancy while a positive scan has  a  lower  probability  of  correctly  predicting  a  malignancy.  However  the  overall  population  for which  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  is  proposed  will  have  a  higher  than  50% prevalence  of malignancy.  In a large proportion of these a negative technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scan would still have to be followed by biopsy. Patients  with  SPN  are  often  a  diagnostic  challenge.    While  the  prevalence  of  malignancy  was  high (79%) in the SPN population, in study 829-P in many reported studies only 28-39% of resected SPNs are malignant.  In all subgroups of SPN, technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide used in conjunction with chest X-ray or CT provided improved agreement rate and specificity while retaining sensitivity &gt; 88.9%, compared to technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide or CT alone. Results  appear  to  be  similar  to  the  reported  results  of  FDG-PET  imaging  of  SPN  patients  with  a sensitivity of 96% and a specificity of 69%.  FDG-PET has a high sensitivity and specificity with a lower  radiation  dose  than  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  but  is  not  widely  available  throughout Europe. The results suggest that including technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide in the evaluation of SPNs (in addition to  chest  X-ray  or  CT  scan)  could  reduce  the  number  of  false  positives  and  the  number  of  invasive procedures necessary to rule out  malignancy. There are fewer false positive results when including technetium  ( 99m Tc)  depreotide  in  the  diagnostic  work-up.    A  negative  diagnosis  would  suggest  that biopsy could be withheld in those patients with low likelihood of malignancy and a repeat chest X-ray or CT scan performed to assess change at an appropriate time point.  It appears therefore that in the subgroup of patients with SPNs technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide may be a useful imaging agent. In  a  recent  clinical  study  with  a  prevalence  of  malignancy  of  49%,  the  PPV  for  NeoSpect  in association with CT/chest X-ray was 84% (CI 63.1-94.7%) for all SPNs and 81.8% for lesions equal to or less than 3cm. The negative predictive value was 87.5% (CI 66.5-96.7%) for all lesions and 87.5% for lesions equal to or less than 3cm. However, histology was predominantly obtained by fine needle aspiration (FNA) with 5 out of 49 patients having open thoracotomies. In view of the false negative rate of FNA (5-8% false negative rate reported), thoracotomy is considered to be the gold standard. Patients with a negative FNA should be followed up clinically as some FNA biopsies may give false negative results Clinical safety Patient exposure

A total of 970 individuals were included in 14 clinical studies. A total of 968 of these patients were exposed to the study agent (58 volunteers and 910 patients); two patients withdrew consent prior to injection of 99m Tc-depreotide.  Most subjects received a single injection but 12 patients received 2 and one patient 3 injections.  825 (90.8%) of subjects received the formulation intended for commercial use.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

151  patients  were  evaluated  for  safety  only.    (These  included  normal  volunteers,  patients  with neuroendocrine tumours, lymphoma and melanoma).

Of  the  968  subjects  (514  males  and  454  females)  exposed  to  the  study  agent  835  completed  all assessments.

The dose of the peptide was approximately 50 µ g in 11 of the 14 clinical studies, whereas in 3 studies the dose ranged from 5 to 50 µ g (829-20, 829-22, 829-23).  The activity of 99m Tc ranged from 296-740 MBq, but was 555-740 MBq in most of the studies.

<!-- image -->

| Body System / Symptom                         | Injections total n=923 No of events:   |
|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Body as a Whole                               | 20 (2%)                                |
| Gastrointestinal                              | 19 (2%)                                |
| product Central and Peripheral Nervous System | 15 (< 2%)                              |
| Cardiovascular                                | 5 (< 1%)                               |
| Respiratory                                   | 3 (< 1%)                               |
| Special Senses                                | 3 (< 1%)                               |
| Psychiatric                                   | 2 (< 1%)                               |
| Endocrine                                     | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Metabolic and Nutritional                     | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Musculo-skeletal                              | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Platelet, Bleeding and Clotting               | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Resistance Mechanism                          | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Skin and Appendages                           | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Vision                                        | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| White Cell and RES                            | 1 (< 1%)                               |
| Headache                                      | 11 (<1%)                               |
| Nausea                                        | 6 (< 1%)                               |
| Diarrhoea                                     | 6 (< 1%)                               |
| Dizziness                                     | 4 (< 1%)                               |
| Back Pain                                     | 5 (< 1%)                               |
| Fatigue                                       | 3 (< 1%)                               |
| Vasodilatation                                | 3 (< 1%)                               |
| Vomiting                                      | 3 (< 1%)                               |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Safety parameters assessed included exposure to the study agent, prior and concomitant medications, adverse  events,  clinical  laboratory  tests,  vital  signs,  immunogenicity  of  the  study  agent,  and  postinjection observation time of 24 hours. All adverse events were coded and classified using the WHOART dictionary or COSTART. Adverse events There were no deaths or other serious events reported in any of the 14 clinical studies, and no patients or healthy volunteers discontinued the study due to adverse events. A total of 52 subjects reported 79 adverse events.  Of these 17 events were considered not related to 99m Tc-depreotide.  The most common event was headache (8 events), nausea and diarrhoea (6 events each).  The majority of all events (Table 9) were judged to be mild (57 events) or moderate by the investigators. Eight  events  in  4  patients  (&lt;  1%)  were  judged  to  be  severe  (headache,  backache  (twice),  lower extremity pain/severe diarrhoea and abdominal pain/severe back pain/toothache).  However, all events were judged as probably not related to administration of 99m Tc-depreotide. Table 9. Incidence of Adverse Events Injections Body System / Symptom total n=923 No of events:

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Flushing         | 3 (< 1%)   |
|------------------|------------|
| Taste Perversion | 3 (< 1%)   |
| Abdominal Pain   | 2 (< 1%)   |
| Chest Pain       | 2 (< 1%)   |
| Somnolence       | 2 (< 1%)   |
| Hypertension     | 2 (< 1%)   |
| Pain/discomfort  | 2 (< 1%)   |
| Pain/toothache   | 2 (< 1%)   |

| Parameter            | Patients    |
|----------------------|-------------|
| Alkaline phosphatase | 1/661 (<1%) |
| AST                  | 3/670 (<1%) |
| ALT                  | 5/670 (<1%) |
| LDH                  | 2/652 (<1%) |
| Total protein        | 1/630 (<1%) |
| Total bilirubin      | 1/667 (<1%) |
| BUN                  | 4/674 (<1%) |
| Creatinine           | 0/673 (0%)  |
| Hematocrit           | 2/636 (<1%) |
| Haemoglobin          | 2/635 (<1%) |
| RBC                  | 2/635 (<1%) |
| WBC                  | 8/607 (1%)  |
| Neutrophils          | 2/611 (<1%) |
| Basophils            | 3/617 (<1%) |
| Eosinophils          | 8/618 (1%)  |
| Monocytes            | 1/619 (<1%) |
| Platelets            | 1/589 (<1%) |

Medicinal product no longer authorised In study 829-34A and 829-34B, 237 of 271 patients (87%) received concomitant medications, mainly calcium  channel  blockers,  diuretics  and  corticosteroids.    As  so  few  adverse  events  were  reported during the studies (5% or fewer of patients in any study grouping) adverse events were not subgrouped by specific medications. A slightly higher incidence of adverse events was reported in subgroup patients with abnormal renal and hepatic function (n = 10) compared to patients with normal function.  A comparison of specific adverse events was not possible because of the small number of patients and events in this subgroup. No adverse events were reported in the 13 patients (12x2 and 1x3) who received multiple injections. Clinical laboratory values Clinical laboratory values were assessed in 11 of the 14 clinical studies with 99mTc-depreotide. The  mean  changes  from  pre-injection  (n=737  patients)  to  each  post-injection  evaluation  (at  1  hour n=224 patients; at 2-6 hours n=552 patients and at 18-30 hours n=674 patients) in clinical chemistry for all parameters (i.e. alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, LDH, total protein, total bilirubin, BUN and creatinine) were small.  The same were reported in mean changes for all hematology parameters (i.e. haematocrit, haemoglobin, RBW, WBC, platelets). No clinically significant changes were observed in any urinary parameters as well. Clinically  significant  changes  defined  as  any  25%  change  from  the  pre-injection  value  (in  both directions) were found in a few patients only and these are summarised in Table 10. Table 10. Significant  changes  from  preinjection  laboratory  values  (i.e.,  any  25%  change from the pre-injection value in both directions)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  study  829-22  it  is  noted  that  some  patients  with  normal  plasma  glucose  pre-injection  had  high values post-injection.  Patients (n = 12) with high values pre-injection rose substantially post-injection. Some low values of glucose were recorded post-injection.

One slightly high calcium result was recorded post-injection.

## Immunogenicity

## Efficacy

Medicinal product no longer authorised Analysis  of  IgG  and  IgM  demonstrated  no  antibodies  against  depreotide  (study  829-12  volume reference, study 829-13 volume reference) in 18/32 patients in whom pre- and post-injection (3 weeks) serum was available. Vital signs Systolic and diastolic blood pressures, pulse and respiration rates were assessed in 12 of 14 clinical studies.  However,  none  of  6  cases  deemed  noteworthy  were  considered  to  be  associated  with  the administration of 99m Tc-depreotide. Discussion on clinical safety Assessment of safety parameters has been performed according to standard criteria for radiopharmaceuticals,  and  the  results  indicate  that  no  serious  reactions  are  to  be  expected  after intravenous bolus injection of 99m Tc-depreotide.  The dose of technetium ( 99m Tc) 15-20 mCi advocated is not inconsiderable but compares with other, approved radiopharmaceuticals.  It is thought to be safe with no abnormally high absorption by any organ.  The probability of radiation-induced toxicity from 99m Tc-depreotide is therefore not considered to be high. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.    Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way.  Some CPMP Members noted the rather high radiochemical impurity levels in the product.  However, this concern was not shared by the majority of CPMP Members and the applicant has initiated further steps to  address  these  concerns  and  provided  a  written  undertaking  that  these  concerns  will  be  fully addressed (as a follow-up measure) and the data supplied within a specified timeframe. Although a few minor quality points remain to be fully clarified,  the  remaining  data  (for  example, further batch analyses data) do not raise any major concerns and would not prevent authorisation of the  product.    These  outstanding  data  will  be  provided  post-authorisation  (as  follow-up  measures) within a specified timeframe. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Overall the primary pharmacodynamic and toxicology studies provided adequate evidence that 99m TCdepreotide has the appropriate properties for the intended application.  Although 99m Tc-depreotide is distributed  to  various  organs  and  tissues  in  the  human,  it  is  labelled  with 99m Tc  which  has  a  short physical  half-life  (6.0  hours)  and  emits  only  low/medium  energy  gamma  photons  and  low-energy Auger and conversion electrons.  The absorbed radiation doses to the various organs and tissues in the human from a 740 MBq dose of 99m Tc-depreotide are rather high in comparison with other, approved radio-pharmaceuticals, but the probability of radiation induced toxicity from 99m Tc-depreotide is not considered to be high. The compound accumulated in renally impaired animals.  Although the human data indicate that there is no need to reduce the dose in renally impaired patients, this has been reflected in the SPC.

In all subgroups of SPN, technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide used in conjunction with a chest X-ray or CT scan showed an agreement rate with histology significantly higher than 70% (P&lt;0.05).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The prevalence of malignancy was high (79%) in the SPN population in the pivotal studies 829-34A &amp; B.  In most reported studies 28-39% of resected SPNs are malignant and the SPN is much less likely to be malignant in people younger than 35 years.

Medicinal product no longer authorised An additional clinical study 829-40 has shown that, using 99m Tc-depreotide in combination with an Xray  or  CT  scan  in  a  49  patient  population  with  a  prevalence  of  malignancy  of  49%,  the  accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy remains relatively high.  The negative predictive value of technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide scintigraphy was 87.5% in patients with an SPN of size less than 3cm.  For lesions less than 3cm there was a total of 31 patients with lesions equal to or less than 2 cm.  Of these there were 9 true positives, 18 true negatives, 2 false positives and 2 false negatives.  Sensitivity was 81.8%, specificity 90.0% with an agreement rate of 87.1%.  There were  15  patients  with  nodules  greater  than  2  cm  and  equal  to  or  less  than  3  cm.    In  this  group, sensitivity  was  90.0%,  specificity  was  60.0%  and  accuracy  80.0%.    In  this  study  histology  was predominantly  obtained  by  fine  needle  aspiration  (FNA)  with  5  out  of  49  patients  having  open thoracotomies.    Since  thoracotomy  is  considered  to  be  the  gold  standard  (5-8%  false  negative  rate reported  for  FNA),  it  is  recommended  that  patients  with  a  negative  FNA  should  be  followed  up clinically. CT scan  and  chest  X-ray  are  generally  accepted  for  the  primary  evaluation  and  follow-up  of  lung cancer, and as comparative methods. The results suggest that including technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide in the evaluation of SPNs (in addition to  chest  X-ray  or  CT  scan)  could  reduce  the  number  of  false  positives  and  the  number  of  invasive procedures necessary to rule out malignancy. The results presented in the initial NeoSpect application were obtained in prospective trials in which the  CT  scans  were  performed  with  contrast  enhancement  in  7l  %  of  the  SPN  patients.    Whether contrast was used or not was at the discretion of the radiologist.  The CT scans in the 829-34 trials were thus largely results obtained with contrast enhancement and showed a specificity of 7%.  In study 829-40  spiral  CT  was  used  in  45%  of  patients  and  contrast  was  used  in  52.7%  of  patients.    The specificity  reported  for  CT  is  within  a  wide  range,  probably  depending  on  several  factors  but  the currently widely accepted position of CT scan is that it has high sensitivity but low specificity.  In addition  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to  conclude,  and  in  particular,  no  controlled  study  showing definitively,  that  spiral  CT  scan  has  adequate  specificity  and  sensitivity  to  predict  with  conviction benign vs. malignant SPNs. FDG-PET  has  a  sensitivity  and  specificity  for  characterization  of  SPNs  comparable  to  those  of NeoSpect but with lower radiation exposure. The general applicability of using MRI for the characterisation of SPNs is unknown. It appears therefore that in the subgroup of patients with SPNs technetium ( 99m Tc) depreotide may be a useful  imaging  agent.    While  the  dose  of  technetium  ( 99m Tc)  advocated  (740  MBq  dose)  is  not inconsiderable,  it  is  thought  to  be  safe  with  no  abnormally  high  absorption  by  any  organ.    The proposed indication for NeoSpect  is scintigraphic imaging of suspected malignant SPNs  in combination with CT scan or chest X-ray.  The radiation dose from NeoSpect alone does not appear to pose a safety risk for radiation-induced injury to tissues.  Following the addition of the radiation dose from  a  CT  scan,  the  risk  still  remains  within  the  accepted  limits.    Using  spiral  CT  instead  of conventional CT however the radiation dose may be kept to a minimum. Overall the benefit/risk ratio is positive for the use of NeoSpect for scintigraphy of solitary pulmonary nodules (SPNs) in association with chest X-ray or CT scan. Safety Toxicity studies indicate a good safety profile for 99m Tc-depreotide.  No organ specific toxicity was identified, the product is non-genotoxic, non-antigenic and non-irritant.

Secondary pharmacology, drug interaction, reproductive toxicity and carcinogenicity testing were not included in the dossier, considering the proposed indication, these omissions are justified.  A detailed environmental risk assessment (ERA) was not submitted but the annual use in the EU is predicted to be  &lt;1g 99m Tc-depreotide.    Predicted  environmental  concentrations  (PECs)  would  therefore  be  well below the action limit of 0.01 µg/L.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Benefit/risk assessment

The chemistry and pharmacy data supporting the application for NeoSpect required supplementation in several areas, in particular tightening of the limits in the specifications for both the active ingredient and the finished product (both before and after reconstitution).  Although the specifications have now been amended and are satisfactory to ensure the quality of the product, some validation data remains to be provided, but the applicant has confirmed that these data will be provided as follow-up measures. Some Members held a divergent position on the pharmaceutical quality, in particular the high level of radiochemical impurities.  However, this concern was not shared by the majority of CPMP Members who were of the opinion that the toxicology of these impurities was not in question bearing in mind the low dose, and that there was no evidence of a negative effect on the clinical performance of the product, as justified in Part IV.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  safety  profile 99m Tc-depreotide  is  in  accordance  with  that  expected  from  pre-clinical  studies. Adverse effects were uncommon and of mild intensity.  Exposure to ionising radiation was adequately addressed.  No major safety concerns have emerged from the clinical studies. During the evaluation of this product there were concerns over the clinical usefulness.  Additional data were provided which show that in the subgroup of patients with SPNs that 99m Tc-depreotide may be a useful imaging agent.  In all subgroups of SPN, 99m Tc-depreotide used in conjunction with a chest Xray or CT scan showed an agreement rate with histology significantly higher than 70% (P&lt;0.05). 18 FDG-PET has high sensitivity and specificity and uses a lower radiation dose than 99m Tc-depreotide, however it is not widely available throughout Europe. Thus, the CPMP considered that the efficacy of NeoSpect in the diagnosis (by scintigraphic imaging) of suspected malignant tumours in the lung, in combination with a CT scan or chest X-ray, in patients with solitary pulmonary nodules was acceptable. Recommendation Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by majority decision  that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  NeoSpect  in  the  diagnosis  by  scintigraphic  imaging  of suspected malignant tumours in the lung after initial detection, in combination with CT scan or chest X-ray, in patients with solitary pulmonary nodules, was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.