---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 21:56:14
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/neurobloc-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: neurobloc-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 6.6430091
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 14:12:31.718795
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of NeuroBloc. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 February 2004.  For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

NeuroBloc  contains  the  active  substance  Botulinum  Toxin  Type  B  (BoNT-B).    It  is  one  of  seven serologically distinct toxins produced by the bacterium Clostridium botulinum: the other ones are A, C, D, E, F, and G.  All serotypes cause paralysis by inhibition of the release of acetylcholine and are candidates for therapeutic agents.  The seven serotypes are antigenically distinct but have a common subunit structure.  Each serotype light chain cleaves a specific residue of one or more of the proteins involved  in  the  neurotransmitter  release  process,  conferring  specificity  to  the  process  of  blocking neurotransmitter  release.    As  a  result,  patients  who  develop  neutralising  antibodies  to  one  serotype should retain responsiveness to another serotypes. When injected directly into a muscle NeuroBloc causes a localised paralysis that gradually reverses over time. Dystonia  is  a  syndrome  of  sustained  muscle  contraction  frequently  causing  twisting  and  repetitive movements or abnormal postures.  The abnormal movements resulting from dystonia are diverse, with a  wide range in speed, amplitude, repetitiveness, torsion, forcefulness, distribution in the body, and relationship to rest or voluntary activity.  Focal dystonias are those where only a specific region of the body  is  affected.    When  this  region  is  the  neck  it  is  called  cervical  dystonia  (CD)  or  spasmodic torticollis. Any dystonia may be a severe and incapacitating disease and cervical dystonia is no exception.  In many cases it produces a level of disability that precludes a normal lifestyle.  The suffering is not only determined by the abnormal postures and abnormal muscular contractions but also, in many cases, by pain. There are very few studies of prevalence and incidence of focal dystonias.  In Europe the estimated prevalence  of  focal  dystonias  (all  types  including  cervical  dystonia)  is  116.9  per  million.    Cervical dystonia alone has a prevalence that varies with age strata but on average is 67 per million.  Botulinum Toxin Type A (BoNT-A) is the first line option for treatment of CD.  A small (5-10%) proportion of patients  have  primary  resistance  to  the  effect  of  BoNT-A.    In  addition,  there  is  another  fraction  of patients (estimates are variable but reach 20%) that become resistant to BoNT-A after several courses of  treatment.    In  these  the  most  likely  cause  for  such  resistance,  but  not  the  only  one,  is  the development of neutralising antibodies to BoNT-A. NeuroBloc is indicated for the treatment of cervical dystonia, (torticollis). 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Composition

NeuroBloc is a sterile solution of Botulinum Toxin Type B formulated at 5000 U/ml in a pH 5.6 buffer containing  disodium  succinate,  sodium  chloride,  human  serum  albumin,  sodium  caprylate,  sodium acetyltryptophanate, hydrochloric acid and water for injections.  It is available in three presentations: 2500 U in 0.5 ml, 5000 U in 1.0 ml and 10,000 U in 2.0 ml, all filled in 3.5 ml vials.

The units of potency are mouse lethality units, and are specific to NeuroBloc (not related to units of other botulinum toxin products).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  primary  container  consists  of  a  3.5 ml  Type  I  (Ph.Eur.)  colourless  glass  vial  closed  with  grey butyl rubber, siliconised stoppers and aluminium overseals.

Phase  I  and  II  clinical  studies  were  performed  with  material  having  the  same  composition  of excipients  and  concentrations  of  the  active  substance  ranging  from  26  to  5000 U/ml.  The  Phase  III programme was conducted with material having an identical composition to the proposed commercial formulation. Comparability studies have been performed demonstrating equivalence of products from the site for the manufacture of the clinical trial lots and the site for the manufacture of the commercial material for the EU market.

During the development of the product, the level of excipients was selected to provide stability during storage, minimise non-specific protein adsorption and maintain osmolarity. Active substance NeuroBloc  is  a  formulation  of  Botulinum  Toxin  Type  B  neurotoxin  and  is  expressed  as  a  protein complex by the spore-forming anaerobic bacterium Clostridium botulinum , during fermentation.  This strain is a wild-type non-recombinant organism.  The toxin is synthesised by the bacterium as a single chain  polypeptide  of  approx.  150 kDa  that  is  activated  during  the  fermentation  process  via  a proteolytic cleavage (nicking) by endogenous proteases.  The nicked protein is a fully active doublechain  polypeptide  consisting  of  a  heavy  chain  (100 kDa)  and  light  chain  (50 kDa)  connected  by  a disulphide bond.  The toxin is present in its native form as a complex of toxin and non-toxin proteins with a molecular weight of approx. 700 kDa. Fermentation The  active  neurotoxin  is  produced  by  bacterial  fermentation  of C.botulinum. A two-tier  cell  bank system is used with a master cell bank (MCB) and a working cell bank (WCB).  The MCB was used to produce the WCB.  Characterisation of the MCB is limited to the identification as C.botulinum by biochemical profiling and gram-staining.  Extensive characterisation of the WCB by testing for culture purity, cell morphology and identity is conducted for each batch.  The history and initial source of the MCB have been satisfactorily addressed. The manufacturing process is controlled with a series of in-process tests designed to ensure cultural purity, morphology and quality. In-process specifications have defined acceptance criteria.  Assurance is given that raw materials of animal origin used during the fermentation process do not present a risk of BSE/TSE. Purification The downstream processing of the active substance is a sequence of validated chromatographic steps. In-process  controls  and  specifications  are  adequate  to  control  the  quality  and  consistency  of production.  Maximum lifetimes for the columns and other process systems have been set. Characterisation The  active  substance  has  been  characterised  using  a  combination  of  traditional  and  state  of  the  art physicochemical techniques. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The active  substance  is  adequately  controlled  by  a  combination  of  physicochemical,  biological  and immunological methods.  Appropriate specification has been set.  All analytical procedures have been validated. Batch  analysis data for four-process performance  qualification batches and three consecutive conformance batches have been provided and demonstrate a consistent production of the active substance.

## Other Ingredients

All excipients (except sodium succinate) meet the requirements of Ph.Eur.  For sodium succinate, (for which there is no Ph.Eur. monograph), in house specifications and test methods have been set. A plasma master file and details of the virological testing performed on the HSA were provided.

All packaging materials comply with the requirements of Ph.Eur.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Prduct development and finished product

The manufacturing of NeuroBloc comprises:

- Manufacture  of  active  and  intermediate  product  at  Elan  Pharmaceuticals,  (NPF),  South  SanFrancisco, California, USA.
- Manufacture  of  final  dosage  form  by  Gensia  Sicor  Pharmaceuticals,  Irvine,  California,  and USA.
- Packaging and labelling of the product at Galen Ltd., Northern Ireland, UK (primary assembly site and site for EU testing and release) or at Gensia Sicor Pharmaceuticals, Irvine, California, US (secondary site).

A comparison of the relative paralytic potencies of Botulinum Toxin Type A (Botox ® ) and NeuroBloc was  conducted  in  cynomolgus  monkeys.    For  both  toxins,  the  doses  used  induced  dose-dependent decreases of M-wave amplitude for all muscles.  The maximum depression was observed at one month post-dose.  Paralysis was not reached.  Paralytic doses (80% depression of M-wave) were calculated from the dose-response curve.  It was concluded that a higher dose of NeuroBloc than of Botulinum Toxin Type A was required to cause an equivalent degree of paralysis.

Manufacturing  and  shipping  processes  have  been  validated  for  the  above  sites  and  are  considered satisfactory. The finished product is adequately controlled by a combination of physico-chemical, biological and immunological  methods.    Appropriate  specifications  have  been  set.    All  methods  used  for  routine control have been described and validated. Stability of finished product The stability results show a good stability profile for the finished product when stored at 2-8 o C for up to 18 months.  The company commits that the HSA remains within its shelf life throughout the shelf life of the finished product. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics The mode of action of botulinum toxins is the inhibition of acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction.    As  a  consequence  a  localised  paralysis  occurs  which  subsequently  recovers  through  a mechanism which is not  absolutely  clarified  and  seems  to  involve  the  regeneration  of  motor  nerve endings and re-establishment of a functional connection with the motor end plate on the muscle.  No formal studies were conducted to study the mechanism of recovery of muscular strength or the time of muscle/nerve terminal recovery following NeuroBloc treatment.  For the methods of action and the mechanism of recovery, reference is made to publish studies. The  paralytic  activity  of  NeuroBloc  was  assessed in  vivo in  mice  and  monkey  models,  and  was expressed  by  the  magnitude  of  the  reduction  of  the  M-wave  amplitude  of  the  evoked  compound muscle action potential (CMAP) for several muscles after the intramuscular injection of NeuroBloc. NeuroBloc induced a significant dose-dependent reduction of the evoked compound motor response for all muscles tested by 2 weeks after injection.  Recovery was observed after 8-16 weeks depending upon dose. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No  signs  of  systemic  neurotoxicity  or  modifications  of  the  M-wave  amplitude  of  the  contralateral muscles were observed in these studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

Pharmacokinetic  characterisation  of  NeuroBloc  was  not  performed.    The  justification  for  this  was based on the difficulties related to the assay/detection of the very small doses, which are to be injected, coupled to the possibility that the  protein  would  be cleaved by tissue proteases before reaching the circulation.

## Toxicity

All pivotal toxicity studies were conducted according to GLP requirements.

Single Dose Toxicity Studies were conducted using the i.m. route of administration in cynomolgus monkeys. Animals treated with up to 1440 U/kg appeared normal and healthy following injection.  Body weight and food consumption of these animals were not changed during the study period (14 days).  Doses of 1440 U/kg up to 2400 U/kg caused signs and symptoms of systemic botulism but animals showed an improvement by the end of the study (14-15 days) and therefore these doses were not life threatening. The dose of 2400 U/kg was found to be lethal. Repeat Dose Toxicity The  therapeutic  and  toxic  effects  of  single  and  repeated  doses  of  NeuroBloc  were  evaluated  in cynomolgus monkeys.  Animals were assigned to either an efficacy phase (doses of 12, 24 or 48 U/kg) or  a  toxicity  phase  (doses  of  120  or  240 U/kg).    The  total  dose  was  divided  over  5  muscles.    Four weeks  after  injection,  animals  receiving  an  initial  dose  of  either  24 U/kg  or  120 U/kg  received additional doses of 48 U/kg and 480 U/kg respectively.  Contralateral muscles were not injected. Electrophysiologic measures  of  central nervous  system  neurotoxicity  or in the sural  sensory velocity/amplitude did not reveal any changes and systemic muscle toxicity (expressed by reduction of M-wave of the contralateral muscles) was not observed in any of the groups, even upon re-injection of total doses of 480 U/kg. A decrease of the muscle tone was observed at all dose levels and high dose animals progressed to inability to grasp.  Paralysis interfering with normal activities like sitting, standing, jumping or eating was not observed in any animal.  Food consumption was considered good, but sporadically moderate or poor in every group.  Body weight and ophthalmoscopic examinations as well as clinical chemistry parameters did not reveal systematic drug-related changes. Reproductive toxicity Reproduction toxicity studies were not conducted because the high molecular weight of NeuroBloc makes it unlikely to cross the placental or testicular barriers.  Accordingly, NeuroBloc administration is not to be recommended during pregnancy and lactation. Genotoxicity The mutagenic potential of NeuroBloc has not been evaluated.  Given the localised administration of the product and lack of systemic exposure, the risk of genotoxic effects is considered to be minimal. Carcinogenicity Carcinogenicity  studies  were  not  conducted  which  is  acceptable  based  on  the  low  frequency  of administration of NeuroBloc. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Local tolerance

Local  tolerance  was  not  evaluated  in  a  formal  study.    However,  there  was  no  evidence  of  tissue reactivity at the injection site in any of the pharmacology or toxicology studies performed.

## Immunogenicity

Blood samples for possible subsequent antibody titration were collected in the repeat dose studies in monkeys.    These  samples  have  not  been  analysed.    The  company  states  that  the  collection  and evaluation of antibody data from patients treated with NeuroBloc is ongoing.  It is accepted that the non-clinical data are superseded by these clinical results.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Special Toxicity studies

## Comparability studies

An in  vivo comparability  programme  was  conducted  to  compare  the  pharmacological  properties  of NeuroBloc manufactured at two different facilities.  Studies comparing paralytic activity and diffusion properties were performed in mouse and monkey models.  The results of these studies suggested that the preparations were bioequivalent with respect to their paralytic potency and diffusion properties.

## 4. Clinical aspects

<!-- image -->

| Number / Title                                                                                                                                                                 | No. volun- teers/patients   | Dose and regimen                                                                                                                               | Pharmacokinetic parameters                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Table A : Pharmacokinetic studies AN072-120: Electophysiologic Response of the Extensor Digitorum Brevis to varying doses of imtramuscularly injected BotB in normal subjects  | 18 healthy volunteers       | 1.25, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 80, 120, 160, 240, 320, 400, 480 U. 2 different doses injected into each EDB muscle of each subject | M-wave amplitude, area and mean rectified voltage (MRV) following stimulation of peroneal nerve. authorised |
| AN072-121: Electophysiologic Response of the Extensor Digitorum Brevis to varying doses of imtramuscularly injected BotB (Botulinum Toxin type B) and Botox in normal subjects | 11 healthy volunteers       | NeuroBloc: 20-480 U Botox: 1.25U-10 U NeuroBloc injection into one EDB and Botox injected in the contra- lateral EDB for each subject longer   | M-wave amplitude, area andMRV following stimulation of peroneal nerve.                                      |

<!-- image -->

| Number / Title                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Study design   | No. patients Dose and regimen                                               | Inclusion criteria                                | Endpoints                                                                                                                            |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ANO72-001: A dose ranging safety evaluation of Botulinum toxin serotype-B in patients with Cervical Dystonia (Torticollis)                                                                                        | OL             | 8; up to 5 injections, 100-1200U into defined neck/shoulder muscles product | Cervical dystonia (CD), responder to type A toxin | Tsui torticollis scale scores and pain scores.                                                                                       |
| ANO72-002: An open label, dose-escalation safety and preliminary efficacy study of Botulinum toxin serotype B in patients with cervical dystonia (torticollis) who have become resistant to serotype A. Medicinal | OL, MC         | 12 ; up to 4 injections, 100-1430 U into defined neck/shoulder muscles      | Cervical dystonia (CD), resistant to type A toxin | TWSTRS subscales (1° endpoint: Severity), TWSTRS- total, patient analog pain assessment, patient and investigator global assessments |
| ANO72-003: An open label, dose-escalation safety and preliminary efficacy study of Botulinum toxin serotype B in patients with cervical dystonia (torticollis)                                                    | OL, MC         | 28; up to 4 injections, 300-12.000U into defined neck/shoulder muscles      | Cervical dystonia (CD), responder to type A toxin | TWSTRS subscales (1° endpoint: Severity), TWSTRS- total, patient analog pain assessment, patient and investigator global assessments |

Table A : Pharmacokinetic studies Table B : Safety, tolerability, Dose ranging studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table C : Placebo controlled studies.

Table D : Ongoing studies (at the time of submission of the Marketing Authorisation Application) Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Number / Title                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Study design   | No. patients Dose / regimen                                                             | Inclusion criteria                                           | Endpoints                                                                                                                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ANO72-008: A double- blind, single dose, dose- finding, safety tolerability and preliminary efficacy study of BotB (Botulinum toxin type B) in patients with idiopathic cervical dystonia (C.D.)                         | R, DB, PC, MC  | 85; single injection placebo, 400U, 1200U, 2400U into defined neck/shoulder muscles     | Cervical dystonia. Up to 50% toxin type A resistant patients | 1° endpoint: clinical benefit ( ≥ 3 pts and ≥ 20% improvement in TWSTRS-Severity) Baseline to week 4, 1200U vs. placebo.                                                  |
| ANO72-009: A double- blind, placebo-controlled, singel-treatment, dose- finding, safety, tolerability and preliminary efficacy study of BotB (Botulinium toxin type B) at various doses in patients with ideopathic C.D. | R, DB, PC, MC  | 122; single injection placebo, 2500U, 5000U, 10.000U into defined neck/shoulder muscles | Cervical dystonia. Up to 50% toxin type A resistant patients | 1° endpoint: pairwise comparison active to placebo. TWSTRS-total baseline to 4 weeks. Clinical benefit ≥ 20% improvement in TWSTRS scores, baseline to week 4. authorised |
| ANO72-301: A double- blind, placebo-controlled, single dose, safety and efficacy study o BotB (Botulinim toxin type B) in patients with C.D.                                                                             | R, DB, PC, MC  | 108; single injection placebo, 5000U, 10.000U in defined neck/shoulder muscles no       | Cervical dystonia Patients responsive to toxin type A longer | 1° endpoint: TWSTRS-total score baseline to week4. Primary contrast 10.000U vs. placebo. Supportive: Patients Global assessment at week 4.                                |
| ANO72-302: A double- blind, placebo-controlled, single dose, safety and efficacy study o BotB (Botulinim toxin type B) in type A resistant patients with C.D.                                                            | R, DB, PC, MC  | 77; single injection placebo, 10.000U in defined neck/shoulder muscles product          | Cervical dystonia Patients resistant to toxin type A         | 1° endpoint: TWSTRS-total score baseline to week4. Supportive: Patients Global assessment at week 4.                                                                      |

| Number / Title                                                                                      | Study design   | No. patients Dose, route of administration and regimen                                                                                | Inclusion criteria                                                                                                                                                              | Endpoints                                                                                                    |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AN072-351: An open- label, safety study of NeuroBloc (Botulinum toxin type B) in patients with C.D. | OL, MC         | 260; repeat injections more 12 weeks apart, 5000-10.000 U initially, up to 15.000U if appropriate ; In defined neck/ shoulder muscles | Cervical dystonia Patients who participated in previous NeuroBloc studies or screening failure for study ANO72- 302, or txoin-naïve and post- surgical/phenol injected patients | TWSTRS-total score and subscales. Patients Analog Pain and Global assessment at week 4 after each injection. |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Number / Title                                                                                                            | Study design   | No. patients Dose, route of administration and regimen                                                            | Inclusion criteria                                       | Endpoints                                                                                               |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ANO72-352: An open- label, dose escalation, safety and tolerability study of Botulinum toxin type B in patients with C.D. | OL, MC         | 138; up to 3 injections, upon return to baseline; 10.000U, 12.500U and 15.000U; In defined neck/ shoulder muscles | Cervical dystonia Type A responsive or resistant (< 50%) | TWSTRS- subscales and total. Patients Analog Pain and Global assessment at week 4 after each injection. |

DB : double blinded OL : open label R : randomised MC : multi centre PC : placebo controlled Clinical Pharmacology Mechanism of action Botulinum  type  B  neurotoxin  reversibly  paralyses  or  weakens  skeletal  muscles  by  inhibition  of acetylcholine release from synaptic vesicles in the terminals of cholinergic motor nerves. Pharmacodynamics Two pharmacodynamic studies were carried out in 28 healthy volunteers to demonstrate Botulinum Toxin Type B biological activity in man (table A).  The muscle used as the model was the extensor digitorum brevis (EDB) of the lower limb.  In the EDB paradigm the level of paralysis was assessed by  measuring  electrophysiologic  parameters,  namely  the  M-wave  parameters  [amplitude,  area  and mean rectified voltage (MRV)].  The degree of reduction of the M-wave was related to the dose of NeuroBloc administered. Study ANO72-120 This study was conducted to assess the EDB model itself and the dose range needed to generate a dose-response curve for NeuroBloc in normal volunteers. 17 different NeuroBloc doses were tested. The  rate  of  fall  in  the  M-wave  amplitude  area  and  MRV  was  similar  in  all  subjects  in  this  study, becoming maximal by approximately day 6, post-injection. The maximal effect achieved at the 480U dose level was approximately 25% of the pre-injection value. This dose-response curve demonstrated with NeuroBloc is similar to that demonstrated previously with one of the commercial formulations of BoNT-A (Botox). Safety data : no patients developed resistance to NeuroBloc. The adverse events (AEs) attributable to the product consisted of pain (three subjects), hypesthesia (one subject), and myasthenia (one subject). These events were mild in all subjects, and none lasted more than four days. There were no reported deaths or serious AEs. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Study ANO72-121

The objective of this study was to compare the effect of various doses of NeuroBloc and Botox on electrophysiological measures in normal subjects.

The following doses were tested (each dose level were studied in two EDB): Botulinum Toxin Type A (BoNT-A, Botox®: 1.25U, 2.5U, 5U, 7.5U, 10U); NeuroBloc (20U, 80U, 160U, 320U, 480U). The measurements were done in days 2, 4, 6, 9, 11, 13 and 14 after injection.

The rate of fall in the M-wave amplitude and area was similar in Botox treated muscles compared with NeuroBloc treated muscles with maximal effect being present by approximately day 6 post-injection.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Intramuscular  injection  with  BoNT  of  either  the  A  subtype  or  the  B  subtype  produces  a  dose dependent fall in M-wave amplitude and area. These curves both approximate logarithmic curves with incrementally less effect at higher doses as the maximal effect is approached.

Adverse events in Study AN072-121 were minimal and of short duration, lasting from a few hours to one week. There were no deaths and no serious AEs. Three out of the 10 volunteers reported foot pain that was considered to be related to study drug.

## Pharmacokinetics

Pharmacokinetic studies were not conducted; as such studies would require the administration of doses of  toxin  that  would  produce  the  death  or  severe  sequelae  of  the  subjects.    At  tolerable  doses  the concentration of botulinum toxin in the systemic circulation after intramuscular injections are in the order of fentograms.  There is no assay available that is sensitive enough to measure those quantities. Interaction studies No  formal  drug  interaction  studies  were  performed  because  it  is  not  expected  that  systemic interactions will occur given the route of administration, the local effects of Botulinum Toxin Type B and  the  known  class  of  the  drug.    Published  clinical  safety  and  pharmacovigilance  data  for  both formulations  of  type-A  toxin  indicate  that,  apart  from  the  expected  additive  effects  of  drugs  which cause  muscle  paralysis  and  muscle  weakness  (e.g.  curare-like  medicines),  no  significant  hazards  or interactions are known or anticipated. Caution should be exercised in patients receiving aminoglycosides. Clinical Efficacy Dose-response studies (table B) Studies ANO72-001, ANO72-002 and ANO72-003 were preliminary open-label safety and tolerability studies carried out to assess the safety range of the drug to support further clinical trials.  A total of 48 patients  with  cervical  dystonia  (CD)  were  enrolled  in  these  studies  and  received  doses  of  between 100 U and 12,000 U.  The data demonstrate that individual doses of up to 12,000 U and cumulative doses up to 12,000 U were well tolerated.  The efficacy data suggested a positive effect at 2400 U that increased at higher doses.  Development of antibodies to Botulinum Toxin Type B was not detected. Main clinical studies (table C) Efficacy of Botulinum Toxin Type B in the treatment of cervical dystonia (CD) was studied in two distinct populations:  patients responsive to BoNT-A and patients resistant to BoNT-A. Efficacy  measurements  were  based  on  the  Toronto  Western  Spasmodic  Torticollis  Rating  Scale (TWSTRS).  This is a validated scale that was specially developed to be used in clinical trials.  The TWSTRS-Total is a comprehensive scale  that  assesses  multiple  components  of  a  patient's  dystonia across  a  spectrum  of  disease  severity,  i.e.  clinical  severity,  disability  and  pain.    The  patient  and principal investigator assessment of global changes and the patient assessment of pain were obtained using visual analogue scale (VAS). Medicinal product no longer authorised

With  the  exception  of  Study  AN072-008,  in  which  the  primary  endpoint  was  defined  as  the  mean change  in  the  TWSTRS-Severity  score  baseline  to  Week  4,  the  primary  endpoint  in  all  controlled studies  was  the  mean  change  in  the  TWSTRS-Total  score  baseline  to  Week  4.    The  secondary endpoint measured were the changes from baseline in TWSTRS-Total at Week 8 and Week 12 plus the  Patient  Global  Assessment  and  Principal  Investigator  Global  Assessment,  at  Week  4.    Tertiary endpoints  included  changes  from  baseline  at  each  study  visit  in  TWSTRS-Severity,  TWSTRSDisability,  TWSTRS-Pain  scores,  and  Patient  Analogue  Pain  Assessment.    Safety  data  were  also collected at each timepoint.  A responder to treatment was defined as showing a 20% improvement in TWSTRS-Total.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy in BoNT-A responsive patients

## AN072-008 (Phase II)

The primary objective of this randomised double blind, placebo-controlled study was to evaluate the safety  and  tolerability  of  three  doses  of  NeuroBloc  (400 U,  1200 U  and  2400 U)  versus  placebo  in patients with cervical dystonia (CD).  Secondary objectives were to provide information to aid in the selection  of  doses  for  future  studies  and  to  evaluate  the  use  of  different  rating  scales  to  measure outcomes in future pivotal trials.

The  efficacy  variables  included  TWSTRS  scores  (Severity,  Disability,  Pain,  and  Total),  Patient Analogue Pain Assessments, Patient Global Assessments, and Investigator Global Assessments.  The primary efficacy variable was the proportion of patients who showed clinical benefit from baseline to Week  4  (responders)  as  indicated  from  the  TWSTRS-Severity  score  and  comparing  patients  who received  placebo  with  those  who  received  1200 U  Botulinum  Toxin  Type  B.    Clinical  benefit  was defined as ≥ 3 points and 20% improvement from baseline TWSTRS-Severity score to Week 4.

All treatment groups showed improvement in TWSTRS scores from baseline to Week 4.  All of the TWSTRS scores tended to improve as the dose of NeuroBloc increased (see below).  In the analysis of covariance  on  baseline  to  Week  4  TWSTRS-Total  scores  for  intent-to-treat  patients,  the  overall difference among treatment groups was highly statistically significant (p = 0.0001).  In addition, the analysis  of  dose-response  was  significant  (Total,  p  =  0.0001;  Severity,  p  =  0.0009;  Disability,  p  = 0.0004; Pain, p = 0.0004).

A total of 85 patients entered and 30 patients (35%) met the criteria to complete the study.  All but 2 patients who were withdrawn from the study were withdrawn because they met the protocol-defined criteria for 'lack of response'.  The percentages of withdrawals were similar in the placebo, 400 U and 1200 U dose groups (67%, 71% and 73%, respectively), whereas only 48% were withdrawn in the 2400 U group.  Of the two withdrawals not related to response, one was a placebo patient. NeuroBloc was safe and well tolerated at single doses up to 2400 U.  A single dose of 2400 U was shown  to  be  effective  using  the  TWSTRS-Total  and  Pain  scores  and  the  Patient  and  Investigator Global Assessment scores. Doses below 2400 U are unlikely to be effective and the data suggest that the duration of effect is dose-dependent. AN072-009 (Phase II) The primary objective of this randomised double-blind placebo-controlled study was to evaluate the safety  and  tolerability  of  three  doses  of  NeuroBloc  (2500 U,  5000 U,  10,000 U)  versus  placebo  in patients  with  CD  by  assessing  clinical  safety  parameters,  laboratory  tests,  and  adverse  events. Additional  objectives  were  to  assess  the  suitability  and  validity  of  the  use  of  various  efficacy parameters  (TWSTRS  scores,  Sickness  Impact  Profile,  Analogue  Pain  Assessment,  Investigator Global Assessment, and Patient Global Assessment) as outcome measures for future pivotal trials. A total of 122 patients entered the study and all completed the protocol.  No patient withdrew from the study  because  of  an  adverse  event  (AE).    Twenty  one  percent  of  BoNT-A  resistant  patients  were included in this study. Patients  with  a  20%  baseline  to  Week  4  improvement  in  TWSTRS-Total  score  were  considered 'responders' and returned to the clinic every four weeks for up to a maximum of four months.  The primary  efficacy  analysis  compared  the  TWSTRS-Total  scores  from  baseline  to  Week  4  between treatment  groups  by  analysis  of  covariance  (ANCOVA).    Secondary  analyses  of  the  TWSTRSSeverity, -Disability, and -Pain subscales were also performed by ANCOVA. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study AN072-009: TWSTRS Improvements at Week 4

|          | TWSTRS   | TWSTRS    | TWSTRS   | TWSTRS    | TWSTRS     | TWSTRS     | TWSTRS   | TWSTRS    |
|----------|----------|-----------|----------|-----------|------------|------------|----------|-----------|
|          | Total    | Total     | Severity | Severity  | Disability | Disability | Pain     | Pain      |
|          | Score    | p-value a | Score    | p-value a | Score      | p-value a  | Score    | p-value a |
| Placebo  | 3.3      |           | 1.6      |           | 0.7        |            | 1.0      |           |
| 2500 U   | 11.6     | 0.0016    | 3.5      | 0.0511    | 3.8        | 0.0165     | 4.4      | 0.0019    |
| 5000 U   | 12.5     | 0.0005    | 4.5      | 0.00211   | 3.6        | 0.0122     | 4.3      | 0.0013    |
| 10,000 U | 16.4     | 0.001     | 4.7      | 0.0007    | 5.4        | 0.0001     | 6.4      | 0.0001    |

a:  p-value for the analysis of covariance on the baseline to Week 4 data; comparison of treatment groups with placebo group

|                                                 | Mean result    | Mean result     |           |
|-------------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------|
| Medicinal                                       | Placebo (n=36) | 10,000 U (n=37) | p-value a |
| Primary Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 4 b | 4.3            | 11.7            | 0.0004    |
| Secondary Patient Global Ass. at Week 4 c,d     | 43.6           | 64.6            | 0.0001    |
| Principal Investigator Global Ass. at Week 4 d  | 52.0           | 64.2            | 0.0038    |
| Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 8 b         | 2.3            | 8.4             | 0.0032    |
| Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 12 b        | 1.4            | 4.1             | NS e      |

- a comparison  of  the  10,000 U  and  placebo  groups  (the  primary  contrast).  Baseline  was  included  in  the  model  as  a  covariant  for  the TWSTRS-total analyses.

Mean  analogue  pain  ratings  and  Patient  and  Investigator  Global  assessments  also  improved  in  the NeuroBloc-treated groups. The study showed that NeuroBloc was safe, well tolerated and effective at single doses of 2500 U, 5000 U, and 10,000 U and that there is a dose-response for clinical benefit and typical adverse events, (like dysphagia).  The trial did not assess directly the time to onset of clinical benefit nor the duration of effect.  Estimates of time to onset of clinical benefit and duration of effect were obtained by indirect methods.    Duration  of  effect  (obtained  from  the  time  for  which  patients  continued  in  the  study) showed a trend towards being dose-dependent. AN072-301 (Phase III) The  objectives  of  this  study  were  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  two  doses  of  NeuroBloc (5000 U  and  10,000 U)  versus  placebo  in  patients  with  CD  who  were  known  to  be  responsive  to Botulinum Toxin Type A. A total of 109 patients were enrolled, 36 in the placebo group, 36 in the 5000 U group, and 37 in the 10,000 U group.  Two patients in the placebo group, one patient in the 5000 U group and one patient in the 10,000 U group withdrew from the study. The primary efficacy variable was the change in TWSTRS-Total score from baseline to Week 4 and the primary contrast performed on this variable was a test that compared of the 10,000 U and placebo treatment  groups  using  analysis  of  covariance.    The  supportive  secondary  variable  was  the  Patient Global Assessments at Week 4.  Additional secondary variables were the Principal Investigator Global Assessments at Week 4 and the TWSTRS-Total scores at Weeks 8 and 12 (see below). Study AN072-301 Medicinal product no longer authorised

- b mean improvement from baseline

c prospectively defined supportive secondary efficacy variable.

- d mean value at Week 4.

e NS= not significant

The 5000 U and placebo groups were also significantly different for the TWSTRS-Total scores from baseline to Week 4, Patient Global Assessments at Week 4, Principal Investigator Global Assessments at Week 4 and TWSTRS-Total scores at Week 8.  However, the mean change noted for the 10,000 U groups was consistently greater than that for the 5000 U group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Patients in the treatment groups experienced similar numbers and types of adverse events overall. The percentage  of  events  that  was  considered  related  to  study  medication  was  higher  in  the  NeuroBloc 10,000  U  group  than  in  the  placebo  or  5000  U  groups.  Patients  who  received  NeuroBloc  than  by patients  who  received  placebo  experienced  dry  mouth  and  dysphagia  more  frequently,  and  the frequency increased with increasing doses. Most cases of dysphagia were mild and none was serious. NeuroBloc was safe and effective at the doses studied for the management of patients with CD.

Retrospective  Kaplan-Meier  analyses,  using  time  to  return  to  baseline  TWSTRS-Total  score,  were conducted  to  estimate  the  duration  of  treatment  effect.    The  estimated  median  time  until  return  to baseline for the treatment groups was: placebo - 63 days (9.0 weeks); 5000 U - 114 days (16.3 weeks); 10,000 U -111 days (15.9 weeks).

Additional retrospective analyses estimated the duration of effect in patients considered responders as defined in protocol.  In this subset of patients approximately 53% of the responders are known to have maintained their response for at least 16 weeks. No formal analysis of time to onset of clinical benefit (latency of effect) was conducted.  However the data demonstrate that by the Week 2 visit the TWSTRS-Total score had improved significantly in the NeuroBloc treated group compared to placebo.  No data before Week 2 are available. Efficacy in BoNT-A resistant patients To be defined as A-resistant, the patient must have met all of the following criteria:  1) have had a good  clinical  response  to  previous  BoNT-A  treatment(s);  2)  have  failed  to  respond  to  the  last  2 successive \"adequate\" treatments (i.e. adequate dose, muscle selection and toxin administration) with BoNT-A;  3)  during  the  last  treatment  session,  an  increased  dose  of  toxin  was  administered  (i.e. relative to the highest dose at which the patient had previously a \"good\" clinical response). The existence of neutralising antibodies anti BoNT-A was not a requirement for defining A-resistance. Preliminary proof of Efficacy Studies AN072-002 and AN072-009 previously described provided preliminary proof of efficacy and dose response in A-resistant patients. AN072-302 (Phase III) The  objectives  of  this  study  were  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  to  confirm  the  efficacy  of  NeuroBloc versus placebo in patients with cervical dystonia who were resistant to Botulinum Toxin Type A.  In addition to  meeting  the  criteria  described  above,  to  be  considered  Type-A  resistant,  patients  had  to have a confirmatory Frontalis Type A Test. A total  of  77  patients  were  enrolled:    38  in  the  placebo  group  and  39  in  the  NeuroBloc  10,000 U group.  Seventy-six completed the study; one patient in the control group withdrew. The primary efficacy variable was the change in TWSTRS-Total score from baseline to Week 4.  The primary contrast compared the NeuroBloc and placebo treatment groups using analysis of covariance. The secondary efficacy variables were the analysis of the Patient Global Assessments at Week 4, the Principal Investigator Global Assessments at Week 4 and the TWSTRS-Total scores at Weeks 8 and 12 (see below). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Study AN072-302

a comparison of the 10,000 U and placebo groups (the primary contrast). Baseline was included in the model as a covariant for the TWSTRS-total analyses. b mean improvement from baseline c prospectively defined supportive secondary efficacy variable. d mean value at week 4. Retrospective  Kaplan-Meier  analyses,  using  time  to  return  to  baseline  TWSTRS-Total  score,  were conducted  to  estimate  the  duration  of  treatment  effect.    The  estimated  median  time  until  return  to baseline in the treatment groups was: placebo- 59 days (8.4 weeks), 10,000 U -112 days ( 16 weeks). Additional  retrospective  analysis  estimates  that  in  patients  considered  responders  as  defined  in protocol  approximately  94%  and  70%  of  patients  maintained  their  response  for  at  least  12  and  14 weeks, respectively.  No formal analysis of time to onset of clinical benefit (latency of effect) was conducted.  However the data demonstrate that there was a significant response by the Week 2 visit. No data before Week 2 are available. Supportive studies (open label) There are two on-going open label trials:  (AN072-351, AN072-352) (see table D). Study AN072-351 is an open-label, repeat-dosing, safety study open to  all  participants in  the  prior trials described in this report including those who had previously failed screening.  A limited number of toxin naïve patients and post surgical/phenol-treated patients are also eligible for inclusion.  This is primarily a safety study is to evaluate the safety of repeated doses of NeuroBloc in patients with CD. The  secondary  objective  is  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  repeated  doses  of  NeuroBloc  using  the TWSTRS-Total endpoint.  Up to 600 patients are to be enrolled in the study. As of the data cut off for the interim analysis (May 1999), 398 patients had participated in the first treatment session and 197 of these patients had participated in a second treatment session and 55 in a third. The first treatment is NeuroBloc 10,000 U (or their current dose if enrolling from Study AN072352 or 5000 U if not previously treated with toxin). Subsequent treatments are given at the time their TWSTRS-Total scores returned to baseline, but no sooner than 12 weeks. The subsequent doses are adjusted by the investigator on the basis of the response (rising increments of 2500 U or 5000 U). In addition to collecting safety data following repeat dosing at and above the higher doses used in the later placebo-controlled trials, this study collects efficacy data using the same endpoints used in earlier studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Variable                                      | Mean result   | Mean result   | p-value a   |
|-----------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------|-------------|
|                                               | Placebo       | 10,000 U      |             |
| Primary                                       |               |               |             |
| Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 4 b       | 2.0           | 11.1          | 0.0001      |
| Secondary                                     |               |               |             |
| Patient Global Ass. At Week 4 c,d             | 39.5          | 60.2          | 0.0001      |
| Principal Investigator Global Ass at Week 4 d | 47.9          | 60.6          | 0.0001      |
| Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 8 b       | 1.7           | 8.8           | 0.0002      |
| Improvement in TWSTRS-total at Week 12 b      | 0.8           | 6.0           | 0.0129      |

Study AN072-352 is an open-label forced dose-escalation study in NeuroBloc naïve patients classified as either Toxin Type A responsive or Toxin Type A resistant.  All patients start at an initial NeuroBloc dose  of  10,000 U  and  are  eligible  to  proceed  to  the  next  dose  cohort  when  they  return  to  baseline status.  The dose cohorts are 10,000 U, 12,500 U, and 15,000 U.  The objectives of the study are to evaluate  the  safety  and  tolerability  of  repeat  dosing  of  NeuroBloc  in  patients  with  CD  at  doses  of 10,000 U, 12,500 U, and 15,000 U and to assess the effect of increasing doses of NeuroBloc. As of the data  cut  off  point  for  the  interim  analysis,  138  patients  had  enrolled  in  the  study.  Each  patient participated  in  up  to  three  dosing  sessions.  In  addition  to  collecting  safety  data  following  multiple dosing at and above 10,000 U the study also collects efficacy data using the same endpoints used in earlier studies.

Clinical benefit was observed at each of the three doses using the TWSTRS-Total score. The findings for other endpoints were similar.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

These data suggest that it is unlikely that the use of concomitant medications confounded the results of the open-label studies, as the distribution of drugs over dose groups is broadly equivalent.

## Discussion on Clinical Efficacy

Studies AN072-008, AN072-009 were primarily designed as dose finding studies.  However they do provide evidence that NeuroBloc is efficacious in the symptomatic treatment of cervical dystonia in Botulinum Toxin Type A responsive patients and that there is a dose-response relationship for this beneficial effect.  A series of doses were tested and the minimum beneficial dose is 2400 U.  This was further  confirmed  by  the  pivotal  study  ANO72-301.    The  beneficial  effect  obtained  is  clinically meaningful (mean change from baseline in TWSTRS-Total at 4 weeks is around 25%) and occurs in approximately 50% of treated patients.  Clinical benefit occurs across all dimensions of TWSTRS and is  also  reflected  in  pain  scores  and  global  assessments.    These  were  single  dose  studies  and,  as expected, no patients developed antibodies to NeuroBloc as measured by ELISA tests.

| Total N   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   | DURATION OF EFFECT   |
|-----------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|           | Responder            | 4 weeks              | 4 weeks              | 8 weeks              | 8 weeks              | 12 weeks             | 12 weeks             | 16 weeks             | 16 weeks             |
| 104       | 20                   | 10                   | 50%                  | 4                    | 20%                  | 2                    | 10%                  | 4                    | 20%                  |
| 67        | 37                   | 16                   | 43%                  | 8                    | 22%                  | 6                    | 16%                  | 7                    | 19%                  |
| 106       | 61                   | 23                   | 38%                  | 21                   | 34%                  | 10                   | 16%                  | 7                    | 11%                  |
| 173       | 98                   | 39                   | 40%                  | 29                   | 30%                  | 16                   | 16%                  | 14                   | 14%                  |

The  results  of  the  pivotal  trial  ANO72-302  in  Type-A  resistant  patients  are  consistent  with  those observed  for  A-responsive  patients.    The  magnitude  of  the  treatment  effect  is  similar  between A-resistant and A-responsive patients but the percentage of patients responding appears to be lower in the A-resistant group.  From the available data it is not possible to conclude whether the response rate is truly similar or different between A-responsive and A-resistant patients. In order to solve the absence in any of the studies of a prospective measurement of duration of effect and latency of effect the applicant produced two retrospective analyses. The first one is a retrospective survival analysis where the event was \"time to return to baseline\". Survival analysis is indeed a robust and suitable type of analysis for this time of outcome. In this particular case, the data that allowed the analysis was obtained intermittently and thus there was need to artificially refer the occurrence of the event for a point in time between to scheduled visits. This has the effect of homogenising the results. In the end the estimated duration of effect may be considered a very rough estimate. Furthermore, the event 'time to return to baseline' may not reflect the clinical practise.. The second analysis attempts to estimate the duration of effect in the responders. This is again a crude estimate of the duration of effect because it is biased towards a greater duration. However we must concede that the two analysis agree that mean duration of effect is between 12 and 16 weeks. In  order  to  provide  an  additional  estimation  of  duration  of  effect,  an aggregate  analysis of  studies ANO72-301/302/009 was done, using the definition of responders. In this analysis duration of effect was  counted  from  day  0  (visit  where  treatment  was  administered)  until  the  last  visit  where  an improvement  of  20%  on  TWSTRS-total  from  baseline  was  maintained.  Only  responders  were included . This aggregate analysis produced the following results: Aggregate analysis of responders in studies ANO72-301/302/009 Groups Total N Responder N 4 weeks Placebo 104 20 10 5000 U 67 37 16 Medicinal product no longer authorised

Bold figures are the % of 'continuous' responders in each duration of effect category

The analysis shows that 30% of patients maintain an improvement of at least 20% on TWSTRS for 12 weeks or longer.

A statement is included in section 4.2 of the SPC that gives a factual account of the duration of effect, based on the combined data from the 5000 U and 10000 U groups (see table). ' In clinical trials the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

duration of effect was variable. In the patients who responded to treatment (those who experienced an improvement  in  TWSTRS  greater  than  20%  over  baseline)  the  following  duration  of  effect  was observed:  at  least  4  weeks  (40%  of  patients),  at  least  8  weeks  (30%),  at  least  12  weeks  (16%), 16 weeks or longer (14%). '

It is worth noting that the dose is established at 10.000U because no other dose level was tested in Aresistant patients. It is likely that the dose of 5000U is also efficacious in this patient population but this was not studied.

## Clinical Safety

<!-- image -->

Specific  analyses  were  carried  out  to  determine  if,  as  might  be  expected,  there  was  a  relationship between  the  dose  of  NeuroBloc  injected  into  the  sterno-cleido-mastoid  muscle  (SCM)  and  the incidence and severity of dysphagia. Data from Studies AN072-301 and -302 were analysed using a logistic  regression  model  to  determine  the  interaction  between  dose  injected  into  the  SCM  and  the severity  or  frequency  of  dysphagia.  Of  the  186  patients  enrolled  into  the  two  pivotal  studies, 26  patients  (14%)  reported  dysphagia.  Although  there  was  an  anticipated,  significant  association between SCM injection and the occurrence of dysphagia (p = 0.0001), there was not an association between  the  amount  of  drug  injected  into  the  SCM  and  the  severity  of  dysphagia.  For  the  four controlled  studies,  36  patients  (10%)  reported  a  maximum  intensity  of  'mild,'  9  patients  (2%) reported a  maximum intensity of 'moderate,' and no patients reported 'severe' for dysphagia. The

Patient exposure Twenty-eight healthy volunteers were treated with NeuroBloc in two pharmacodynamic studies.  The doses used were less than 500 U and the safety results can not be expected to reveal information about the tolerability of treatment in clinical practice, where the proposed starting dose is 10,000 U. The  total  of  568  patients  exposed  to  NeuroBloc  in  the  nine  clinical  trials  received  2438  doses  of NeuroBloc. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths Safety  data  from  patients  with  cervical  dystonia  were  obtained  from  double-blind  and  open-label trials.    The  most  frequent  adverse  events  associated  with  NeuroBloc  treatment  are  dry  mouth  and dysphagia.    These  adverse  effects  are  to  be  anticipated  when  injecting  botulinum  toxin  into  the muscles of the neck and are known also to be associated with the use of Botulinum Toxin Type A in the treatment of CD. Overall, the majority of patients reporting AEs reported them as mild.  For the event of dry mouth (nervous  system),  125  patients  (24%)  reported  a  maximum  intensity  of  'mild',  71  patients  (13%) reported  a  maximum  intensity  of  'moderate',  20  patients  (4%)  reported  a  maximum  intensity  of 'severe', and for one patient (&lt;1%), the intensity was unknown.  For dysphagia (digestive system), 102 patients (19%) reported a maximum intensity of 'mild', 44 patients (8%) reported a maximum intensity of 'moderate', 7 patients (1%) reported a maximum intensity of 'severe', and for 2 patients (&lt;1%), the intensity was unknown.  The mean and median duration over all doses were 35 days and 18 days for dry mouth and dysphagia, respectively.  No cases were reported of dysphagia that needed gastric intubation. Analysis of the number of patients reporting AEs in the placebo controlled studies reveals a clear and consistent dose response relationship between number of patients reporting treatment emergent signs and  symptoms  in  the  nervous  system  and  a  clear  trend  in  the  digestive  system.    Dry  mouth  and dysphagia  are  the  most  frequently  reported  AEs  and  are  those  with  the  clearest  dose  response relationship. Data  from  open-label  and  follow-on  studies  demonstrate  that  the  body  systems  most  commonly associated  with  AEs  are  the  nervous  system,  body  as  a  whole,  and  the  digestive  system.    There  is evidence of a relationship between dose and reporting of AEs in these body systems. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

information that dysphagia depends on the total dose and in particular of the dose injected in the SCM is included in the SPC.

In  the  two  pivotal  studies,  33  patients  (18%)  reported  dry  mouth.  For  the  four  controlled  studies, 29  patients  (8%)  reported  a  maximum  intensity  of  'mild,'  16  patients  (4%)  reported  a  maximum intensity of 'moderate,' and four patients (1%) reported a maximum intensity of 'severe' for their dry mouth.

Data from clinical trials indicate that there is a relationship between the dose of NeuroBloc injected into the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the incidence and severity of dysphagia.

Safety-related withdrawals There were 14 withdrawals due to adverse events.  It should be noted that of the 14 withdrawals only 6 were due to an AE that was considered to be related to the study drug.  Two of these six patients were being treated with placebo. Serious adverse events and deaths During the clinical trials programme four patients died.  None of the deaths was thought to be related to  treatment  with  NeuroBloc  (two  cancers,  a  post-surgical  complication  following  a  myocardial infarction, and a sub-arachnoid haemorrhage). Twenty-nine patients reported a total of 35 serious adverse events during treatment with NeuroBloc. Cases of cardiovascular events were reported, but do not raise any particular concern.  None of the serious adverse events was considered by the investigator to be treatment-related and the majority of serious adverse events resolved. Immunogenicity Immunogenicity was investigated by carrying out ELISA and Mouse Neutralising Antibody Assays (MNAA) to detect the presence of antibodies directed against NeuroBloc in all patients enrolled in Studies AN072-301 and AN072-302.  Samples were taken at baseline, four weeks after treatment and at  the  end  of  the  study.    The  ELISA  test  is  very  sensitive  and  is  capable  of  detecting  circulating antibodies  against  NeuroBloc  at  very  low  titres  but  it  is  not  capable  of  demonstrating  if  they  are neutralising  antibodies  or  not.    The  MNAA  is  an  in  vitro  assay  which  determines  if  the  antibodies neutralise the effects of the toxin.  As of the data cut off point for filing only one case of a positive MNAA in which a clinical history consistent with secondary non-response had been observed. Further  immunogenicity  data  were  generated  from  459  patients  in  the  ongoing  extension  studies AN072-351 and AN072-352:  6% of patients developed a positive MNAA, although the majority of patients  continued  to  receive  NeuroBloc  treatment.    The  limited data  available  suggest  that  there  is little difference in likelihood of an immunogenic response in A-resistant compared with A-responsive patients however insufficient data are available to draw firm conclusions.  There is no evidence that NeuroBloc is more or less immunogenic than BoNT-A. Discussion on Clinical Safety Medicinal product no longer authorised

Botulinum toxins are injected locally in the muscles judged to be involved in the abnormal posture or movement of the neck.  Systemic effects or effects at distance from the locale of the injection are not expected, except for a flu like syndrome with asthenia that is described as being associated to BoNT-A treatments; this is interpreted as an unspecific immunological reaction.  At a local level it is expected that  in  some  cases the diffusion of toxin will affect some muscles that were not injected producing adverse events such as dysphagia or floppy neck.  It is also expected that the anticholinergic effect of botulinum toxins  may  manifest  in  the  vicinity  of  the  local  injection  (dry  mouth)  and  sometimes  in more distant sites in the form of blurred vision.

The  safety  data  obtained  in  relation  to  NeuroBloc  are  absolutely  in  accordance  with  what  was expected.  There are no significant systemic effects.  The local effects of dry mouth and dysphagia are

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in  most  cases  mild  to  moderate  and  dose-dependent.    The  dose  injected  in  the  sternocleidomastoid muscle is predictive of the occurrence of dysphagia.

Deaths and serious adverse events  were considered unrelated to treatment with NeuroBloc. Withdrawals due to adverse events are also totally acceptable and do not deserve further comment. The position of the company regarding special populations (contraindication in children and no special precautions in elderly) is adequate.  Elderly were represented in trials and the parameter that should determine the treatment is the muscular bulk and not age by itself.

The company has performed a comprehensive programme to identify antibodies against NeuroBloc in the population enrolled in the controlled trials. All were screened with ELISA tests at several points in time and the positive ELISA were further studied in the Mouse neutralising antibodies assay (MNAA). The ELISA test is highly sensitive but has a low specificity. Thus there were a number of positive ELISA  tests  evenly  distributed  by  placebo  and  active  treated  patients.  None  of  these  prove  to  be positive in MNAA. In the patients enrolled in the on-going, open-label trials all patients were tested by ELISA  and  MNAA..    Approximately  6  %  of  patients  developed  a  positive  MNAA,  but  the  data suggest that relatively few patients became unresponsive to NeuroBloc and that NeuroBloc probably has  similar  immunogenicity  potential  as  Botulinum  Toxin  Type  A.    Given  the  limited  long-term follow-up data, immunogenicity of NeuroBloc will continue to be evaluated in the ongoing studies and in the post marketing setting. 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Quality A comprehensive  pharmaceutical  dossier  supported  the  application  and  there  were  no  major  issues identified  on  the  quality  part  of  the  dossier.    A  number  of  points  for  clarification  were  raised. Adequate responses to these points were provided as answers to the list of questions and appropriate pharmaceutical commitments have been agreed. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology The preclinical file supporting the marketing authorisation for NeuroBloc  is limited. The pharmacological characterisation was mainly based on published information from the literature.  The study  of  the  toxicological  profile  of  NeuroBloc  was  also  very  limited  and  the  toxicity  of  repeated doses  has  not  been  fully  explored  in  animal  studies.    However  the  evidence  from  the  completed preclinical  studies  together  with  the  clinical  data  suggest  that  the  effect  of  NeuroBloc  is  relatively short and should be regarded as multiple single dose treatments. The immunogenic potential, which is a relevant issue for this type of compound has not been studied, but the company has performed a comprehensive programme to identify antibodies against NeuroBloc in patients treated in the clinical trials. In summary the limited preclinical information provided suggests that the human use of NeuroBloc, unless  superceded  by  clinical  information  and  experience  may  only  be  justifiable  for  single-dose administration in situations without a therapeutic alternative. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Efficacy

The clinical studies documented provide evidence that NeuroBloc is efficacious in the symptomatic treatment of cervical dystonia in patients responsive and resistant to BoNT-A.

Data from clinical trials suggest that efficacy is dose dependent but these trials, because they were not powered for a comparison, do not show a significant difference between 5000 U and 10,000 U.  The SmPC therefore suggests that an initial dose  of 5000 U  may also be considered, but that a  dose  of 10,000 U may increase the likelihood of clinical benefit.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In order to solve the absence in any of the studies of a prospective measurement of duration of effect and latency of effect the applicant provided retrospective analyses indicating a medium time to return to  baseline  of  12-16  weeks.    The  duration  of  effect  was  variable,  however  in  the  patients  who responded to treatment at Week 4 60% were still responders at Week 8, 30% were still responders at Week 12 and 14% were still responders at Week 16.

The latency for  clinical  effect  is  unknown  but  considered  reasonable  since  significant  efficacy  was seen at 2 weeks post-injection.

## Safety

<!-- image -->

NeuroBloc  is  injected  locally  in  the  muscles  judged  to  be  involved  in  the  abnormal  posture  or movement of the  neck.    Systemic  effects  or  effects  at  a  distance  from  the  site  of  injection  are  not expected.  At a local level it is expected that in some cases the diffusion  of toxin will affect some muscles  that  were  not  injected  producing  adverse  events  like  dysphagia  or  floppy  neck.    It  is  also expected that the anticholinergic effect of BoNT may manifest in the vicinity of the local injection (dry mouth) and sometimes in more distant sites in the form of blurred vision.  The dose injected in the sternocleidomastoid muscle is predictive of the presence of dysphagia. Regarding the immunogenicity of NeuroBloc, of the patients enrolled in the controlled and on-going, open-label trials approximately 6% of patients developed a positive MNAA, but the data suggest that relatively few patients became unresponsive to NeuroBloc and that NeuroBloc probably has similar immunogenicity  potential  as  BoNT-A.  The  company  committed  to  do  a  further  follow-up  study  in Europe  to  determine  the  incidence  of  resistance  to  treatment  and  development  of  neutralising antibodies to NeuroBloc in CD patients treated in multiple occasions. The study will include at least 50 % A-resistant patients. Benefit/Risk Assessment The documentation submitted is adequate to evaluate the quality of the medicinal product. The preclinical file supporting the marketing authorisation application for NeuroBloc is limited, but could be accepted on the basis of the clinical experience. The clinical studies provide evidence that NeuroBloc is efficacious in the symptomatic treatment of cervical dystonia in patients responsive or resistant to Botulinum Toxin Type A.  The studies were not designed for comparison between NeuroBloc and Botulinum Toxin Type A, nor where they designed to study prospectively the duration of effect or latency of onset of effect. The safety profile of NeuroBloc is adequate.  The local effects of dry mouth and dysphagia are in most cases mild to moderate and dose-dependent.  However the immunogenicity characteristics are not yet known because there is not a long enough follow-up.  The Applicant has committed to continue to evaluate the immunogenicity of NeuroBloc in the ongoing studies and the post marketing setting. The CPMP discussed the following points of concern: The analysis of the duration of effect The comparative safety and efficacy of NeuroBloc with Botulinum Toxin Type A Medicinal product no longer authorised

-

Post  approval  comparative  study  of  NeuroBloc  against  Botulinum  Toxin  Type  A  in  patients with cervical dystonia.

The Applicant showed that for both Botulinum Toxin Type A and Type B the duration of effect is variable  and  dose  related,  but  that  most  patients  can  be  successfully  managed  by  injections  every 12 weeks.  From analysis of the published trials with Botulinum Toxin Type A , there were no major differences between Botulinum Toxin Type A and B in terms of efficacy and safety at their respective recommended  starting  doses.    There  is  also  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  patients  who  developed resistance to Botulinum Toxin Type A are more likely to develop antibodies to NeuroBloc.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The applicant discussed the practical problem to conduct a comparative trial between Botulinum type A and type B to establish the efficacy and duration of effect. The CPMP during their September 2000 meeting requested the company to provide them prior to opinion with a protocol synopsis of such a study. The applicant prior to the October CPMP meeting has submitted the protocol for such a post marketing study. This study will be a randomised, double blind study compariung the efficacy and safety of NeuroBloc (Botulinum toxin type B) with Botulinum toxin type A (Botox) in patients with Cervical  dystonia  who  have  never  received  previously  a  botulinum  toxin  product.  104  botulinum toxin naïve CD patients will be studied.

The CPMP agreed with the post marketing study proposed by the Applicant.

<!-- image -->