---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:54:01
document_pages: 13
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/nonafact-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: nonafact-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.353752
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-23 01:40:14.333979
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion and scientific discussion on procedures, which have been finalised before 1 February 2004. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

1. Introduction Nonafact  is  a  plasma-derived  factor  IX  product.  The  approved  indication  is  'Treatment  and prophylaxis of bleeding in patients with haemophilia B (congenital factor IX deficiency)'. Factor IX is a single chain glycoprotein with a molecular mass of about 68,000 Dalton. It is a vitamin K-dependent coagulation factor and is synthesised in the liver. Factor IX activity is greatly reduced in patients with haemophilia B and therefore substitution therapy is necessary. Haemophilia B is a sexlinked recessive bleeding disorder that is 4 to 8 times less common than haemophilia A. The incidence is of about 1-2 per 100,000 in the population, occurring almost exclusively in males. In  the  last  three  decades  several  types  of  plasma-derived  coagulation  products  containing  factor  IX have  been  developed.  The  first  generation  of  products,  prothrombin  complex  concentrates,  contain coagulation factors II, VII and X in addition to factor IX. The second generation of factor IX products have a reduced content of factor II, factor VII and X. Further product improvement has been achieved by the introduction of immuno-affinity chromatography, which allows for the production of very pure factor IX. Recently recombinant factor IX has been licensed. The availability of alternative products allows the selection of the optimal product for the individual patient. Potential risks of replacement therapy  for  bleeding  episodes  in  patients  with  haemophilia  B  are  transmission  of  blood-borne  viral infections, thrombosis and development of inhibitors. Nonafact  is  an  immuno-affinity  purified  factor  IX  product.  The  manufacturing  process  includes solvent/detergent treatment for the inactivation of enveloped viruses such as HIV, hepatitis B and C viruses, and nanofiltration for the removal of viruses including non-enveloped viruses such as hepatitis A virus and parvovirus B19. In February 1996 a \"Note for Guidance to assess efficacy and safety of human plasma-derived factor VIII:C  and  factor  IX:C  products  in  clinical  trials  in  haemophiliacs  before  and  after  authorisation' (CPMP/198/95 Final) came into operation.  Clinical trials  for  the  evaluation  of  Nonafact  have  been designed according to this CPMP Note for Guidance. A revised Note for Guidance CPMP/BPWG/198/95, rev 1 on 'The Clinical  Investigation  of  Plasma-Derived  Factor  VIII  and  IX Products' came into operation in April 2001. To support the application, the applicant submitted the results of three clinical studies with Nonafact performed in previously treated patients. Abbreviations used in this report ALT : alanine aminotransferase ASAT  : aspartate aminotransferase HAV : Hepatitis A virus HBsAg : Hepatitis B surface antigen HBV : Hepatitis B virus HCV : Hepatitis C virus Medicinal product no longer authorised

HIV

: human immunodeficiency virus

HTLV  : human T cell lymphotropic virus

PTP

: previously treated patient

PUP

: previously untreated patient

SD

: solvent /detergent

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

## Composition

Nonafact  is  a  freeze-dried  powder  in  presentations  of  500  and  1000  IU  factor  IX  per  vial,  to  be reconstituted with 5 or 10 ml of water for injections respectively.

The product is provided in colourless glass vials (Type I glass Ph. Eur.) of 8 ml (500 IU) or 20 ml (1000  IU).  Water  for  injections  is  provided  in  colourless  glass  vials  (Type  I  glass  Ph.  Eur)  of respectively  11  or  20  ml.  All  vials  of  the  product  are  closed  with  a  bromobutyl  rubber  (Ph.Eur.) freeze-drying stoppers, sealed with an aluminium 'combi' cap. Vials water for injections are closed with rubber (Ph.Eur.) stoppers and sealed with an aluminium 'combi' cap. Active substance Source material The  information  concerning  the  source  material  is  submitted  in  a  Plasma  Master  File  (PMF).  This PMF is in compliance with EC Guideline III/5272/94. Plasma used for the manufacturing of Nonafact is derived from voluntary, non-remunerated donors meeting the criteria of non-remunerated donors as accepted by the Council of Europe. Criteria for the selection  and  acceptance  of  donors  are  in  accordance  with  the  relevant  European  and  International recommendations. The plasma is supplied by the blood banks of Stichting Sanquin Bloedvoorziening (abbreviated: Sanquin) in the Netherlands. Blood banks are audited by the Dutch Health Inspectorate and by CLB, Products Division (a division of Sanquin). All  individual  donations  are  tested  for  viral  markers  (HBsAg,  anti-HIV  1/2,  and  anti-HCV)  using commercially available kits. In addition, donations are tested for anti-HTLV I/II and antibodies against Treponema  pallidum.  Only  donations  tested  negative  for  all  these  markers  are  used  for  the manufacturing  of  Nonafact.  In  the  Netherlands,  an  ALT  test  is  not  performed  on  the  donations. According to the CPMP position paper on ALT testing (CPMP/BWP/385/99), there is no scientific basis for objecting to the use of plasma for fractionation collected without ALT testing. Plasma pools are tested for anti-HCV, anti-HIV 1/2 and HBsAg. Pools are also tested for HCV RNA. All donations are traceable from the moment of collection until the final marketing and use of blood products prepared from them and vice-versa. Measures with respect to the post-collection information system  are  in  compliance  with  CPMP/BWP/269/95  rev.  3  'Note  for  guidance  on  plasma-derived medicinal products'. A list of blood bags (all CE marked) used by the different blood banks is submitted. The type of blood bag, manufacturer, and anticoagulant is indicated. Plasma collection, isolation from whole blood donations, methods of freezing, storage and shipping conditions  and  specifications  are  in  compliance  with  the  Ph.  Eur.  monograph  'Human  plasma  for fractionation'. Specifications for plasma are submitted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Ingredients          |                          | Conc.   | Function    | Quality   |
|----------------------|--------------------------|---------|-------------|-----------|
| Active ingredient    | factor IX (IU/ml)        | 100     |             |           |
| Auxiliary substances | Histidine (mmol/l)       | 15      | Stabilizer  | Ph.Eur.   |
|                      | Sucrose (mmol/l)         | 151     | Stabilizer  | Ph.Eur.   |
|                      | Sodium chloride (mmol/l) | 75      | Isotonicity | Ph.Eur.   |
|                      | Water for injections     | q.s.    |             | Ph.Eur.   |

## Purification

The  whole  process  is  performed  at  CLB,  Products  Division  in  Amsterdam,  the  Netherlands.  The starting material for the production of Nonafact is fresh-frozen plasma, which is firstly subjected to cryoprecipitation using conventional techniques. Factor IX is captured from the cryo-depleted plasma by adsorption to an anion exchange chromatographic matrix (first chromatographic step) from which, after washing, a factor IX-containing '3F-concentrate' is eluted. This factor IX fraction is diafiltered and concentrated and, after filtration, stored at ≤ - 25 ° C.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

3F-concentrate is thawed and S/D treated during at least 13 hours using TNBP and Tween-80. Factor IX  is  purified  from  the  S/D-treated  3F-concentrate  by  immuno-affinity  chromatography  using monoclonal  antibody  CLB-FIX  D4  coupled  to  Sepharose  (second  chromatographic  step).  After extensive washing to remove contaminants, the factor IX containing fraction (D4 eluate) is eluted with a chaotropic elution buffer. The eluate is filtered by dual nanofiltration using a pore size of 15 nm.

The nanofiltered factor IX solution is subjected to a third chromatographic step to remove not only mouse  protein  due  to  possible  leakage  from  the  monoclonal  antibody  matrix  and  the  chaotropic components,  but  also  possibly  degraded  factor  IX.  This  is  achieved  by  thorough  washing  of  the matrix. Following elution of the bound factor IX the eluate ('third eluate') is concentrated and stored at ≤ - 25 ° C.

It was demonstrated that the formulation chosen gives the best overall product characteristics in terms of moisture content, appearance, reconstitution, osmolality, protein stability and activity. Qualification batches produced in 1995 were used for shelf-life and pre-clinical studies. There are no changes in the formulation between the qualification batches and the formulation of Nonafact for marketing.

Cleaning, sanitization, regeneration procedures and storage of relevant columns are described and reuse has been validated. Active substance characterisation Effective  separation  between  factor  IX  and  the  other  blood  clotting  factors  II,  VII  and  X  is accomplished by the immuno-affinity chromatography process. This step also distinguishes between intact factor IX and activated factor IX (factor IXa). The specific activity of at least 200 IU/mg protein for this factor IX preparation is four times the requirement stated in the Ph. Eur. monograph, and the content of other coagulation factors is far below the Ph. Eur. limits. Traces of high molecular weight proteins are present. No interference of these trace amounts with the biological activity of factor IX is expected. No factor IX aggregates are present. Specification of active substance An appropriate specification is set for the final concentrate. Batch to batch consistency The  full  scale  production  process  was  validated  through  compilation  of  process  results  of  batches manufactured during the development phase in 1995. Additional validation data were obtained after introduction of changes in the manufacturing process, by the production of new consistency batches of both 500 and 1000 IU fillings in 1999. Comparison of the in-process results of the consistency batches of 1999 with those of the consistency batches manufactured in 1995 shows that the introduction of process modifications has no significant influence on the composition of intermediates and final product. Stability of the active ingredient Stability  studies  were  performed  with  3F-concentrate  and  final  concentrate  to  justify  the  storage  of these two intermediates. Other ingredients Excipients are of Ph. Eur. quality. Product development and finished product Product development Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical trial formula

Full  QC results of all  batches  used for  clinical studies  are  provided.  All  batches  complied  with the specifications.  No  significant  differences  were  seen  between  batches  produced  for  the  pre-clinical studies, stability studies, clinical studies and the consistency batches.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Manufacturing process

Formulation and filling is performed at CLB, Products Division in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. The formulated bulk is manufactured from the final concentrate.

The solution is sterilised by filtration through a 0.22 µ m membrane filter.

After  filling,  the  vials  are  fitted  with  freeze-drying  stoppers,  freeze-dried,  capped,  and  stored  at 2 - 8 ° C.

Satisfactory information is provided on in-process controls and the overall manufacturing process.

Satisfactory information on the manufacture of water for injections by SVM 1 is provided. Finished product specification The specifications for the finished product are based on the Ph.Eur. Monograph 1223. Potency of the finished  product  is  determined  by  a  chromogenic  factor  IX  assay.  This  assay  is  validated  and compared  with  the  pharmacopoeial  method  (one-stage  clotting  assay).  The  in-house  standards (concentrate  and  plasma  standard)  are  calibrated  against  the  International  Standards  for  Factor  IX concentrate and plasma (WHO standards). A specific factor IXa assay has been developed. The principle of the factor IXa assay is the same as for the chromogenic assay for factor IX with the first activation step omitted. An  ELISA-based  method  was  developed  as an identity test since the precipitation  method recommended  by  the  Ph.Eur.  is  not  suitable  for  this  product.  Tests  for  process  related  impurities (TNBP, Tween 80 and chaotropic components) are not included in the finished product testing. This is sufficiently justified by the retrospective analyses of 32 batches and by the routine monitoring of those impurities in the final concentrate. Mouse IgG is determined routinely on the finished product. The suitability of the methods used was sufficiently demonstrated. Batch analyses Qualification  batches  used  in  shelf-life  and  preclinical  studies,  batches  used  in  clinical  studies  and consistency batches all complied with the finished product specification. Finished product stability To justify the claimed shelf life of 24 months at 2 ° C-8 ° C results of real time stability studies of 500 IU batches and 1000 IU batches (produced in 1995 and 1996 respectively) were submitted. In  addition,  a  new  study  with  500  IU  batches  and  1000  IU  batches,  manufactured  on  routine production  scale,  was  started  in  1999.  For  the  1999  batches,  the  results  for  12  months  storage  at 2 ° C-8 ° C  were  presented.  Based  on  the  results  submitted,  a  shelf-life  of  24  months  at  2 ° C-8 ° C  is accepted. The Company is carrying out ongoing stability studies. A shelf-life of 5 years is accepted for the water for injections based on the stability data submitted by the company. Ongoing stability studies are performed. Stability reconstituted product According to the SPC the product should be administered immediately for microbiological reasons. Chemical and physical in-use stability has been demonstrated for 3 hours at a temperature of 21 ° C. Immuno-affinity matrix A selective immune-affinity chromatography step is included in the purification process of Nonafact. Development,  characterisation, fermentation and purification of this monoclonal  antibody  are described in sufficient detail. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  mouse  monoclonal  antibody  CLB-FIX  D4  is  specific  for  non-activated  FIX;  it  distinguishes between intact factor IX and factor IX that has been cleaved at position Arg 145, thus allowing the selective elution of non-activated factor IX.

Fermentation is carried out in serum-free medium. The purification process includes three different chromatographic steps: affinity chromatography, cation exchange chromatography and gel filtration. The eluate  resulting  from  the  affinity  chromatography  step  is  subjected  to  a  solvent/detergent  viral

1 Stichting tot Bevordering van de Volksgezondheid en Milieuhygiene (Foundation for the Advancement of Public Health), Bilthoven, the Netherlands

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

inactivation step. Product containing fractions from the gel filtration step are pooled and subjected to nanofiltration.  Consistency  of  production  is  demonstrated  and  appropriate  specifications  are  set. Production of the immuno-affinity matrix is adequately described.

The stability of the monoclonal antibody and of the immuno-affinity matrix has been demonstrated in sufficient detail.

## Viral safety and safety with respect to TSEs

|                                                 | Reduction factor (log)   | Reduction factor (log)   | Reduction factor (log)   | Reduction factor (log)   | Reduction factor (log)   | Reduction factor (log)   |
|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Process steps studied                           | HIV                      | BVDV                     | PSR                      | EMC                      | CPV                      | HAV                      |
| A Incubation with SD chemicals (TNBP/ Tween 80) | >7.3                     | >5.8 product             | >7.1                     | ND                       | ND                       | ND                       |
| B Immunoaffinity                                | >3.9                     | 4 ºC ≥ 2.1               | >5.1                     | ≥ 3.6                    | ≥ 3.9                    | ≥ 1.6                    |
| Chromatography 12                               | ≥ 5.2                    | ºC ≥ 1.7                 | >5.7                     | ND                       | >4.5                     | >3.1                     |
| C 15 nm nanofiltration 4                        | >4.7                     | ºC >5.1                  | >5.3                     | >6.2                     | >4.9                     | >6.2                     |
| 12 ºC                                           | >5.1                     | >5.0                     | >6.3                     | ND                       | >4.7                     | >5.9                     |
| D Final                                         | ND                       | ND                       | ND                       | ND                       | 1.9                      | 1.5                      |
| 4 ºC Chromatography 12 ºC                       | ND                       | ND                       | ND                       | ND                       | 1.6                      | 1.5                      |
| Total reduction factor 4                        | >15.9                    | ºC >13.0                 | >17.5                    | >9.8                     | >10.7                    | >9.3                     |
| 12                                              | >17.6                    | >12.5                    | >19,1                    | ND                       | >10.8                    | >10.5                    |

A list  of  materials  falling  within  the  TSE  (transmissible  spongiform  encephalopathy)  guideline  has been submitted. Applications for Certificates of Suitability have been made for these materials. Four  stages  of  the  production  process  were  separately  assessed  for  their  ability  to  remove  and/or inactivate  viruses:  SD  treatment,  immuno-affinity  chromatography,  dual  nanofiltration  and  the  final chromatography step. The virus validation studies were performed in compliance with the Note for Guidance on virus validation studies. The choice of the viruses was appropriate. Robust inactivation of enveloped viruses (bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV), HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and pseudorabies (PSR) virus) was demonstrated for the S/D step. Validation  of  the  dual  nanofiltration  step  was  investigated  using  a  range  of  enveloped  and  nonenveloped viruses including HAV (hepatitis A virus), canine parvovirus (CPV) and encephalomyocarditis  virus  (EMC).  Immunoaffinity  purification  was  shown  to  contribute  to  virus removal. The final chromatography step makes only a minor contribution to the overall viral safety of the  product.  The  virus  inactivation/removal  capacity  of  the  production  process  of  Nonafact  is sufficiently demonstrated. The virucidal effect of the column sanitisation procedures is sufficiently demonstrated. A summary of the viral reduction  factors  found in  the  manufacturing  process  of  Nonafact  is  given below: ND: not done Monoclonal antibody CLB-FIX D4 Medicinal product no longer authorised

The cell bank system has been tested for the presence of adventitious virus, retrovirus, Mycoplasma, bacteria, yeast and fungi. No evidence for the presence of adventitious agents was detected. At the end of every fermentation run, cells are tested for viruses. The following steps of the purification process have  been  validated  for  the  virus  removal/inactivating  capacity:  affinity  chromatography,  S/D treatment and nanofiltration. The reduction factors obtained are considered sufficient.

The virucidal effect of the column sanitisation procedures is sufficiently demonstrated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

The quality of the product is considered satisfactory on the basis of the submitted data and the agreed follow-up measures. In particular, viral safety measures include appropriate donor selection, testing of donations  and  plasma  pools  for  viral  markers,  and  viral  inactivation/removal  procedures  in  the manufacturing process.

3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics No  studies  of  pharmacodynamic  effects  in  animals  were  conducted.  Animal  data  are  not  needed because human plasma-derived factor IX has a well-established physiologic effect in humans. The thrombogenic potential of Nonafact was studied in the Wessler stasis model in rabbits and a nonstasis  model  in  guinea  pigs.  In  both  models,  Nonafact  displayed  considerably  less  thrombogenic potential  as  compared  with  conventional  prothrombin  complex  concentrate.  In  the  Wessler  stasis model, Nonafact and a reference human  plasma-derived factor IX product showed similar thrombogenic potential. The thrombogenicity assays were conducted in compliance with GLP regulations. No further safety pharmacology studies were conducted. Animal data are not needed because human plasma-derived factor IX has a well-established physiological effect in humans. Pharmacokinetics No animal studies have been conducted. Such studies are not necessary because of the human origin of factor  IX,  the  relatively  long  history  of  its  clinical  use,  and  the  evaluation  of  the  pharmacokinetic aspects  of  Nonafact  in  clinical  trials.  Moreover,  Nonafact  displays  a  similar  elimination  half-life  as compared to other factor IX products. Toxicology Acute toxicity, repeated dose toxicity, reproductive toxicity, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity As  factor  IX  is  a  normal  constituent  of  the  human  body,  its  clinical  use  (which  is  to  obtain  a physiological concentration of the constituent) is not expected to be associated with toxicity. Products containing factor IX have been used for decades and the clinical experience of their use is therefore extensive.  Furthermore,  due  to  the  protein  character  of  factor  IX,  a  full  investigation  of  the toxicological parameters in animals is not feasible. Therefore, no animal studies have been performed to assess toxicity of factor IX. The toxicity related to impurities has been addressed sufficiently. Local tolerance No animal studies have been performed. Clinical experience provides no hint for local effects caused by Nonafact. Discussion on non-clinical aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

Plasma  coagulation  factor  IX  is  a  normal  constituent  of  human  plasma.  Factor  IX  in  the  product, therefore, behaves like endogenous factor IX. Conventional animal toxicity studies and mutagenicity studies  with  plasma  coagulation  factor  IX  would  not  provide  meaningful  information  and  therefore were not carried out. In pharmacodynamic studies in rabbits and guinea pigs, the thrombogenicity of Nonafact was shown to be minimal.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 4. Clinical aspects

The approved indication is \"Treatment and prophylaxis  of  bleeding in  patients  with  haemophilia  B (congenital factor IX deficiency)'.

The  submitted  clinical  trials  to  investigate  efficacy  and  safety  of  Nonafact  were  carried  out  in  26 previously treated patients (PTPs) with haemophilia B for treatment and prevention of bleeding (study KB96003) and in 8 patients undergoing elective surgical procedures (study KB96002). A subset of study KB96003 (study KB96001) investigated pharmacokinetics in 13 patients.

This number of patients exceeds the number of patients required according to the CPMP document \"Note for Guidance to assess efficacy and safety of human plasma derived factor VIII:C and factor IX:C products in clinical trials in haemophiliacs before and after authorisation' (CPMP/198/95) which came into operation in February 1996 and is also in agreement with the revised document 'Note for Guidance  on  the  Clinical  investigation  of  human  plasma  derived  factor  VIII  and  IX  products' (CPMP/BPWG/198/95 rev. 1) which came into operation in April 2001. The clinical trials were performed according to GCP. Pharmacokinetics Study KB96001 included 13 patients, age ≥ 18 years,  with  severe  haemophilia  B  (factor  IX ≤ 2%). Half-life  and  recovery  were  assessed  in  13  patients  in  the  beginning  of  the  study  with  a  second assessment in 5 patients after 6 months. Patients received a single dose of 25-75 IU/kg. Samples for factor IX activity were taken before injection of Nonafact   and 15, 30 minutes, 1, 3, 6, 12, 30 and 48 hours after the transfusion. The results are reported in Table 1. The half-life of factor IX reported in the literature ranges between 16 and 34 hours. 2,3 This variability is  partly  due  to  a  difference  in  mathematical  approach  for  assessing  half-life.  Model-independent methods  for  analysing  single-dose  pharmacokinetics 4 tend  to  result  in  lower  half-life  values  than model-dependent  (two-phase)  models 5 .  As  illustrated  in  table  1,  both  mean  terminal  half-life  and recovery  remained  stable  over  time.  The  only  statistically  significant  difference  was  the  model dependent mean terminal half-life, which showed an increase from 29.01 hours to 38.00 hours. The value of 38 hours is somewhat longer than expected based on the data from the literature. However, given the limited number of patients (5) and the large variability of the second half-life assessment, the apparent half-life prolongation is probably of no clinical relevance. Furthermore, the  model independent analysis did not reveal any significant difference between the first and second assessment. These  values  are  similar  to  the  reported  range  for  other  plasma-derived  or  recombinant  factor  IX products (16-18 hours) using the same model. 6 2 Thompson AR: Factor IX concentrates for clinical use. Semin-Thromb-Hemost. 1993; 19(1): 25-36 Medicinal product no longer authorised

3 Bjorkman S and Carlsson M. The pharmacokinetics of factor VIII and factor IX methodology, pitfalls and applications. Haemophilia 1997; 3: 1

4 Longo G et al. Single-dose pharmacokinetics of factor IX evaluated by model-dependent methods. Eur J Haematol. 1987; 39: 426

5 Lee ML et al A two-phase linear regression model for biologic half-life data. J Lab Clin Med 1990; 115: 745

6 Poon et al. Comparison of the recovery and half-life of a high-purity factor IX concentrate with those of a factor IX complex concentrate. Transfusion 1995; 35: 319. White GC et al. Recombinant factor

IX. Thromb Haemost. 1997; 78: 261

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Half-life and recovery assessed in 13 patients in the beginning of the study and a second assessment in 5 patients after 6 months of follow-up (study KB96001).

|                                                 | Start of study (N=13)                                         | after 6 months (N=5)                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| mean terminal half-life: hours (SD)             | model independent: 18.68 (1.99) model dependent: 29.01 (9.66) | model independent: 17.94 (1.85) model dependent: 38.00 (16.22) |
| Recovery: U/ml per IU/kg factor IX infused (SD) | 0.011 (0.002)                                                 | 0.011 (0.003)                                                  |

A  total  of  780  minor  bleedings  were  reported  during  the  study  period;  640  (82%)  of  these  minor bleedings were stopped after a single transfusion of Nonafact, 108 (13.8%) haemorrhages required 2 infusions, 21 (2.7%) required 3 infusions, and 12 (1.5%) 4 or more infusions. Only 4 patients used Nonafact  prophylactically.  Between  visit  1  and  visit  5  (18  months),  Nonafact  transfusions  were required in all patients in the follow-up study because of minor bleedings, except for 2 patients, who both used prophylactic treatment already before the study.

Recovery: U/ml per IU/kg factor IX infused (SD) Clinical efficacy Three  clinical  studies,  all  carried  out  in  previously  treated  haemophilia  B  patients  have  been submitted.  The  studies  were  carried  out  in  patients  with  various  degrees  of  haemophilia  B,  mostly severe, and were enrolled from 5 participating centres in the Netherlands (n=4) and Poland (n=1). In study KB96003 a total of 26 previously treated patients with severe haemophilia B (factor IX ≤ 2%) were included (14 patients in the Netherlands and 12 in Poland). None had an inhibitor to factor IX at the time of inclusion. The primary objective was to determine the in-vivo recovery and half-life in a subset of patients (n=13) (KB96001), the secondary objective was the demonstration of viral safety and clinical efficacy of Nonafact. Thrombogenicity of Nonafact was also investigated. Patients were also followed for development of factor IX inhibitors. Response per infusion for the treatment of major or life-threatening bleeding episodes was assessed subjectively using a four-point scale (\"excellent\", \"good\", \"moderate\" and \"none\"). HIV seropositive patients  and  CD4  lymphocytes  count ≤ 400/µl  were  excluded.  The  mean  age  was  32.9  years.  Four patients (all from the Netherlands) used Nonafact as prophylactic treatment, the 22 other patients on demand (in case of a bleeding or in case of planned, extensive, physical exercise, including intensive physiotherapy  at  the  Polish  haemophilia  treatment  centre).  The  administration  of  Nonafact  was supervised by the investigator or a designate. Part of the study consisted of a follow-up period of at least  6  months  and  with  a  minimum  number  of  10  exposure  days  to  Nonafact  in  each  patient.  The mean number of exposure days to Nonafact at visit 5 (18-month follow-up) was 71.8 days (range 16174 exposure days). The mean total dose of Nonafact transfused between visit 1 and 5 was 108,129 IU. During the 18-month follow-up period, 12 major or life-threatening bleedings occurred in 9 patients (5 muscular  bleedings,  2  gingival  bleedings,  4  surgeries  and  1  trauma  capitis).   The  four  surgeries consisted of 2 minor surgeries (dental extraction and surgical removal of verrucae seborrhoica) and 2 major surgeries (abdominal surgery and a total hip replacement and replacement of both knees). In all cases  but  one,  which  was  considered  as  good,  the  clinical  effect  of  Nonafact  was  judged  by  the investigator as excellent. Medicinal product no longer authorised

At the time of the response to the list of questions, results for the 12 patients treated in Poland were available  for  the  completed  36-month  period  of  study.  One  patient  was  lost  to  follow-up  after  the 18-month visit, so no data were available for visit 6 (24 months) and 7 (36 months). The mean number of exposure days to Nonafact between visit 1 and 7 was 126.8 days (range 16-175 exposure days). The mean total dose of Nonafact transfused in the same time period was 131,899 IU.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

During  this  36-month  period,  nine  major  bleedings  occurred  in  seven  patients.  These  comprised muscular bleedings in five cases, gingival bleeding, haematuria, bleed undergoing surgery (total hip replacement and an arthroplasty of both knees) and dental extraction each in one case. None of the bleedings  was  considered  related  to  the  study  drug  and  in  all  cases  but  one  the  clinical  effect  of Nonafact  transfusions  was  judged  excellent  by  the  investigator.  In  the  one  case  it  was  considered good.

A total of 1046 minor bleedings was reported; 77% of these minor bleedings were stopped after one single transfusion of Nonafact. The  14  patients  treated  in  the  Netherlands  will  be  followed  until  the  marketing  authorisation  for Nonafact is granted and an interim report after 36 months will be submitted. The mean dosages used in  the  patients  treated  in  Poland  were  lower  than  those  used  in  the  Dutch  patients,  although  still efficacious. Study KB96002 was an open, multicentre study of 8 haemophilia B patients undergoing a total of 11 surgical  interventions.  One  patient  had  mild  haemophilia  (factor  IX  of  2%)  and  7  had  severe haemophilia.  The  mean  age  was  45.6  years.  The  objective  was  to  show  the  clinical  efficacy  of Nonafact  in  patients  with  haemophilia  B  undergoing  a  surgical  procedure.  The  type  of  surgery  is indicated  in  table  2.  Patients  were  treated  with  a  single  i.v.  bolus  of  40-60  IU/kg  before  a  dental extraction  and  a  single  i.v.  bolus  of  60-90  IU/kg  for  other  surgical  interventions.  Further  dosing depended on the factor IX level assessed in the plasma. During substitution therapy the plasma level should be maintained at least at 50%. The criteria for evaluation was achievement of a satisfactory haemostasis  (to  be  assessed  by  the  investigator),  the  amount  of  blood  loss  and  the  transfusions  of blood  components  required.  Furthermore,  samples  for  the  determination  of  thrombogenicity  were drawn before the first transfusion of Nonafact and 5 and 30 minutes thereafter. In addition, adverse events and laboratory variables were evaluated. From a total of 11 surgeries, only two resulted in blood loss. Seven  of  the  surgical  procedures  were  dental  extractions  in  4  patients,  prior  to  which  only  one transfusion with Nonafact was given. No measurable amount of blood loss was detected in any of the patients  undergoing  dental  extraction.  However,  in  all  dental  extractions,  tranexamic  acid  was concomitantly  administered.  Although  this  is  a  common  approach  in  managing  oral  bleeding  in haemophilia patients, evaluation of efficacy of Nonafact in these patients is more difficult to establish and cannot be solely attributed to the transfusion of Nonafact. The patient who underwent a pancreas cyst drainage received 4 Nonafact transfusions in 4 days, the patients  with  a  cholecystectomy  received  2  transfusions  per  day  resulting  in  a  total  of  18  Nonafact transfusions in 10 days. The patient with 'removal of varicose veins' received 2 transfusions during the  first  8  days  and  1  transfusion  per  day  during  the  last  4  days.  The  'arthroplasty'  patient  had  2 transfusions per day during the first 19 days and 1 transfusions per day during the next 10 days. Blood loss  was  observed  for  the  2  major  surgeries  (life-threatening  surgeries).  The  amount  of  blood  loss during 'removal of varicose veins of the left lower limb' was 0.15 litre and for the 'total arthroplasty of left and right knee and total hip replacement right' a blood loss of 1.2 litre was recorded. No postsurgical bleedings occurred. One patient was treated with fractionated heparin to prevent the risk of thrombo-embolic events after orthopaedic surgery. In all cases, the circulating level of factor IX, 30 minutes after transfusion was higher (mean 88.4% for the dental extractions and 53%, 61%, 93% and 82%  in  the  other  surgical  procedures)  than  the  recommended  minimum  level.  Also  the  level  of circulating  factor  IX  30  minutes  after  Nonafact  transfusion  was  higher  then  would  be  expected considering the dose-calculation formula. Values of haematological parameters outside normal ranges (such  as  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  (APTT))  could  be  explained  by  underlying  disease. Other abnormal coagulation variables were not clinically relevant. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2: type of surgical procedures (studies KB96002)

| Surgical procedure                                                                                            | number of surgical procedures (number of patients)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| Minor surgery Dental extraction                                                                               | 7 (4)                                                |
| Other surgery (major): pancreas cyst drainage cholecystectomy                                                 | 2 (2)                                                |
| Other surgery (life-threatening): removal of varicose veins in left lower limb combined orthopaedic procedure | 2 (2)                                                |

<!-- image -->

Clinical safety Adverse events In the first 18-month period of study KB96003, including 26 patients with severe haemophilia B, 28 adverse  events  occurred,  of  which  12  were  major  or  life  threatening  bleedings.  According  to  the investigator 3 of the 28 adverse events were possibly related to the study drug. These adverse events were  'flushes  after  drug  administration'  during  the  pharmacokinetic  sub-study  in  one  patient  and 'elevation of bilirubin' at visit 3 in one patient, and 'elevation of bilirubin and ALT and ASAT' at visit 3 in another patient. The last two adverse events could be explained by the HCV positive status of the patients. See also 'Viral safety'. In  the  surgery  study  KB96002 two adverse events were reported (pyrexia and decrease of Hb after arthroplasty in one patient); both events were not considered related to the study drug. Vital signs During  the  pharmacokinetic  study  (KB96001),  vital  signs  (blood  pressure,  pulse  and  temperature) were measured 7 times per pharmacokinetic assessment. There were no clinically relevant abnormalities recorded. Viral safety: In study KB96003, 26 patients with severe haemophilia B were treated with Nonafact. At the start of the study, 26 patients were HCV seropositive and 25 patients were seropositive for parvovirus B19. Twenty-one  of  the  26  patients  were  either  vaccinated  for  hepatitis  B  or  were  previously  infected. Therefore, transmission of HCV, parvovirus and hepatitis B could not be evaluated. No patient was either  HIV-1/HIV-2  seropositive  prior  to  study  entry.  Results  at  the  18-month  study  time-point  are indicated in table 3. No viral transmission of HAV, HIV-1 or HIV-2 was documented during follow up. All patients remained seronegative. In the surgical study KB96002 virus serology was only performed at admission. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3: Viral safety (study KB96003 including 26 patients)

|                          | Start of study Seronegative                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | during follow up seronegative                                            |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| HAV                      | 20 patients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 20 patients                                                              |
| HBsAg and HBs antibodies | 5 patients (21 patient were either vaccinated or had a hepatitis B infection before the start of study). Of these 5 patients, only one patient was negative for HBsAg and HBs antibodies at the start of study; 4 patients were HBsAg positive | one patient was evaluable: and remained HBsAg and HBs antibody negative. |
| HCV                      | 0 patients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | not evaluable                                                            |
| HIV-1/2                  | 26 patients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 26 patients                                                              |
| Parvovirus -B19          | 0 patients (25 of 26 were tested)                                                                                                                                                                                                              | not evaluable                                                            |

No thromboembolic events occurred in this study.

Thrombogenicity In  the  pharmacokinetic  study  KB96001,  including  13  PTPs  with  severe  haemophilia  B  (factor  IX ≤ 2%), the thrombogenicity of Nonafact was examined by the assessment of prothrombin fragment 1+2 before  Nonafact  administration,  and  at  30  minutes,  1  and  3  hours  after  transfusion.  Fragment  1+2 levels  were  all  within  the  95%  confidence  interval  of  normal,  except  one  measurement,  which  was slightly higher than the other measurements. No thromboembolic events occurred. In  study  KB96003  including  26  patients  (part  of  which  are  the  13  patients  of  the  pharmacokinetic study KB96001) no thromboembolic events occurred. In  the  surgical  study  KB96002  eight  patients  were  included  undergoing  11  surgical  procedures. Fragment  1+2  values  (measured  5  and  30  minutes  post-administration)  were  all  within  the  normal range, although one measurement was slightly higher than the other measurements. No thrombogenic event occurred in any of the patients during follow up. Immunogenicity In  study  KB96003  all  26  PTPs  were  screened  for  the  development  of  an  inhibitor  at  each  visit. Antibodies to factor IX antibodies were not detected in any of the patients. Safety results from the completed 36-month study of patients treated in Poland The  results  of  the  completed  study  for  the  12  patients  treated  in  Poland  in  study  KB96003  were available at the time of the response to the list of questions. Adverse events A  total  of  12  adverse  events  were  recorded,  10  of  which  were  considered  unrelated  to  Nonafact. According  to  the  investigator,  two  adverse  events,  'hyperbilirubinemia'  and  elevation  of  bilirubin, ALT and ASAT, were possibly related to the study drug. These adverse events could be explained by the HCV positive status of the patients. One adverse event, a bleeding of the M. Iliopsoas was considered serious. Thrombogenicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Immunogenicity

Anti-factor IX levels were not detected in any of the patients during the study.

## Viral transmissions

Since 9 patients were positive for HBs antibodies and three patients were positive for HBsAg at the beginning of the study, Hepatitis B seroconversion could not be studied. All 12 patients were negative

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

for HAV antibodies and HIV-1 and HIV-2 antibodies at visit 1. No seroconversion occurred during the study with respect to HAV and HIV 1+2.

## Discussion on clinical aspects

Half  life  (model  independent:  18.68  hours)  and in  vivo recovery  (0.011  U/ml  per  IU/kg  factor  IX infused)  for  the  13  patients  investigated  was  shown  to  be  in  the  reported  range  for  other  plasmaderived or recombinant factor IX products and remained stable after 6 months in 5 tested patients.

According  to  the  Note  for  Guidance  (CPMP/BPWG/198/95  rev.1),  it  is  no  longer  considered appropriate to use clinical trials to investigate viral safety with regard to enveloped viruses. Moreover, the  safety  of  the  products  with  respect  to  non-enveloped  viruses  cannot  currently  be  adequately evaluated in clinical studies. The viral safety data, provided by the applicant (in accordance with the former Note for Guidance (CPMP/198/95 final) and in line with normal clinical practice of monitoring patients), demonstrate that there was no transmission of HAV, HIV 1 or HIV 2. Transmission of HCV and Parvo B19 could not be investigated as all patients were antibody positive at the start of the study. Only one patient was HBV and HBsAg negative at study entry. As most haemophilia B patients will be vaccinated against hepatitis B, transmission of HBV virus cannot be evaluated in clinical studies.

The clinical experience in the pharmacokinetic and the follow-up study referred to 1867 cumulative exposure days (average of 71.8 days per patient) over an 18-month study period. Submitted data on the  clinical  response  in  on  demand  treatment  regimens  (study  KB96003),  including  a  sufficient number  (N=26)  of  previously  treated  patients  with  severe  haemophilia  B,  give  reassurance  of  the efficacy of Nonafact as 82% of a total of 780 minor bleedings stopped after a single transfusion of Nonafact.  A  total  of  9  patients  had  a  major  or  life-threatening  bleeding.  In  all  cases  but  one,  the clinical  effect  of  the  Nonafact  transfusions  was  judged  by  the  investigator  as  excellent.  In  the  one remaining  case  the  effect  was  considered  to  be  good.  Furthermore  the  reported  efficacy  in  major surgical  procedures  (including  major  orthopaedic  surgery,  pancreas  cyst  drainage,  cholecystectomy, and  removal  of  varicose  veins)  indicate  that  Nonafact  is  effective.  Unfortunately,  in  all  dental extractions (7 procedures in 4 patients), tranexamic acid was concomitantly administered. Therefore, in these cases haemostatic efficacy cannot be solely contributed to the transfusion of Nonafact. Efficacy was further supported by the 36-month study period data on 11 patients in study KB96003 treated in Poland. The number of patients tested for vital signs, adverse events, thrombogenicity and immunogenicity meets the requirements in the guideline CPMP/BPWP/198/95, final (February 1996). The submitted data of studies KB96003 and KB96002 give reassurance on the safety of the product with respect to thrombogenicity, although longer follow up is necessary to establish this conclusively. No thromboembolic  events  have  been  reported  and  adequate  thrombogenicity  tests  (fragment  1+2) after  Nonafact  infusion  in  13  patients  included  in  the  pharmacokinetic  trial  and  in  8  patients undergoing surgical procedures did not show significant elevations. The  lack  of  high  immunogenicity  in  PTPs  is  also  established,  as  no  antibodies  to  factor  IX  were reported in 26 PTPs, who received the product for a median of 71.8 days per patient (range 16-174 exposure days). In addition, no antibodies were detected in the 11 of these patients treated in Poland at the end of the 36-month study period (exposure days: mean 126.8, range 16-175 exposure days; mean total dose transfused: 131,899 IU.) The company considers monitoring of development of circulating antibodies to murine immunoglobulins inappropriate, as it is estimated that 85% of severe haemophilia B patients in the Netherlands have already been treated with an immuno-affinity purified factor IX product. Furthermore the presence of such antibodies of the IgG type has been demonstrated in 7-10% of the normal donor population. These arguments are considered valid. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The company intends to perform a prospective pharmacovigilance study post-authorisation including patients with mild, moderate and severe haemophilia B in accordance with CPMP/BPWG/198 rev. 1.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Since  children  may  respond  differently  to  adults,  the  company  has  committed  to  perform  an  open multicentre  study  including  at  least  12  children  with  haemophilia  B  under  the  age  of  six  years regardless of prior treatment. A proposal for a study protocol has been submitted (KB200001). This study will be in accordance with the Note for Guidance CPMP/198/95, rev 1. In the meantime, the SPC  includes  a  statement  that  there  are  insufficient  data  to  recommend  the  use  of  the  product  in children less than 6 years of age.

No data on previously untreated patients (PUPs) have been submitted in accordance with the former version  of  Note  for  Guidance  CPMP/198/95.  In  accordance  with  the  CPMP  guideline,  the  SPC includes  a  section  stating  the  lack  of  experience  in  PUPs.  After  authorisation,  the  Company  will include  in  the  Periodic  Safety  Update  Reports  immunogenicity  and  viral  safety  data  on  any  PUPs treated  with  Nonafact,  of  which  the  company  becomes aware, or any PUP included in the study in children according to protocol KB200001. 5. Overall conclusion and benefit/risk assessment · Quality On the basis of the submitted data and the agreed follow-up measures, the quality of this product is considered  to  be  acceptable  when  used  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  defined  in  the  SPC. Physicochemical and biological aspects relevant to  the uniform  clinical  performance  of  the  product have  been  investigated  and  are  controlled  in  a  satisfactory  way.  Viral  safety  and  batch  to  batch consistency have been documented and the relevant tests will be performed according to the agreed specifications. · Non-clinical (pre-clinical studies) Plasma coagulation factor IX is a normal constituent of human plasma. Conventional animal toxicity studies  and  mutagenicity  studies  with  plasma  coagulation  factor  IX  would  not  provide  meaningful information and therefore  were not carried  out. The  thrombogenicity of Nonafact was shown to be minimal in  pharmacodynamic  studies  in  rabbits  and  guinea  pigs.  Toxicity  related  to  impurities  has been addressed sufficiently. · Clinical efficacy and safety Half life and in vivo recovery in the 13 patients investigated was shown to be in the reported range for other  plasma-derived  factor  IX  products  and  remained  stable  after  6  months  in  5  tested  patients. Submitted data on the clinical response in on demand regimens give reassurance of the efficacy of Nonafact. Furthermore, the reported efficacy in major surgical procedures indicates that Nonafact is effectiveThe submitted data give reassurance on the safety of the product with respect to thrombogenicity, although longer follow-up is necessary to establish this conclusively. No indication of immunogenicity, as measured by antibodies to factor IX, was detected in the 26 PTPs investigated. No transmission of HAV, HIV 1 or HIV 2 occurred. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A  prospective  pharmacovigilance  study  will  be  performed  post-authorisation,  in  accordance  with CPMP/BPWG/198/95  rev.  1,  and  seronegative  patients  will  be  monitored  for  parvovirus  B19  and HCV status. Since children may respond differently to adults, an open multicentre study in children under the age of 6 years will be undertaken. There is no experience of the treatment of PUPs with Nonafact. This is indicated in the SPC. Immunogenicity and viral safety data on any PUPs treated with Nonafact that the company becomes aware of will be included in the Periodic Safety Update Reports.

## Benefit/risk assessment

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Nonafact in the treatment and prophylaxis of bleeding in patients with haemophilia B (congenital factor IX deficiency) was favourable.