---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:17:56
document_pages: 32
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/onsenal-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: onsenal-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.2914948
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 08:47:44.508607
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Onsenal. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 May 2004.  For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B

<!-- image -->

The  current  standard  therapy  in  the  EU  is  endoscopic  surveillance  and  surgery.  Treatment  is polypectomy  until  the late teens  when  proctocolectomy  with  ileo  pouch-anal  anastomosis  is performed. Adenomas and eventually also cancer may develop in other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, in particular the  duodenum.  Patients  with  extensive  duodenal  disease  are  subjected  to pancreatoduodenectomy  or  Whipple's  operation.  The  surgical  approach  is  often  highly  mutilating, especially  considering  the  relatively  young  age  of  affected  patients,  and  it  is  proportional  to  the anatomic extension of the disease.

Introduction Celecoxib is a diaryl-substituted pyrazole, chemically similar to other non-arylamine sulphonamides (e.g. thiazides, furosemide) but differing from arylamine sulphonamides (e.g. sulphamethoxizole and other sulphonamide antibiotics). Celecoxib is a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygense-2 (COX-2) with no inhibition of cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) at therapeutic doses. Cyclooxygenase is responsible for generation of prostaglandins. The COX-2 isoform is not detected in most normal tissues and is under the control of an inducible promoter, and its expression is associated with inflammation. Elevated levels of COX-2 are found in many pre-malignant lesions (such as adenomatous colorectal polyps) and epithelial cancers. COX-2 is probably also involved in ovulation, implantation and closure of the ductus arteriosus, regulation of renal function, and central nervous system functions (fever induction, pain perception and cognitive function). Celecoxib  has  been  approved  within  the  EU  via  the  mutual  recognition  procedure  as  a  non-steroid antiinflammatory drug for symptomatic relief in osteoarthrosis and rheumatoid arthritis. Onsenal (celecoxib) is intended for the treatment of Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), a genetic disease  with  a  prevalence  of  between  0.3  to  1  in  10,000  persons  within  the  EU,  resulting  from  an autosomal  dominant  genetic  alteration  of  a  tumor  suppressor  gene,  the  adenomatous  polyposis  coli (APC) gene. Polyps with the APC mutation overexpress COX-2 and affected patients usually develop multiple premalignant adenomas in the colon and rectum between 12 and 16 years of age. The average number of polyps in FAP patients is around 1,000, but this may vary between 100 and 2,500. Polyps are usually evenly distributed from caecum to rectum and up to 93% of the patients have involvement of  the  duodenum.  Presenting  symptoms  appear  usually  at  around  25-30  years  of  age  and  are characterised by rectal bleeding, diarrhoea or constipations and abdominal pain. These tumours are not life threatening per se , but if left untreated, polyps continue to form and enlarge in the colon or rectum resulting in essentially a 100% chance of developing colorectal cancer at around 40-50 years of age. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Several  clinical  and  epidemiological  studies  have  demonstrated  that  extended  periods  of  NSAID intake is associated with a 40-50% reduction in the incidence of colorectal cancer and a decreased risk of  developing  adenomas.  Small  and  methodologically  less  optimal  studies  have  indicated  that  the NSAID  sulindac  may  reduce  the  number  and  size  of  polyps  in  patients  with  FAP.  Treatment  is, however, limited by gastrointestinal side effects related mainly to the inhibition of COX-1.

Inhibition of COX-2 leads to inhibition of angiogenesis and tumour cell proliferation as well as the induction of apoptosis. Thus, COX-2 stimulation may be one important common step in the pathway leading  to  adenomas  and  colorectal  cancer  regardless  of  the  underlying  genetic  defect  and  COX-2 inhibition  may  represent  a  significant  therapeutic  option  in  the  prevention  and/or  regression  of adenomatous polyps. Onsenal (celecoxib) is indicated for ' the reduction of the number of adenomatous intestinal polyps in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), as an adjunct to surgery and further endoscopic surveillance. The effect of Onsenal-induced reduction of polyp burden on the risk of intestinal cancer has not been demonstrated. ' Treatment with celecoxib in FAP has been studied for up to 6 months and has not been shown to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal or other forms of cancer or the need for surgery. Therefore, the usual care of FAP patients should not be altered because of the concurrent administration of celecoxib.  In particular, the frequency of routine endoscopic surveillance should not be decreased and FAP-related surgery should not be delayed (see clinical discussion). The proposed dosage regimen of Onsenal is two 200 mg capsules administered twice per day orally, taken with food. The maximum recommended daily dose is 800 mg. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Onsenal contains 200 and 400 mg of celecoxib as active ingredient. It is presented in hard gelatine capsules. The two strengths only differ in terms of amount of granulate filled into the capsules. Other ingredients include lactose monohydrate, sodium  lauryl sulphate, povidone  K-30, and croscarmellose sodium and magnesium stearate. Onsenal  400  mg  capsules  are  packaged  in  opaque  PVC/foil  blister  strips,  while  Onsenal  200  mg capsules are packaged in clear or opaque PVC/Aclar/foil blister strips. Active substance Celecoxib is a diaryl substituted pyrazole. Its chemical name is (4-[5-(4-Methylphenyl) 3(trifluoromethyl)-1 H-pyrazol-1 -yl]benzenesulfonamide.  It does not contain any chiral centers and thus it does not exhibit any optical isomers. Celecoxib is a member of the class of anti-inflammatory agents known as specific cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors.  It is a white to off white solid, composed of crystalline particles with a needle and bar habit. The amide hydrogen is weakly acidic (pKa  is near 11) leaving the molecule uncharged at physiological  pHs.  Celecoxib  is  hydrophobic  (log  P  is  3.5)  and  is  practically  insoluble  in  aqueous buffers  at  a  range  of  physiological  pHs.  It  is  however  a  highly  permeable  compound  and  it  is categorised  into  Class  II  according  to  the  US  Biopharmaceutics  Classification  System  (BCS). Therefore particle size effects on dissolution of capsules can be expected. In order to ensure batch to bacth consistency celecoxib is subject to milling. Three  polymorphic  forms  of  celecoxib,  distinguishable  by  powder  X-ray  diffraction  (PXRD)  have been  isolated.  Solid-state  interconversion  between  the  forms  at  low  temperatures  has  not  been observed. All GLP lots of celecoxib consisted of stable Form III polymorph. Following pin milling only the thermodynamically stable polymorph, Form III, is produced. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Two  processes,  Process  A  and  Process  B,  may  be  used  for  the  preparation  of  celecoxib.  The differences  are  mainly  in  the  use  of  different  reagents  and  solvents.  Process  B  offers  an  improved

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

manufacturing  efficiency  by  producing  celecoxib  that  does  not  require  further  purification  by recrystallisation. Celecoxib produced by either process is chemically and physically equivalent.

Synthesis involves a two-step process from  the starting materials  4-methylacetophenone  and ethylflouroacetate, which are reacted to form an intermediate product and then celecoxib. The product is milled using a pin mill or equivalent appartus to reduce the particle size.

All excipients comply with Ph Eur. requirements. Sufficient information has been provided showing that  lactose  monohydrate,  croscarmellose  sodium,  magnesium  stearate  and  gelatin  capsules  do  not present  any  risk  for  TSE.  For  magnesium  stearate  and  gelatin  CEP's  are  given.  For  lactose monohydrate it is declared, that milk from healthy animals in the same condition as milk collected for

There  are  eleven  potential  impurities  arising  from  the  routes  of  synthesis.  All  these  impurities  are detected by the current analytical release methods for celecoxib. Seven impurities have been identified in one or more batches of celecoxib used in animal studies and/or clinical trials. A potential impurity is 4-SAPH, which is mutagenic and potential carcenogenic. However, data from 50 batches have been provided demonstrating that 4-SAPH was below the detection limit (&lt;25 ppm) in all cases. Specifications of the Active Substance The active substance specification includes tests for appearance, identity (IR, HPLC), assay (HPLC), related impurities (HPLC), particle size (LLD), residual solvents (GC), heavy metals (Ph. Eur.) etc. Particle size is measured and evaluated, as it is critical to the bioavailability, dissolution and content uniformity of the encapsulated product.  Specifications have been selected that set both the upper and lower  limit  of  the  particle  size  distribution.  The  D90  limit  is  justified  based  on  the  results  from  a bioequivalence study of capsules containing different particle sizes. Process validation of the milling step is provided. It demonstrates that the milling process is a robust method and is well controlled by particle size analyses in bulk drug substance prior to release. Batch  analysis  data  have  been  provided  for  53  batches  of  the  active  substance.  Comparative  batch analysis data from three full-scale batches  manufactured at different sites are presented showing no significant  differences.  Furthermore,  three  full  scale  batches  manufactured  by  process  A  and  B respectively have been compared  demonstrating no differences in terms of physicochemical characteristics and impurity profile. The  analytical  methods  used  in  routine  controls  were  adequately  validated  and  thus  considered suitable. Impurity limits in the specification are justified by toxicology studies. It  has  been  proved  that  the  tests  and  limits  in  the  specification  are  appropriate  for  controlling  the quality of Celecoxib. Stability of the Active Substance Stability evaluation has been performed in accordance with ICH guidelines. The parameters tested are assay, degradation products, water content and melting range using the same methods as for release. Results  for  three  pilot  batches  and  twelve  production  scale  batches  produced  by  Process  A  and  for three production scale batches produced by Process B are presented. The results for Process A material cover up to 48 months at 25 o C/60% R.H., 6 months at 30 o C/60% R.H., and 6 months at 40 o C/75% R.H. For Process B material, results are available for 9 months at 25 o C/60% R.H., and 6 months at 40 o C/75% R.H. No degradation products were observed at all storage conditions at all time points. Threre  were  also  not  observed  any  differences  in  the  degradation  or  impurity  profile  of  the  two manufacturing processes. A forced degradation study has demonstrated that celecoxib does not degradate under the acid, base and oxidising stressed conditions used. Furthermore results from a photostability study indicate that the active substance is stable under UV and visible light conditions. Therefore the requested retest period when the product is packaged in double polyethylene bags in a fibre container and stored under the defined conditions can be approved. OTHER INGREDIENTS Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

human consumption is used. Therefore there are no concerns relating to TSE risks arising from the excipients.

Two  different pack types are proposed as immediate packaging material. Clear or opaque PVC/Aclar/foil blister strips and  opaque PVC/foil blister. The  materials are tightly controlled by in house specifications. The  compatibility of celecoxib capsules with the container/ closure is demonstrated by stability data.

Product development and finished product Celecoxib is practically insoluble in water and is isolated as agglomerates of needle-shaped crystals, which exhibit cohesive behaviour and poor flow properties. The aim of the initial formulation studies was to develop a homogeneous powder with good flow characteristics and producing a bioavailable dosage form. Celecoxib is classified as a low solubility/high permeability drug. Particle size control has been found to be critical to the content uniformity, dissolution and bioavailability of the product. For this reason special attention is given to particle size, and an adequate specification is set, based on the results from the bioequivalence study. Two different dissolution methods have been developed. The drug substance is poorly soluble in water and therefore it was necessary to use a dissolution method with non-physiological pH of 12, and 1 % SLS added to obtain sink conditions. Due to the very low solubility of Celecoxib in physiologically relevant medium no clinically meaningful in vivo-in vitro correlation has been possible to establish. Nevertheless there have been no concerns over the availability of the substance as presented in the summary of clinical pharmacokinetics. Because  of  cross-linking  of  the  gelatine  capsules  when  stored  at  accelerated  conditions,  it  was necessary to develop an alternate test (Tier II) with enzyme pre-treatment. When using this test, no difference  in  dissolution  is  observed  compared  to  initial  results  with  the  normal  test.  There  is  no evidence  that  the  bioequivalence  of  capsules  is  adversely  affected  by  cross-linking  or  pellicle formation.  This  dissolution  test  is  used  primarily  as  a  batch  quality  control  measure  to  ensure  that capsule shells dissolve and their contents go into solution and there is no relevance of the dissolution method to the in vivo behaviour. Several formulations of the finished product have been developed. The formulations used for phase III clinical trials are identical to the formulations which are intended to be marketed. The  method of  manufacture  is  a  typical  wet  granulation  and  fluid  bed  drying  method,  followed  by milling and capsule filling. In process controls are stated. Validation data from three full-scale batches of both the 200 and 400 mg capsules are provided. Granulation and milling were fully validated with respect  to  content  uniformity,  reproducibility,  particle  size,  bulk  density.  Weight  control  data  were within acceptance criteria. Assay, dose uniformity and dissolution results confirm that the process is capable  of  consistently  producing  a  uniform  drug  product  with  the  required  unit  dose  strength  and dissolution performance. All batches met the acceptance criteria for the release of the final product and all pre-defined quality and performance specifications established in the approved validation protocol was met. Product specification The products specifications include tests by validated methods for appearance, identification (HPLC, UV),  assay  (HPLC)  degradation  products  (HPLC),  uniformity  of  mass  (Ph.Eur.),  dissolution  and microbial purity. Batch analysis data from 21 lots for 200 mg capsules and 3 lots for 400 mg capsules are  presented.  All  batches  met  the  test  limits  as  defined  in  the  release  specification  and  test methodology valid at the time of batch release. Results from two lots (200 mg) manufactured using drug substance  made via  Process B  compare favourably with a commercial lot manufactured using drug substance made via Process A. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The specification of the finished product complies with the requirements set in the current guidelines. Batch analyses data, supporting the limits applied for, are submitted for full-scale batches as well as development batches.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Stability of the product

All stability studies were conducted in compliance with ICH requirements. The batches are tested for all  parameters  included  in  the  release  specifications  with  the  addition  of  disintergration  and  water content.

3.

All  toxicology  studies  were  conducted  in  accordance  with  Good  Laboratory  Practices  (GLP),  and relevant EU and ICH guidelines. However, the dose-ranging and exploratory studies and  'core' safety pharmacology studies were not conducted in compliance with GLP but did conform to current good scientific practices. Overall, compliance with GLP is satisfactory.

For  the  200  mg  strength  primary  stability  studies  have  been  performed  for  36  months  stored  at 25 o C/60% RH, 24 months 30 o C/60% RH and 6 months 40 o C/75% RH. For the 400 mg strength data have been provided for three lots stored for 13 months at 25 o C/60% RH and 30 o C/60% RH and for 6  months  at  40 o C/75%  RH.  During  these  studies  all parameters  remain  within the defined specifications despite of the storage conditions used. Photostability of the drug product has been evaluated and results from assay, degradation, dissolution and appearance testing indicate that 200 mg and 400 mg capsules are not sensitive to light. Forced degradation studies were conducted on the Phase III formulation celecoxib capsules.  Results showed that substantial degradation occurs only under extreme thermal conditions (130 ° C) and that the HPLC analytical method is stability indicating. As suggested by the results obtained from all batches, the proposed shelf life for the commercially packaged product under the conditions specified in the SPC is acceptable. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The quality of Onsenal is adequately established. In general, satisfactory chemical and pharmaceutical documentation has been submitted for marketing authorization. There are no major deviations from EU and ICH requirements. The active substance is well characterised and documented. Two additional dissolution tests had to be developed in order to allow sink conditions of the poorly soluble active substance and to overcome the cross linking phenomenon that might be present at capsules stored at accelerated conditions resulting in reduced in vitro dissolution values. Nevertheless, there have been no concerns over the availability of the substance as presented in the summary of clinical pharmacokinetics. The  excipents  are  commonly  used  in  this  kind  of  formulation  and  the  packaging  material  is  well documented. The manufacturing process of the finished product has been adequately described. Stability tests indicate that the product under ICH guidelines conditions is chemically stable for the proposed shelf life. However at the time of the CPMP opinion a number of minor quality issues were unresolved. The applicant gave a commitment to resolve these issues as a post opinion follow up measure: · Acceptance criteria and tests methods for all the excipients should be harmonised with Ph.Eur. Toxico-pharmacological aspects GLP Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

## In vitro studies

| (N=15)                 | %rats with gross tumours   | Total No. of gross tumours /rat (mean ± SD)   | Tumour volume (mm 3 ) (mean ± SD)   |
|------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| AOM                    | 85%                        | 1.91 ± 1.38                                   | 204 ± 483                           |
| AOM+celecoxib 1500 ppm | 6%                         | 0.06 ± 0.23                                   | 27 ± 23                             |

| N=12 (males)                        | Total No. of ACF/rat   | %change from controls (AOM + placebo)   | Number of multicrypt per focus (4+)   | %change from controls (AOM + placebo)   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| AOM                                 | 120 ± 15               | -                                       | 35 ± 8                                | -                                       |
| AOM+placebo                         | 111 ± 35               | 100%                                    | 31 ± 10                               | 100%                                    |
| AOM+celecoxib 150 ppm (0.5 µ g/ml)  | 127 ± 13               | +14%                                    | 33 ± 7                                | +6%                                     |
| AOM+celecoxib 1500 ppm (3.5 µ g/ml) | 71 ± 15                | -36%                                    | 18 ± 6                                | -42%                                    |
| AOM+Sulindac 320 ppm                | 77 ± 14                | -31%                                    | 21 ± 6                                | -32%                                    |

Celecoxib  was  shown  to  exhibit  preferential  COX-2  inhibition  as  compared  to  COX-1.  It  is  noted, however, that the in  vitro determinations were dependent upon experimental conditions, and do not adequately  address  the  relationship  between  pharmacokinetic/  pharmacodynamic  parameters  that might influence COX-2-selectivity in vivo .  Experiments with the carrageenan-inflamed air pouch rat indicated that celecoxib caused inhibition of COX-2 comparable to a variety of conventional NSAIDs but at slightly higher dosages (x 2-3). The mechanism of COX-2 selectivity was shown to be due to time-dependent inhibition of COX-2 and reversible competitive inhibition of COX-1. By the use of crystallographic methods it was shown that the phenylsulfonamide moiety of celecoxib bound in a side pocket present in the active site of COX-2 but not COX-1. In vivo studies The two most relevant pre-clinical models for the human Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) are the (Apc) Multiple Intestinal Neoplasia (Min) mice model and the AOM rat model. The Min mice inherit a dominant mutation in the Apc gene. Homozygosity for the Min mutation is embryonically  lethal.  Heterozygous  Apc  +/Apc  (Min)  Min  mice  develop  more  than  100  intestinal tumours  per  mouse,  mainly  located  in  the  upper  gastrointestinal  tract.  The  adenomas  grow  to  a detectable  size  in  one  to  three  months  and  visible  tumours  begin  to  arise  in  the  Min  mice  around 55 days of age. The Min mice usually get moribund from tumour burden at age 80 days and seldom live longer than 140 days due to intestinal bleeding and the resulting severe anaemia. In this model celecoxib showed a dose-dependent decrease in tumour indices with the most striking change occurring in the middle and distal small intestines when administered between days 30 to 80. Total  tumour  multiplicity  decreased  in  a  dose-dependent  manner  to  29%  of  the  control  group (p&lt;0.001) in mice treated with 1500 ppm (days 30 to 80). However, no obvious effects occurred at the lower dose levels. Further,  celecoxib  was  evaluated  in  F344  rats  given  azoxymethane  (AOM).  AOM  produces chemically  induced  colon  cancer  in  the  rat,  the  experimental  endpoints  being  tumours  (number  or volume) and/or aberrant crypt foci (ACF) (putative preneoplastic lesions) depending on study design. In a 50 weeks study, dietary administration of celecoxib (1500 ppm) was shown to inhibit both the incidence and multiplicity of colon tumours by 93% to 97%, respectively. Celecoxib was also shown to suppress the overall tumour burden by more than 87%. However, the variability was high. In another study celecoxib, administered by diet for 16 weeks,  was shown to reduce the numbers of AOM-induced ACF at 1500 ppm (3.5 µ g/ml) from 31% up to 42%, which was on a similar level as was shown in the treatment group receiving sulindac. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In a 52-week study  celecoxib  administered by diet (500 ppm, 1000 ppm or 1500 ppm) to F344 rats has shown  a significant dose-dependent reduction of both incidence and multiplicity of colon cancers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Tumor volumes were also reduced in a dose dipendent manner. The effect exterted by celecoxib at 1500 ppm was more marked in the early stage than in the late  stage  of  carcinogenesis  induced  by AOM (77% vs 47% incidence; 84% vs 57% multiplicity). The steady state plasma levels of celecoxib in this study were 2.21, 2.61, and 4,29 µ g/ml in the 500, 1000, 1500 ppm groups, respectively.

Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No pre-clinical interaction studies were submitted. General pharmacodynamics and safety pharmacology Celecoxib has been studied in various animal models of inflammation and pain. COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitory action was studied and celecoxib was screened for a broad range of receptors and enzymes. The effects were related to COX-2 inhibition. There was an inhibition of platelet aggregation induced by arachidonic acid at concentrations of 0.3 to 10 µ g/ml. Relevant organ systems were investigated and there were no major findings in the safety pharmacology programme conducted. Experimental  evidence  indicates  that  COX-2  has  functional  effects  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  In rodents  with  preexisting  gastrointestinal  injuries,  selective  inhibition  of  COX-2  reduced  mucosal prostaglandin synthesis and significantly enhanced the severity of colonic damage (colitis model) or inhibited  ulcer  healing  (ulcer  model).  Other  studies  suggest  that  COX-2  plays  a  critical  role  in  the resistance  to  gastrointestinal  tract  injury  following  exposure  to  a  mild  irritant,  and  that  blockage  of COX-2 inhibits the defence mechanism. As a consequence, the COX-2 'selective' profile of celecoxib may raise a potential safety concern with regards to ulcer healing (retardation) when episodes of blood per  rectum  and  intestinal  anastomotic  ulceration  occurs  as  observed  in  the  one  pivotal  clinical  trial with  celecoxib.  The  role  of  celecoxib's  COX-1  inhibitory  action  at  high  exposure  levels  in  the bleeding episodes observed in the clinical trials is uncertain. Pharmacokinetics Plasma concentrations were analysed by HPLC, LC-MS assays. 14 C-labelled celecoxib was used for studies of absorption, tissue distribution, metabolism and excretion. Absorption differed between the rat (approximately 60%) and the dog (approximately 17%). Binding to plasma proteins was studied both in vitro and in  vivo over a range of concentrations, and ranged from 94% to 98% in mouse, rat, dog and man. The rabbit, however, had lower protein binding, and it is estimated that the 'free drug' exposure in this species is two-fold that of man. The volume of distribution indicates that celecoxib is readily distributed into tissues (Vd 2-3 l/kg in the species studied). Celecoxib was distributed to primarily the gastrointestinal tract but high concentrations were also observed in the liver, red blood cells, adrenal and lachrymal glands and bone marrow.  Celecoxib  has  been  shown  to  pass  the  blood-brain  barrier,  to  pass  the  placenta  and  to  be excreted in milk. No  accumulation  phenomenon  was  observed.  Celecoxib  is  hydroxylated  and  further  oxidised  to carboxylic acid and cleared by hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes. Dimorphism was observed in rat and dog (CYP2D15, CYP2C21) but the celecoxib metabolites were present in the animal species used for safety assessment. Human dimorphism also exists due to allelic variants of CYP2C9 (warfarin and tolbutamide  metabolic  interaction).  However,  the  main  celecoxib  metabolites  are  inactive  towards COX isoforms. Gender differences in clearance were observed in the rat and mouse. Celecoxib is the major circulating substance in rats, dogs and humans. Excretion in animals (except female mice) is predominantly by the biliary route. In man, the metabolites are mainly excreted with urine. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Toxicology

## Single dose toxicity

Single  dose  toxicity  studies  with  oral  administration  of  celecoxib  were  conducted  in  rats,  dogs  and Cynomolgus monkeys. No important high-dose acute toxicity was observed following administration of 2000 mg/kg of celecoxib in rats and dogs and it was concluded that the approximate lethal dose was greater  than  2000  mg/kg  body  weight.  Furthermore,  celecoxib  did  not  show  to  be  a  potential sensibiliser or an irritant product. Celecoxib was not acutely lethal  in  female  cynomolgus  monkeys  after  oral  administration  of  doses ranging from 2 to 15 times the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) that is proposed for treatment of FAP (400 mg BID, approximately 16 mg/kg/day based on a body weight of 50 kg). Due to  the  observation  of  very  low  absorption  in  the  Cynomolgus  monkey  the  study  programme  in monkeys was discontinued. Repeat-dose toxicity Repeat-dose toxicity was investigated in Sprague-Dawley rats (up to 26 weeks) and Beagle dogs (up to 52 weeks of administration). In  rats,  gastrointestinal  toxicity  and  associated  events  were  dose  limiting.  Female  rats  were  more affected  than  males  because  of  a  gender-specific  4-fold  lower  clearance  and  a  resulting  double systemic celecoxib exposure. NOEL was established at 20 mg/kg/day providing a mean Cmax of 2 to 4 µ g/ml and an AUC 0-24h of 19 to 53 µ g/ml *h (gender and duration dependent). In the studies undertaken in the dog, celecoxib was administered twice daily taking into account its short half-life and proposed clinical dose regime. Histopathological examination was performed in the control  and  high-dose  groups  in  the  pivotal  dog  studies  and  no  overt  toxicity  was  observed  at  the highest  dose  level.  There  was  a  wide  variation  in  systemic  exposures  in  dogs  given  the  same  dose levels of celecoxib due to the two cytochrom P450-dimorphic populations of dogs (PM and EM). The NOEL in dogs was the high dose level of 17.5 mg/kg BID, which corresponds to a Cmax of 1.5 to 3.6 µ g/ml and an AUC0-24h of 11 to 41 µ g/ml *h (gender and duration dependent). The  NOAELs  in  rats  corresponded  to  an  exposure  4-5  times  (in  respect  to  Cmax  and  AUC respectively)  higher  than  the  clinical  exposure  in  humans  in  a  4-week  study,  while  in  the  13-  and 26-week studies and all studies in the dog, the exposures was almost the same as in the clinical setting or very slightly higher. In particular in dogs, if fast clearance animals are considered, the safety factor for GI toxicity appears lower  than  the  unit  (0.99  and  0.6  for  Cmax  and  AUC  respectively).  Also  considering  rats  in  the 4-week study the safety factors appear 50% reduced. Thus in studies where the NOAEL approached the MRHD proposed for the FAP indication (i.e. 800 mg/day corresponding to bout 16 mg/kg), the ratio  between  animal  exposure  /human  exposure  was  not  really  significant  as  demonstrated  for  the 400 mg/day dose previously approved for rheumatoid arthritis, on the basis  of the same  preclinical toxicity studies. In the pharmacodynamic colon cancer models only Cmax was measured. Thus, it is not possible to make a complete comparison between exposure levels at therapeutic doses in the colon cancer models and NOAEL or lowest toxicity dose in the same animal species (in order to exclude interference of species-related toxicokinetics), and finally with the MRHD. From the evaluation of Cmax it appears that there is a non-significant safety margin in the same animal species between non-toxic doses and therapeutic ones, and also with MRHD. In mice a safety margin of 3.4-1.3 with respect to MRHD was observed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Genotoxicity

Celecoxib  was  tested  in  an  appropriate  battery  of  genotoxicity  assays  including  gene  mutation  in bacteria  and  mammalian  cells  (CHO),  chromosomal  aberrations in  vitro (CHO)  and in  vivo (rat micronuclei in bone marrow). Endo-re-duplication was observed in CHO cells in vitro after metabolic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

activation  but  the  relevance  of  this  finding  is  not  known  and  is  unlikely  to  indicate  a  clastogenic potential. No bone marrow toxicity or signs of toxicity were observed in the in vivo rat assay with a three-day  treatment  protocol.  However,  information  of  exposures  from  other  studies  indicates  that saturation of exposure occurs at the high dose selected in the in vivo genotoxicity test.

It may be concluded that celecoxib is unlikely to be genotoxic under the proposed clinical conditions.

Carcinogenicity The carcinogenic potential and chronic toxicity of celecoxib was also investigated in 2-year bioassays in  CD-1  mice  and  SD  rats.  Gastrointestinal  toxicity  and  associated  secondary  dose-limiting  effects were observed in both animal species. Trends for higher incidence of hemangiosarcomas (male mice), pituitary  pars  distalis  adenomas  (female  mice)  and  hepatocellular  adenomas/carcinomas  (male  rats) were  observed.  However,  the  incidences  of  these  appeared  to  be  within  the  values  of  historical controls. MTD was reached in both experiments at exposure levels close to or lower than that expected in the proposed clinical use in FAP patients. In mice the AUC0-24h was 6 to 27 µ g/ml*h across all groups given celecoxib (exposures were slightly higher in male compared to female mice). In rats high dose exposures were in the range of 57 to 158 µ g/ml*h (AUC0-24h, the higher range in female rats), around the range of expected human exposure in FAP patients. Although the experimental exposures in vivo were low as compared to those in the proposed clinical situation,  the  overall  conclusion  is  that  the  carcinogenic  potential  of  celecoxib  is  low.  The  tumour findings in the 2-year carcinogenicity studies should not compromise the proposed use of celecoxib in man (at double dose level as compared to the OA and RA indications). Reproductive and developmental toxicity A standard reproduction toxicity testing battery was conducted (segment I, II, III in rats, and segment II in rabbits). Male fertility including testicular function was not affected by celecoxib. As expected, celecoxib-induced inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis caused early embryo-foetal deaths in the rat. Further, celecoxib given during organogenesis  selectively caused  diaphragmatic  hernia  in rat offspring. In rabbits, celecoxib caused selectively embryo-toxicity, embryo-lethality, and malformations  of  heart  and  major  vessels  including  defects  of  aorta,  the  pulmonary  artery  and ventricular  septal  defects.  The  effects  of  celecoxib  on  the  parturition  processes  have  not  been evaluated.  Celecoxib  has  been  shown  to  cross  the  placenta  and  is  secreted  into  milk.  Toxicity  was observed in the F1 generation offspring after administration of celecoxib to their pregnant and lactating mothers  possible  due  to  offspring  exposure  via in  utero exposure  and/or  milk.  Systemic  exposure levels  at  respective  NOELs  were  close  to  or  lower  than  those  expected  exposures  in  FAP  patients proposed to be given 400-mg celecoxib on a chronic basis. Celecoxib affects fertility due to the increased pre- and post-implantation losses seen in rat and rabbit, reduced  gestation  index  and  increased  length  of  pregnancy  in  rat.  The  results  of  rat  and  rabbit teratology studies suggest that Celecoxib acts as a teratogen in  both species  without any treatmentrelated clinical sign or change in body weight of dams. The induced diaphragmatic hernia is the same phenotype  as  occurred  spontaneously  in  maternal  animal,  suggesting  the  presence  of  a  genetic susceptibility background. Celecoxib was shown to selectively induce malformations and embryo-lethality in early pregnancy. Local tolerence and immunotoxic potential Dermal sensitisation  potential  of  celecoxib  was  negative  according  to  the  Magnusson  and  Kligman guinea pig model. Celecoxib did not produce a reaction indicative of active systemic anaphylaxis or homologue/heterologous  passive  skin  anaphylaxis  in  animal  stimulation  assays.  The  antigenic potential of celecoxib may be regarded as low, except for possible sulphonamide sensitivity. Celecoxib was non-/minimal irritant to skin and eye. Celecoxib does not contain a chiral centre, and thus no stereoisomers exist. Celecoxib will not be expected to carry a risk for dependence or addiction. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Environmental risk assessment

No particular risks to the environment of celecoxib use in FAP patients can be foreseen.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects

Celecoxib selectively inhibits  COX-2, but  also COX-1 although not  at therapeutic  dose levels.  The pharmacodynamic rationale for celecoxib in FAP is its COX-2 inhibitor effect, possibly its molecular configuration independently of its COX-2 inhibition, or perhaps a combination of the two. Although the mechanism of action remains to be fully elucidated, experimental evidence suggests that celecoxib exhibits an anti-angiogenetic activity and may induce cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in colon cancer cell lines. Further, epidemiological evidence suggests an association between the use of NSAIDs and a decrease in colon cancer in the general population. There is a strong association between the level of COX-2 expression in tumours and anticancer effects of COX-2 inhibition.

<!-- image -->

The pharmacodynamic effects of celecoxib against adenomas were observed at plasma concentration levels  between 0.7 and 4.29 µ g/ml. The preferential  distribution  of  celecoxib  to  the  gastrointestinal tract might perhaps result in an even higher concentration/exposure at the local target site of adenoma growth in FAP patients. In rats, the concentration of celecoxib in the large intestine from 1 to 8 hours post-dosing is 2- to 16-fold greater than the concentration in plasma.

Celecoxib was evaluated in a series of nonclinical pharmacology studies:  1) to examine its inhibitory kinetics  and  mechanism  of  action;  2)  to  determine  its  anti-inflammatory,  analgesic,  antipyretic,  and chemopreventative  actions in  vivo ;  and,  3)  to  specifically  evaluate  its  propensity  to  cause  GI  tract injury and to explore its potential for action on a variety of physiological systems that are targets of conventional NSAIDs.  A major goal of these studies was to understand the pharmacological action of celecoxib in relation to its ability to produce differential inhibition of COX isoforms in vivo , ex vivo and in vitro . No new data regarding the antinflammatory and analgesic properties, and the general toxicity profile of celecoxib have been presented over and above the data submitted during the Mutual Recognition Procedure (MRP) for the OA and RA indication. For  the  pharmacodynamic  evaluation  of  the  effect  of  celcecoxib  related  to  treatment  of  FAP,  a chemical (AOM-induced ACF model) and a genetic (Apc Min-mouse model) rodent model were used. These  cancer  models  involve  tumour  types  that  are  known  to  express  COX-2  and  are  sensitive  to conventional  NSAIDs. In these  models,  distinct  COX-2 expression  occurs in  the  distal  parts  of  the intestine. The deletion of the COX-2 gene in the Apc mouse has been shown to reduce the size and number of intestinal  polyps.  A  significant  reduction  in  tumour  formation  has  also  been  observed  in  COX-2 deficient  mice  with  chemically  induced  skin  papillomas,  and  in  yet  other  cancer  models  COX-2 inhibitors  such  as  sulindac  have  been  shown  to  reduce  the  tumour  burden.  Evaluation  of  COX-2 mRNA and protein in the colon of Min mice parallel findings in human tumours, in which the majority of colorectal adenomas and adenocarcinomas express COX-2. Celecoxib was shown to reduce the tumour burden in the Min mouse and the AOM rat models in a dose-dependant manner, in particular in the middle (jejunum, ileum (Min mouse)) and distal (colon (AOM rat) parts of the intestine. Celecoxib effect was more marked in the early stage than in the late stage of carcinogenesis induced by AOM.   However, these results do not support an extrapolation of the possible clinical effect on polyps in the colon and other intestinal segments expressing COX-2 to the rest of the gastrointestinal tract e.g. the duodenum. It has been demonstrated that COX-2 expression in the uninvolved mucosa was 3- to-4 times higher in the distal as compared to the proximal bowel in both Min mice and AOM rats. The results from the studies in the Min mouse model also indicate that NSAIDs have distal predilection, at least partially. This finding may support the role of COX-2 inhibition as the major anticancer mechanism of NSAIDs. It has been reported that in 85% of colorectal adenocarcinomas taken from humans, COX-2 levels are 2-  to  50-fold  higher  than  levels  in  adjacent  normal  mucosa,  and  that  COX-2  was  over-expressed in polyps  from  FAP  patients.  However,  the  distinct  intestinal  distribution  of  effect  (of  celecoxib  and other NSAIDs) in the Min mouse model, and its relation to COX-2 tumour expression distribution is important. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The inhibitory effect of celecoxib on the Min-mouse model is comparable or sometimes lower than that  of  piroxicam,  suggesting  that  the  inhibitory  effect  on  tumor  multiplicity  and/or  volume  is  not specifically related to the expression of COX-2. Therefore, it is highlighted that the antitumorigenic effect of NSAIDs, COX-2 selective or not selective, might be related to the expression of both COX isoenzymes. Moreover the existence of COX-independent mechanisms by which NSAIDs exert their antitumorigenic effects, has been recently proposed.

It  is  generally  accepted  that  colorectal  cancer  is  preceded  by  adenomas.  Large  intervention  studies have demonstrated that removing adenomas reduce the risk of developing colorectal cancer. Several clinical  and  epidemiological  studies  have  demonstrated  that  extended  periods  of  NSAID  intake  is associated  with  a  40-50%  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  colorectal  cancer  and  a  decreased  risk  of developing  adenomas.  Small  and  methodologically  less  optimal  studies  clearly  indicate  that  the NSAID  sulindac  can  reduce  the  number  and  size  of  polyps  in  patients  with  FAP.  Treatment  is, however, limited by the gastrointestinal side effects related mainly to the inhibition of COX-1.

The non-clinical  safety  evaluation  was  based  on  exposure  to  the  test  article.  Plasma  concentrations were measured in all toxicity studies and Cmax and AUC0-24hr were calculated. A comparison of the preclinical  Cmax  and  AUC  0-24hr  values  with  the  corresponding  values  obtained  in  human  patients given celecoxib at 800 mg/kg is discussed. The  preclinical  safety  profile  of  celecoxib  does  not  differ  significantly  from  the  earlier  approved indications  of  osteoarthritis  and  rheumatoid  arthritis,  i.e.  gastrointestinal  toxicity  and  associated secondary  toxicity.  No  main  adverse  findings  were  observed  in  safety  pharmacology  studies,  but exposures were low. In  literature,  it  has  been  reported  that  COX-2  may  play  a  critical  role  in  the  resistance  to gastrointestinal tract injury following exposure to a mild irritant, and that blockage of COX-2 inhibited the  defence  mechanism.  As  a  consequence,  the  COX-2  'selective'  profile  of  celecoxib  may  raise  a potential  safety  concern  with  regards  to  ulcer  healing  (retardation).  The  role  of  celecoxib's  COX-1 inhibitory  action  at  high  exposure  levels  in  the  bleeding  episodes  observed  in  the  clinical  trials  is uncertain in this context. A full battery of genotoxicity studies has been performed. The overall evaluation of the results, under the  conditions  of  the  studies,  suggests  that  celecoxib  is  devoid  of  a  significant  genotoxic  activity. Further, celecoxib administered by gavage to rats or in the diet to mice did not show any indication of a  treatment  related  increased  risk  of  carcinogenicity.  The  assays  were  conducted  according  to  ICH guidelines. Reproduction  toxicity  studies  have  been  conducted  in  male  and  female  rats  and  rabbits. Celecoxib affects fertility due to the increased pre- and post-implantation losses seen in rat and rabbit, reduced gestation index and increased length of pregnancy in rat. The  results  of  rat  and  rabbit  teratology  studies  suggest  that  Celecoxib  acts  as  a  teratogen  in  both species  without  any  treatment-related  clinical  sign  or  change  in  body  weight  of  dams.  The  induced diaphragmatic hernia is the same phenotype as occurred spontaneously in maternal animal, suggesting the presence of a genetic susceptibility background. This may represent a further concern for humans, due  to  the  possible  presence  of  enhanced  susceptibilities  within  the  population.  Celecoxib  is contraindicated in pregnancy, in women who can become pregnant unless using an effective method of contraception and in breast-feeding and this is sufficiently covered by the SPC and Package Leaflet. 4. Clinical aspects Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A rapidly increasing pool of published experimental and human data indicates that COX-2 is involved in  colorectal  carcinogenesis.  COX-2  is  upregulated  and  overexpressed  in  adenomas  and  colorectal cancer also in FAP patients and related to tumour angiogenesis in human colorectal cancer. Polyps in FAP with the APC mutation overexpress COX-2 and left untreated, these polyps continue to form and enlarge in the colon or rectum resulting in essentially a 100% chance of developing colorectal cancer. Inhibition of COX-2 leads to inhibition of angiogenesis and tumour cell proliferation as well as the induction of apoptosis. Thus, COX-2 stimulation may be one important common step in the pathway leading  to  adenomas  and  colorectal  cancer  regardless  of  the  underlying  genetic  defect  and  COX-2 inhibition  may  represent  a  significant  therapeutic  option  in  the  prevention  and/or  regression  of adenomatous polyps.

Celecoxib  is  an  orally  active  selective  inhibitor  of cyclooxygenase-2  (COX-2).    No  statistically significant inhibition of COX-1 (assessed as ex vivo inhibition of thromboxane B2 [TxB2] formation) was observed in healthy volunteers at the FAP therapeutic dose of 400 mg BID. A  dose-dependent  effect  on  TxB2  formation  has  been  observed  after  high  doses  of  celecoxib. However, in small multiple dose studies in healthy subjects with 600 mg BID celecoxib had no effect on platelet aggregation and bleeding time compared to placebo. COX-2  is  probably  also  involved  in  ovulation,  implantation  and  closure  of  the  ductus  arteriosus, regulation  of  renal  function,  and  central  nervous  system  functions  (fever  induction,  pain  perception and cognitive function). It may also play a role in ulcer healing. COX-2 has been identified in tissue around gastric ulcers in man but its relevance to ulcer healing has not been established. No specific pharmacodynamic studies related to the proposed indication have been conducted and pharmacodynamic  data  with  celecoxib  are  limited  to  that  generated  by  the  preclinical  studies  (see preclinical discussion), and include evaluations in animal models of FAP and colon cancer (primary pharmacology);  molecular,  enzymatic,  and  biochemical  characterizations  of  inhibition  of  COX-2 (primary  pharmacology);  evaluations  in  animal  models  of  inflammation  and  analgesia  (secondary pharmacology);  and  evaluation  of  potential  side  effects  and  ancillary  pharmacological  activity (secondary pharmacology). Celecoxib  inhibits  tumour  formation  in  preclinical  models  of  colon  cancer,  which  express  COX-2, whether induced by chemical (rat AOM model) or genetic (MIN mouse model) mutation. Some pharmacodynamic data can also be extrapolated from the clinical pharmacokinetics interaction studies,  in  particular  those  exploring  the  interaction  between  celecoxib  and  warfarin,  glyburide  and combined  oral  contraceptives  (see  discussion  below).  No  clinically  significant  pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions were observed in these studies. Pharmacodynamic interaction studies All  pharmacodynamic  drug-drug  interaction  assessments  were  made  in  conjunction  with  studies  of pharmacokinetic interactions (see also section on pharmacokinetic interactions below). In  a  warfarin  interaction  study  investigating  the  pharmacodynamic  and  pharmacokinetic  effects  of celecoxib  200  mg  BID,  no  significant  differences  in  prothrombin  time  were  seen  during  celecoxib treatment  as  compared  to  placebo.  Anticoagulant  activity  should  be  monitored  in  patients  taking warfarin  or  similar  agents,  particularly  in  the  first  few  days  after  initiating  or  changing  the  dose  of celecoxib. Bleeding events in association with increases in prothrombin time have been reported, in arthritis patients (mainly elderly) receiving celecoxib concurrently with warfarin, some of them fatal. Another study investigated the effect of celecoxib on the glucose and insulin levels in type 2 diabetic patients  receiving  the  oral  hypoglycaemic  agent  glyburide  (glibenclamide)  5  and  10  mg  QD.  There were  no  clinically  relevant  changes  in  glucose  and  insulin  levels  when  celecoxib  was  administered compared to placebo. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There is no indication that celecoxib given to women under oral contraception would alter the efficacy of oral contraceptives.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further, NSAIDs may reduce the effect of diuretics and antihypertensive medicinal products. As for NSAIDs, the risk of acute renal insufficiency may be increased when ACE inhibitors are combined with celecoxib.

Co-administration  of  NSAIDs  and  cyclosporin  or  tacrolimus  have  been  suggested  to  increase  the nephrotoxic effect of cyclosporin and tacrolimus. Renal function should be monitored when celecoxib and any of these medicinal products are combined. Celecoxib can be used with low dose acetylsalicylic acid, however it cannot be considered a substitute for acetylsalicylic acid for cardiovascular prophylaxis. Pharmacokinetics Basic pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic data were obtained from studies in young and elderly healthy subjects of both sexes as well as from the various patient populations studied in support of the previously approved OA and RA  indications.  Both  single  and  multiple  dose  studies  were  performed  but  data  are  limited  to administration via the oral route. Celecoxib is a low solubility, high permeability substance with good oral bioavailability and low firstpass metabolism either in the gut or liver. Celecoxib has a plasma CL/F of ~500 ml/min (30 L/hr/70 kg) adjusted for 70 kg body weight in young healthy adults. It has a protein binding in vivo of about 97% and this binding remains constant within wide  therapeutic  concentration  range  of  the  total  drug.  The  apparent  distribution  volume  (Vz/F)  of celecoxib  is  ~500  L/70  kg  after  single  200  mg  dose  in  young  healthy  adults,  suggesting  extensive tissue  uptake.  Celecoxib  is  absorbed  after  oral  administration  with  tmax  approximating  3  hours. Celecoxib  half-life  (t1/2 λ z)  is  ~10-12  hr.  Its  absolute  bioavailability  is  not  known  because  of  the unavailability of an intravenous dosage form. It is, however, estimated that at least 73% of the orally administered dose reached the systemic circulation. The apparent oral clearance was about 30 l/h, but with a high degree of variation. The  AUC  of  celecoxib  increases  less  than  proportional  with  dose  when  the  dose  exceeds  200  mg, especially  at  doses  larger  than  600  mg.  This  may  be  due  to  the  low  biopharmaceutical  solubility resulting in dissolution-limited saturation in the absorption at high doses. Celecoxib is extensively metabolised in man. The percentage of dose excreted in feces is only 2.6% and  no  unchanged  drug  was  detected  in  urine.  Both  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  studies  indicate  that  this hydroxylation pathway is mediated predominantly via CYP P450 2C9. The important role of CYP2C9 was  supported  by  clinical  interaction  studies.  Three  metabolites  of  celecoxib  were  observed,  all  of them  pharmacologically  inactive  with  respect  to  COX-1  and  COX-2  inhibition.  Renal  excretion  of unchanged celecoxib is negligible. Body weight and hepatic impairment were shown to be the two most important covariates that had important effects on celecoxib CL/F. These findings are expected since celecoxib is eliminated mostly by hepatic metabolism and a decrease in hepatic function is likely to result in decreased metabolism. The  effect  of  body  weight  results  from  the  fact  that  CL/F  is  derived  from  the  relationship  CL/F  = dose/AUC and since the dose (expressed as mg/kg) is higher in subjects with significantly lower body weight, decreased CL/F should be expected in these subjects. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There is a genetic polymorphism of CYP2C9 and less than 1% of the population are poor metabolisers and have an enzyme with decreased activity. Patients known to be CYP2C9 poor metabolisers have not been specifically investigated by the applicant, and should be treated with caution.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Pharmacokinetics in the target population

No formal pharmacokinetic trial has been conducted in FAP patients.  Plasma samples were taken for population PK analysis from the FAP patients included in the clinical phase II study IQ4-96-02-001. The celecoxib CL/F values in FAP patients were then compared with those in OA and RA patients.

## Pharmacokinetic interaction studies

The intended clinical dose (400 mg BID), at steady state, produces an AUC0-24h of 31.8 µ g/ml/h and a Cmax of approximately 2.38 µ g/ml. Further, plasma levels as high as 16.3 µ g/ml have been observed in FAP patients (6.8-fold higher than the reference value (2.38 µ g/ml)). It is noted that for the AO and RA indications (at lower dose levels) it has been reported that Cmax was about 3.5 µ g/ml and AUC0-24h was about 43 µ g/ml/h. CL/F in FAP patients at steady-state (31.0 L/hr, N=52) is similar to the CL/F in RA and OA patients (34.7 L/hr, N=110). No  further  accumulation  of  celecoxib  plasma  concentrations  seems  to  occur  in  FAP  patients  from month 3 to  month  6  of  celecoxib  treatment.  In  the  FAP  trial,  the  celecoxib  CL/Fs  in  patients  with intact colon (29.7 L/hr, N=18) were shown to be similar to CL/Fs in patients with partial colectomy (32.5  L/hr,  N=32).  No  correlation  was  found  between  exposure  (AUC)  and  efficacy  (reduction  in polyp number) . Special populations Impairment  of  hepatic  function  clearly  reduces  clearance  and  increases  exposure  of  celecoxib.  The effect is clinically relevant at moderate severity, and celecoxib should not be administered in severe cases of hepatic impairment. Compared to subjects with normal hepatic function, patients with mild hepatic impairment had a mean increase in Cmax of 53% and in AUC of 26% of celecoxib. When dosed at 200 mg per day the corresponding values in patients with moderate hepatic impairment were 41% and 146% respectively. The metabolic capacity in patients with mild to moderate impairment was best correlated to their albumin values. In FAP patients with moderate hepatic impairment (serum albumin of 25-35 g/l), the daily recommended dose of celecoxib should be reduced by 50%. Patients with severe hepatic impairment (serum albumin &lt;25 g/l) have not been studied and celecoxib is contraindicated in this patient group. Celecoxib CL/F is not markedly reduced in patients with stable chronic renal dysfunction (GFR &gt;34 ml/min/1.73 m2) and in patients with Type II non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). The pharmacokinetics of celecoxib has not been studied in patients with renal impairment but is unlikely to be markedly changed in these patients since it is mainly eliminated by hepatic metabolism. There is little  experience  of  celecoxib  in  renal  impairment  and  therefore  caution  is  advised  when  treating patients with renal impairment.  Severe renal impairment is a contraindication to use. Celecoxib has not yet been studied for use in pediatric patients below the age of 18. The pharmacokinetics in elderly subjects has not been specifically studied in FAP. In elderly healthy subjects, AUC and Cmax values are higher (about 67% and 85%) compared to young healthy subjects. Celecoxib  CL/F  is  lower  [higher  drug  exposure  (AUC)]  in  elderly  women  and  in  patients  with moderate  hepatic  impairment.  Reduction  in  CL/F  in  elderly  females  (&gt;65  years),  can  be  partly attributed  to  age  and  partly  to  their  lower  body  weight.  However,  the  decrease  in  CL/F  in  healthy elderly Caucasians is &lt;40% compared to healthy Caucasians &lt;50 years. The plasma concentration of celecoxib is approximately 100% increased in elderly women (&gt;65 years).) The pharmacokinetics of celecoxib in females and males are similar. Data from several studies indicate that body weight adjusted oral clearance is lower in black subjects compared to Caucasians. In a study of elderly subjects, there is no clinically significant difference in pharmacokinetic parameters between black subjects and Caucasians. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Potential  drug-drug  interactions  with  celecoxib  were  evaluated  based  on  previous  experience  with currently available NSAIDs and their effect on other drugs that have a narrow therapeutic window. NSAIDs are known to decrease renal blood flow and may potentially affect drugs that are eliminated

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

mostly  by  the  kidney,  such  as  methotrexate  and  lithium.  Furthermore,  NSAIDs  typically  undergo extensive hepatic metabolism and have the potential to interact with other drugs that are metabolized by the liver, in particular by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 isozyme, such as warfarin, tolbutamide and phenytoin. NSAIDs are typically highly protein bound and have the potential to cause protein binding displacement and/or effect the clearance of other highly protein bound drugs, such as glyburide.

The pivotal phase II study, IQ4-99-06-001, was a randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled, three arm parallel group study with 6 months duration in patients with FAP. The study was conducted at two sites: one in the UK and one in the USA.

Administration  of  an  antacid  (aluminium-magnesium  hydroxide)  with  celecoxib  produces  a  slight reduction  in  celecoxib  AUC  and  more  pronounced  decrease  in  Cmax.  Fluconazole  (a  CYP2D9 inhibitor) increases celecoxib AUC more than 2-fold and also significantly increases Cmax. Celecoxib  administered  as  200  mg  BID  for  seven  days  did  not  significantly  affect  the  kinetics  of methotrexate.  Serum  concentrations  of  lithium  increased  slightly  (17%)  but  this  increase  is  not considered  clinically  important.  Multiple  doses  of  celecoxib  also  showed  no  clinically  important interactions with other substrates of 2C9 namely, S-warfarin, phenytoin, glyburide and tolbutamide. In vivo  studies  with  paroxetine  and  dextromethorphan  have  indicated  that  celecoxib  is  not  a  strong inhibitor  of  CYP2D6.  Furthermore,  these  studies  demonstrated  that  celecoxib  is  not  a  substrate  of CYP2D6 in vivo. Administration  of  celecoxib  with  food  (high  fat  breakfast)  results  in  increased  bioavailability (AUC(inf) increased between 7% and 11%, Cmax between 39% and 62%). Bioequivalence A bioequivalency  link  has  been  established  between  the  capsules  used  in  phase  III  pivotal  clinical trials and the proposed commercial formulation . Clinical efficacy Dose-response studies and main clinical studies Dose response studies Plasma levels of celecoxib that were effective in the animal cancer prevention models, supported by findings in controlled clinical trials of celecoxib in patients with OA and RA, guided dose selection for the pivotal study. It had been demonstrated that a total daily dose of 200 mg, administered as 100 mg BID or  200  mg as  a  single  dose,  provided  significant  reduction  in  joint  pain  as  well  as  significant reduction in joint swelling in RA patients.  Doses up to 400 mg BID were also well tolerated, with no evidence of dose-dependent adverse events in the arthritis studies.  The recommended daily dose for RA is 200-400 mg taken in two divided doses. No additional dose finding study was undertaken in FAP patients given the small size of the patient population. Instead dose comparison was carried out as a part of the pivotal study with doses chosen based on the preclinical and OA/RA data. Two doses, 100 mg BID (lowest efficacious dose in OA/RA studies) and 400 mg BID (a safe dose in OA/RA studies and one providing exposure comparable to the efficacious dose in preclinical cancer prevention models) were selected. Main clinical study (IQ4-99-06-001) The pivotal FAP study has been conducted in compliance with GCP rules . Description of the study Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Eighty-one  patients  (75  with  lower  gastro-intestinal  tract  disease  and  6  with  exclusively  duodenal lesions) and an additional 2 replacement patients, both with lower tract disease, were enrolled in the study adding up to a total of 83 patients.

FAP  patients  with  gastrointestinal  disease  were  eligible  provided  that  they  had  at  least  five endoscopically  assessable  colonic  or  duodenal  polyps  (stage  III  or  IV  polyp  burden  according  to Spigelman  criteria)  remaining  after  baseline  endoscopy  and  polypectomy. The  eligible  patient population had a diagnosis of FAP based on the following criteria: more than 100 polyps, or more than 10 polyps and age over 40 years, or more than 25 polyps and age over 40 years and a characteristic family history which included one of the following: over 100 polyps in a first degree family member or more than 25 polyps in two relatives in two generations, including a first degree family member. Patients to be recruited had to be between 18 and 65 years of age and had to be willing to abstain from use of NSAID including aspirin. Women of childbearing potential had to accept use of an adequate contraception. Exclusion criteria included anticipated colectomy within 8 months, hypersensitivity to NSAIDs  or  salicylates,  use  of  NSAID  for  6  (3)  months  prior  to  study  entry,  a  history  of gastroduodenal ulceration within the last year (patients with H. pylori associated peptic ulcer disease became eligible upon H. pylori eradication), history of invasive cancer within 5 years (resected Duke's A &amp; B1 accepted), anaemia with a haemoglobin &lt; 10.0 g/dl or a platelet count of &lt; 100.000 per µL or significantly elevated liver enzymes or creatinine. The two centres included 42 and 41 patients between the age of 19 and 64 years representing  &gt;90% and 25%,  respectively of patients in their respective registries. The 77 FAP  patients with gastrointestinal disease were randomised 1:2:2 to placebo, celecoxib 100 mg and celecoxib 400 mg BID,  respectively.    The  6  patients  with  only  duodenal  disease  were  randomised  1:1:1  to  placebo, celecoxib 100 mg and celecoxib 400 mg BID. Treatment duration was 6 months up to 200 days. The treatment groups were similar except that patients given the high dose celecoxib were younger and  weighed  less  (median  weight  75  kg,  75  kg  and  68  kg,  respectively  in  the  three  groups).  The treatment groups were similar for race and gender at baseline. Across treatment groups, 88% to 94% of  the  patients  were  Caucasian  and  56-59%  were  male.  For  all  patients,  the  age  range  was  19  to 64 years. The groups were statistically different (p=0.013) for age at baseline, with the placebo group being oldest (41.2 years), the celecoxib 100 mg BID group being slightly younger (39.5 years) and the celecoxib 400 mg BID group being youngest (33.0 years). A statistical analysis of the robustness of the  primary  efficacy  outcome  showed  that  difference  in  age  among  the  groups  did  not  affect  the conclusions of the study. All treatment groups were similar with respect to height, weight, vital signs at baseline and colon status. All in all, 15 placebo patients, 32 celecoxib 100 mg BID and 30 celecoxib 400 mg BID were analysed. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies were performed at baseline and at the end of the study. Pre-designated areas were to be videotaped, photographed and scored in detail. The area in the rectum with the highest polyp burden and one or two areas in the proximal colon were marked with India ink tattoo and biopsied at the follow-up examination. Baseline polyp counts were obtained after removal of the large polyps and the two colonic areas with the highest polyp burden were to be avoided and at least 5 unbiopsied polyps to be left. Laboratory evaluation was performed at entry and at months 1, 2 and 6. Structured interviews for symptom assessment were performed at week 2 and 4 and monthly thereafter. Quality of life was determined at baseline, at month 3 and 6 or at early termination using the  SF-36  health  survey,  which  includes  multiple  items  within  each  of  eight  domains:  physical functioning,  role-physical,  bodily  health,  general  health,  vitality,  social  functioning,  role-emotional, and  mental  health.  The  changes  from  baseline  to  endpoint  scores  were  analysed.  Biopsies  were obtained for biomarker analysis. Dietary assessments were conducted at baseline and at termination but these results were not included in the final report. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

## Primary efficacy variables

The primary efficacy parameter was the percent change in colorectal polyp number from baseline as compared to the observation at 6 months. The absolute polyp numbers were obtained as the sum of counts from still photos of each of the tattooed sites and predefined areas.

<!-- image -->

|                                               | Selected Efficacy                             |                                        |                      |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------|
| Variable                                      | Placebo BID                                   | ITT Population Celecoxib 100 mg BID no | Celecoxib 400 mg BID |
| Number of Colorectal                          |                                               |                                        |                      |
| P l Baseline Mean                             | 15.5 (15)                                     | 11.5 (32)                              | 12.3 (30)            |
| ( ) Mean %Change from Baseline at Month 6     | -4.5 (15)                                     | -11.9 (32)                             | -28.0 a (30)         |
| Mean Residual Colorectal Polyp Size ) product | Mean Residual Colorectal Polyp Size ) product |                                        |                      |
| ( Baseline Mean                               | 2.9 (15)                                      | 2.9 (32)                               | 2.9 (30)             |
| Mean %Change from Baseline at Month 6         | -0.7 (15)                                     | -3.0 (32)                              | -4.9 (30)            |
| Mean Colorectal Polyp Burden (Sum of Polyp    | Mean Colorectal Polyp Burden (Sum of Polyp    |                                        |                      |
| Di t ) Baseline Mean                          | 44.7 (15)                                     | 34.8 (32)                              | 37.6 (30)            |
| Mean %Change from Baseline at Month 6         | -4.9 (15)                                     | -14.6 (32)                             | -30.7 b (30)         |
| Percent Area of Duodenum Covered By           | Percent Area of Duodenum Covered By           | -Like Polyps                           |                      |
| Pl Baseline Mean                              | 16.2 (12)                                     | 12.8 (23)                              | 8.8 (17)             |
| Mean %Change from Baseline at Month 6         | -1.4 (12)                                     | 117.9 (23) c                           | -14.5 (17)           |

b.

Statistical significance compared to placebo of p=0.001

c.

Findings for the primary endpoint were also examined for progression or &lt;10% reduction in number of colorectal polyps, &gt;10% reduction in number of colorectal polyps, &gt;25% reduction in number of colorectal polyps and &gt;50% reduction in number of colorectal polyps. More patients in the celecoxib 400 BID than in the placebo group had a ≥ 50% and a ≥ 25% reduction in number of colorectal polyps compared to baseline:

Five discontinued patients with no data beyond baseline were included in the ITT analysis by defining all changes for the primary efficacy parameter from baseline as 0%. A protocol amendment stated that treatment efficacy was to be based on comparison of high dose vs. placebo and low dose vs. placebo based on type I errors of 0.04 and 0.01, respectively. Supportive analyses included percent responders, percent  change  in  total  polyp  burden,  percent  change  in  size  and  number  of  polyps  in  different anatomical  regions  of  the  lower  gastrointestinal  tract,  and  physicians'  review  of  videotapes  of  the endoscopies (mean of five blinded examiners). A total of 77 patients had lower gastrointestinal tract disease and was included in the analysis. Celecoxib, 400 mg BID for 6 months, reduced the number of colorectal polyps by 28.0%, mean polyp size by 4.9% and overall polyp burden (sum of polyp diameters) by 30.7% as compared to baseline. Compared to the mean decrease of 4.5% in the placebo group, the between treatment difference was statistically  significant  (p=0.003).  The  difference  in  percent  change  of  polyp  size  did  not  reach statistical significance in the celecoxib 400 BID group compared to placebo. Compared to baseline, celecoxib  400  mg  BID  reduced  the  colorectal  polyp  burden  by  30.7%  on  average  and  celecoxib 100 mg BID reduced the colorectal polyp burden by 14.6%. Compared with the mean reduction of 4.9% in the placebo group, this difference was statistically significant for the celecoxib 400 mg BID group (p=0.001). The latter analysis consists in practice in the sum of polyp diameters. a. Statistical significance compared to placebo of p=0.003. Analysis of percent area of duodenum covered by plaque-like polyps, with two patients who had a zero percent coverage at baseline excluded, indicated a 4.2% reduction in the celecoxib 100 mg BID treatment group compared to placebo Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                     | Placebo (N=15)   | Celecoxib 100 mg BID (N=32)   | Celecoxib 400 mg BID (N=30)   |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Progression or ≤ 10% reduction %(N) | 73.3% (11)       | 56.2% (18)                    | 26.7% (8)                     |
| %(N) >10% reduction                 | 26.7% (4)        | 43.8% (14)                    | 73.3% (22)                    |
| %(N) ≥ 25% reduction*               | 6.7% (1)         | 31.2% (10)                    | 53.3% (16)                    |
| ≥ 50% reduction %(N)                | 0.0% (0)         | 9.4% (3)                      | 16.7% (5)                     |

|            |         | Celecoxib   | Celecoxib   |
|------------|---------|-------------|-------------|
|            | Placebo | 100 mg BID  | 400 mg BID  |
| N          | 15      | 32          | 30          |
| Baseline   | 232     | 369         | 369         |
| Final      | 213     | 344         | 264         |
| Difference | -19     | -25         | -105        |
| Change     | -8.2%   | -6.8%       | -28.5%      |

52 patients were available for evaluation of the secondary endpoint, which is more difficult from an endoscopic  point  of  view.  Celecoxib  400  mg  BID  reduced  the  area  of  the  duodenum  covered  by plaque-like polyps by 14.5%, a reduction that did not reach statistical significance compared to the change in the placebo group (p=0.436). A trend towards a dose-dependant response was nevertheless noted (placebo 1.4%, celecoxib 100 mg BID 4.2% and celecoxib 400 mg BID 14.5%). However it has to  be  mentioned that two patients in the celecoxib 100 mg BID group had no plaque-like polyps at baseline  and  were  excluded  from  the  previous  calculation.  If  these  patients  are  included  in  the analysis, there is a 117.9% (p=0.986) increase in the area of duodenum covered by plaque-like polyps for the celecoxib 100 mg BID treatment group.

* p=0.003 celecoxib 400 mg BID vs. placebo by Fisher's Exact Test; only percent responders based on 25% reduction was analyzed Further,  with  reference  to  the  overall  number  of  polyps  in  each  treatment  group  at  baseline  and  at 6 months, along with the change from baseline, the reduction in total number of polyps was greatest for the celecoxib 400 mg BID group: Furthermore,  a  consistent  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the  rectum  and  all  colon  regions  was observed in patients in the celecoxib 400 mg BID treatment group compared to the placebo group, confirming  findings  for  the  percentage  change  in  the  number  of  polyps,  percentage  of  responders, mean  residual  polyp  size  and  polyp  burden  in  this  treatment  group.  Global  assessments  showed  a statistically  significant  improvement  in  each  colorectal  segment  for  the  celecoxib  400  mg  BID treatment group when compared to the placebo group. Secondary efficacy variables The secondary efficacy parameter was the percent change from baseline in an area of the duodenum covered  by  plaque-like  polyps.  The  absolute  values  were  obtained  by  computing  one  high  polyp density photograph and one low polyp density photograph. There were two patients without duodenal plaques at baseline and some duodenal plaques at the end of study for which the percent change was calculated assuming a baseline value of 1%. Supportive analyses included percent change in the size of the ampulla, the Spigelman grade (based on histology, dysplasia, size, and number of polyps) and the physicians' review of videotapes. The 52 patients included in the ITT analysis of the secondary parameter  included  the  6  patients  with  only  plaque  like  duodenal  polyps  and  46  patients  with measurable duodenal disease at baseline and study exit. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Results  for  global  assessments  of  endoscopic  videotapes  by  a  blinded  GI  panel  revealed  an improvement considered statistically significant for the celecoxib 400 mg BID treatment group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical studies in special populations

No studies in special patient groups (e.g. in children) were performed.

Discussion on clinical efficacy No  specific  pharmacodynamic  studies  related  to  the  proposed  indication  have  been  conducted, however,  there  is  evidence  that  elevated  levels  of  COX-2  are  found  in  several  types  of  tumours, including  colon,  as  well  as  in  pre-cancerous  conditions  such  as  adenomatous  polyps.  Human  and experimental  colon  tumours  contain  increased  amounts  of  prostaglandin  E2,  which  is  thought  to participate in colon cancer carcinogenesis. COX-2  appears to be responsible for increased prostaglandin E2 levels in response to growth factors in human and animal colonic tumours. COX-2 inhibition may therefore play an important role in colon cancer prevention. More recent data indicate that NSAIDs increase apoptosis, inhibit angiogenesis, and reduce metastasis in various experimental models of carcinogenesis. Circumstantial evidence that the inducible isoform of COX contributes to colorectal neoplasia is that COX-2  is  up-regulated  as  normal  intestinal  mucosa  progresses  to  invasive  colorectal  cancer  in humans. Published data also indicate that inhibition of COX-2 leads to inhibition of angiogenesis, tumour cell proliferation  and  the  induction  of  apoptosis.  This  mechanism  may  play  an  important  role  in  the prevention  and/or  regression  of  adenomatous  polyps.  Overall,  the  rationale  for  the  development  of celecoxib is considered sound and the lack of specific studies acceptable. The  application  is  based  on  one  single  study  on  efficacy  and  safety  in  the  target  population  and supportive  safety  studies  in  different  patient  groups.  The  pivotal  phase  II  study  was  a  randomised double-blind  placebo  controlled  study  conducted  in  83  patients  with  FAP.  The  study  population included  58  patients  with  a  prior  subtotal  or  total  colectomy  and  25  patients  with  an  intact  colon. Thirteen patients had the attenuated FAP phenotype. However, despite the achievement of a large study group of 83 FAP patients in the study performed, there remains concern as to whether the study population is truly representative of the general FAP population.  Differences  between  the  study  arms  with  reference  to  age  and  number  of  polyps  at baseline were noted. Patients on the high dose of celecoxib were younger and the baseline number of colorectal polyps was largest in the placebo group. Celecoxib 400 mg BID has shown some efficacy in comparison to placebo with regard to the percent reduction  in  the  number  of  colorectal  polyps  in  patients  with  FAP.  Celecoxib  has  been  shown  to reduce  the  number  and  size  of  adenomatous  colorectal  polyps.  However,  the  28%  change  from baseline  in  the  number  of  colorectal  polyps  (the  primary  efficacy  endpoint)  measured  in  the  FAP patients treated with celecoxib 400 mg BID was lower than the prespecified 40% difference for which the  study  was  powered  and  which  was  considered  a  clinically  relevant  difference  and  in  line  with previous  studies  of  NSAIDs.  The  reduction  in  polyps  observed  with  celecoxib  400 mg  BID  was statistically superior to placebo at the six-month time point. The net difference with placebo is 23.5%, which is also not very convincing. Moreover, percentages are highly influenced by the relatively small absolute  numbers of the study. In terms of  absolute  numbers,  7  out  of  30 patients  in  the  celecoxib 400 mg BID group did not show any reduction in polyp number (in two of them it even increased), corresponding to a percentage of 23.3%. Similarly, with reference to the number of polyps, 369 polyps at baseline in 30 patients (mean: 12.3) were reduced to 264 after six months (-105, mean: 3.5). The maximum number of polyps found in an individual patient at baseline was 41 while the vast majority of  patients  had  much  less  than  20  polyps.  Even  though  a  small  reduction  in  polyp  number  might possibly be translated into an absolute reduction of the risk of developing cancer, it is not clear how such a reduction would change the clinical approach to the disease and thus whether the findings are clinically relevant. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Although  it  is  recognised  that  the  duodenal  assessment  is  harder  than  the  colorectal  one,  and  the accuracy  of  the adopted  techniques  of  a  poorer  standard,  the  results  are  at  best  considered encouraging. Moreover, the preclinical rationale for the duodenal disease is to be considered weak.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Extensive  duodenal  disease,  i.e.  Spigelman  IV  is  associated  with  a  high  (36%)  risk  of  developing cancer and (prophylactic) treatment is a radical and mutilating Whipple operation. Demonstration of a convincing effect on the duodenal manifestation of FAP would be of more crucial value for the longterm  treatment  than  an  effect  on  colonic  disease  for  which  the  surgical  treatment  is  much  less mutilating. Unfortunately, however, the applicant chose to assess the effect of celecoxib on duodenal disease  as  a  secondary  parameter  and  to  perform  a  much  less  rigorous  study  than  that  on  colonic disease.

It is acknowledged that the reduction of adenomatous polyps in FAP patients does not provide a cure for  patients  with  FAP.    In  relevant  settings,  however,  Onsenal  might  provide  a  benefit  to  patients specifically in conjunction with routine surveillance thus enhancing the management of FAP patients. Surgery could be an aggravating factor and the usefulness of a pharmacological tool should be taken in

Results  of  the  videotape  assessment  from  study  FAP-001,  however,  show  a  clinical  improvement ranging from 16.5 to 25% in the duodenum in patients receiving the 400 mg BD dose. Regression  of  large  plaque-like  adenomas  does  not  occur  uniformly,  therefore,  counting  adenoma number, as is done for colorectal adenomas, is not a technique amenable to assessment of duodenal adenomas. However, the assessment of duodenal plaque area does show a reduction in plaque area of 14.5% in patients treated with Onsenal 400 mg BD vs. 1.4 % in placebo, demonstrating consistency with the results seen in the video assessment. Although not statistically significant, these results may be considered supportive for an effect in the duodenum, which was not, on the other hand, the primary objective of the pivotal trial. Reducing the number, or eliminating adenomas, is the primary goal of all therapeutic interventions in FAP. Multiple published studies have demonstrated a correlation between the number of adenomatous polyps  and  the  risk  of  rectal  cancer  in  FAP  patients  even  after  partial  colorectal  surgery.  Although these studies vary in design, number of patients, and the years of follow-up, the conclusions are robust and derive their strength from the consistency of these findings among multiple centers and studies. The development of rectal cancer is a highly significant risk in any remaining mucosa in FAP patients, and while a prospective study demonstrating that untreated adenomas develop into cancer would be ideal, this would not be ethical given the availability of subsequent surgical options. Despite  a  similar  reduction  in  polyp  size  and  number  as  previously  demonstrated  with  sulindac, NSAID therapy has not become part of the standard of care in FAP patients because of substantial uncertainty on the balance between potential benefits and risks. Such an uncertainty remains also for celecoxib, because of the limitations outlined above regarding efficacy, and because of safety concerns identified  (see  discussion  on  safety  below).  In  fact,  also  measurement  of  quality  of  life  of  treated patients did not reveal any statistically significant improvement as compared to placebo. In summary, independent assessment of both colorectal adenomas and duodenal adenomas, using siteappropriate measurement techniques is suggestive of a certain clinical benefit of celecoxib 400 mg BD in the treatment of FAP. The colonic efficacy findings appear robust although the absolute magnitude of  polyp reduction was not overwhelming. The number of polyps decreased in all groups including placebo. It remains, however, to be shown that this reduction was clinically relevant, i.e. either that the natural  history  of  FAP  with  adenomas  developing  into  andenocarcinomas  was  changed  or  that  the therapeutic  approach  could  be  modified.  Since  it  is  not  anticipated  that  the  presented  data  will persuade clinicians to postpone colectomy the answer must come from analysis of patients in which a colectomy  or  proctocolectomy  had  previously  been  performed,  i.e.  in  patients  with  remnant  rectal mucosa, duodenal disease or desmoids. In fact, although celecoxib did reduce the  mean number of polyps in the rectum from 11 to 8 in accordance with the overall result this effect was not statistically different from the reduction from 17 to 15 in the placebo group. The difference in baseline number of polyps was significant. The small effect of celecoxib will probably not change the surgical approach towards the colorectal disease in patients with FAP. Whether it will change the handling of disease in the remnant rectum remains to be demonstrated. It is not known whether the effect on colonic polyps can  be  extrapolated  to  other  parts  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract,  in  particular  to  the  duodenum,  the mucosa of which differs significantly from colon. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

consideration in this subset of severely ill patients. Whether long-term treatment with celecoxib may allow  for  a  delay  in  colon  surgery  and  possibly  a  reduction  in  the  life-long  risk  of  cancer  in  FAP patients  remains  to  be  established.  The  primary  end-point  of  the  pivotal  efficacy  study  was  the  % reduction in colorectal polyp numbers. These results seem to support the claimed indication, but the clinical relevance of the outcomes is still far to be demonstrated.

Phase II/III studies with celecoxib 400 mg BID in the OA/RA indication:

| INDICATION           | STUDY DESIGN                                                   |   # Patients treated at 400 mg BID | TREATMENT DURATION   |
|----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------|
| OA                   | Phase II dose-range study                                      |                                 99 | 4 weeks              |
| RA                   | Phase II dose-range study                                      |                                 82 | 4 weeks              |
| RA                   | Phase III, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled        |                                217 | 12 weeks             |
| RA                   | Phase III, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled        |                                217 | 12 weeks             |
| OA,RA                | Open-label, long-term safety study                             |                               1630 | 12-24 weeks          |
| OA, RA (CLASS study) | Phase III, double-blind parallel group, long term safety study |                               3987 | 26-65 weeks          |

Treatment  with  celecoxib  in  FAP  has  been  studied  for  up  to  6  months  and  has  not  been  shown  to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal or other form of cancer or the need for surgery. Therefore, the usual care of FAP patients should not be altered because of the concurrent administration of celecoxib.  In particular, the frequency of routine endoscopic surveillance should not be decreased and FAP-related surgery should not be delayed. Since the prospective analysis was limited to 6  months, careful post-marketing surveillance will be required and the Applicant has committed to provide further longer-term safety and efficacy data for Onsenal as part of a post-marketing programme. Clinical safety Patient exposure In addition to the pivotal phase II study including 83 FAP patients, further safety data were derived from studies in the OA/RA indication at 400 mg BID and from the post-marketing setting including the most recent Periodic Safety Update Reports (PSURs). Overall 615 patients received celecoxib at the recommended dose for the FAP indication in the 4 placebo-controlled arthritis studies for duration of 4 or 12 weeks. There is supportive data from an open-label long-term safety study in 1630 patients with OA or RA and the class study including 3987 patients with OA or RA (see discussion below). Adverse events and serious adverse events/ deaths FAP: In the pivotal phase II study in FAP patients, 79 (95%) of the 83 patients receiving at least one dose of the  study  drug  reported  one  or  more  treatment-emergent  adverse  events  during  the  study.  Adverse events were reported by 16 (94%) of the patients receiving placebo; 32 (94%) of the patients receiving celecoxib 100 mg BID; and 31 (97%) of the patients receiving celecoxib 400 mg BID. Both doses of celecoxib were well tolerated as compared to placebo. The most commonly reported adverse events were diarrhoea, dyspepsia, fatigue, blood per rectum (rectal spotting), upper respiratory infection and rash (see table below). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Adverse event    | Placebo (n=17)   | Celecoxib 100 mg BID (n=34)   | Celecoxib 400 mg BID (n=32)   |
|------------------|------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Diarrhea         | 6 (35.3%)        | 11 (32.4%)                    | 14 (43.8%)                    |
| Dyspepsia*       | 5 (29.4%)        | 9 (26.5%)                     | 11 (34.4%)                    |
| Fatigue          | 8 (47.1%)        | 6 (17.6%)                     | 10 (31.3%)                    |
| Blood Per Rectum | 2 (11.8%)        | 3 ( 8.8%)                     | 10 (31.3%)                    |
| URTI             | 6 (35.3%)        | 13 (38.2%)                    | 9 (28.1%)                     |
| Rash             | 3 (17.6%)        | 1 (2.9%)                      | 9 (28.1%)                     |

In  this  multicentre,  double-blind  study  3987  patients  received  celecoxib  and  almost  2000  patients received each NSAID comparator, making up a total of 8059 patients. All patients were provided an opportunity  to  complete  a  minimum  of  6  months  of  treatment.  The  planned  analysis  of  the  entire cohort at 6 months showed a lower incidence of combined clinical upper GI events for celecoxib than the  comparator  NSAIDs.  The analysis for the entire  study  period  showed  that  the  safety  difference between celecoxib and pooled NSAIDs for 'clinically significant upper gastrointestinal events' was not statistically significant, while considering the combined end point of 'clinically significant upper

* All patients with negative endoscopy at end of study Overall, the types of side effects of celecoxib reported in the FAP population were similar to those observed in  the  arthritis  population.  Intestinal  surgical  anastomotic  ulceration  was  the  only  adverse event  reported  by  celecoxib-treated  patients  in  the  FAP  trial  that  was  not  reported  in  the  arthritis studies. This was observed in 3 of 58 patients who had prior intestinal surgery before entering the FAP study.  Pre-existing  ulcers  localised  to  the  ileal  anastomosis  worsened  in  two  patients  and  had developed in a third patient at the end of study; all were on celecoxib. Patients  on  celecoxib  400  mg  BID  reported  blood  per  rectum  more  frequently  than  those  in  the placebo group (P=0.175). However, a thorough analysis of these patients revealed no association to treatment  or  several  other  factors  and  concluded  that  the  bleedings  were  neither  statistically  nor clinically significant when compared with the placebo group. 22% of the patients reported previous rectal  spotting  upon  entering  the  study.  One  patient  on  celecoxib  100  mg  BID  experienced  severe anaemia  and  haemoglobin  decreased  by  at  least  1  g/dL  in  approximately  10%  of  patients  in  each treatment group. The upper gastrointestinal endoscopies performed at baseline and at the final visit revealed no cases of gastritis, inflammation or ulceration. Three  patients  experienced  severe  adverse  events.  One  patient  with  known  psychiatric  illness committed suicide, one had an elective resection  of pre-existing angiofibroma and continued in the study,  and  one  experienced  an  allergic  reaction  to  celecoxib  in  the  form  of  a  bronchospasm  treated with oral medication. There were no statistically significant changes in  health-related quality of life in patients  with FAP who had been treated for 6 months with either celecoxib 100 mg BID or celecoxib 400 mg BID when compared to those treated with placebo. OA/RA: The following reactions were commonly observed (&gt;1%) in arthritis patients receiving celecoxib in clinical trials: Cardiac  disorders:  peripheral  oedema;  Renal  and  urinary  disorders:  fluid  retention;  Gastrointestinal disorders: abdominal pain, diarrhoea, dyspepsia, flatulence; Nervous system disorders: dizziness; Psychiatric disorders: insomnia; Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders: pharyngitis, rhinitis, sinusitis, upper respiratory tract infection; Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: rash. The  CLASS  study  combined  two  arthritis  protocols  which  compared  the  incidence  of  'clinically significant  upper  gastrointestinal  events'  (e.g.  perforation,  gastric  outlet  obstruction,  and  bleeding), and 'gastroduodenal ulcers' associated with celecoxib 400 mg BID to those associated with ibuprofen 800 mg TID and diclofenac 75 mg BID in patients with RA or OA. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

gastrointestinal events' and 'gastroduodenal ulcers', an improved safety profile of celecoxib was seen and the difference between celecoxib and pooled NSAIDs became statistically significant (1.85% vs. 2.81%). The CLASS study showed no difference in the incidence of overall cardiovascular events and no  difference  in  the  rate  of  myocardial  infarction  among  treatment  groups.  In  the  CLASS  study celecoxib 400 mg BID was associated with a lower rate of chronic GI blood loss causing anemia, and GI adverse events than diclofenac and ibuprofen administered at conventional doses for OA and RA.

<!-- image -->

Adverse events were reported by 4445 patients (86%) and were considered to be attributable to the study  drug  in  420  patients  (8%).  The  most  common  adverse  events  were  upper  respiratory  tract infections  (22%),  headache  (18%),  dyspepsia  (13%),  sinusitis  (13%),  accidental  injury  (12%), diarrhoea  (10%),  abdominal  pain  (8%),  nausea  (7%),  bronchitis  (7%),  back  pain  (7%),  peripheral oedema (6%), dizziness (6%), coughing (6%), influenza like symptoms (5%), insomnia (5%) urinary tract  infection  (5%),  and  rhinitis  (5%).  During  the  entire  study period  666  patients  (13%)  withdrew

<!-- image -->

The  most  common  adverse  events  observed  in  the  CLASS  study  were  dyspepsia  (17%),  upper respiratory tract infection (15%), headache (14%), abdominal pain (12%), and diarrhoea (11%). The majority of events occurred within the first 3 months of treatment and the events occurring later were similar in character to those occurring early. A gastrointestinal adverse event was encountered by 46% of the patients and 12% of participating patients withdrew due to gastrointestinal adverse event, i.e. 26% of patients experiencing a gastrointestinal adverse event withdrew as a result. A rash was seen in 247 patients (6%) causing withdrawal in 85 (2%) and pruritus occurred in 97 (2%) causing withdrawal in 29 (1%). A risk factor analysis identified for celecoxib was advanced age (&gt;75 years), history of cardiovascular disease and low dose aspirin use but not a history of upper gastrointestinal bleeding or ulcer. The  major  serious adverse events observed  in the  CLASS  study  were  cardiac  events  (79), gastrointestinal (13), infection (22) and syncope (5). Nineteen deaths (cardiac 11, infection 3) occurred during or after the study, none of which resulted from a gastrointestinal cause or were judged to be related to the use of celecoxib. A small decrease was noted in platelet count and was not seen in the other NSAID arms of the study. Neither  ferritin,  haemoglobin  nor  haematocrit  decreased.  Creatinine  levels  increased  slightly.  A decrease  of  haemoglobin  in  excess  of  2  g/dL  and/or  a  drop  in  haematocrit  of  0.10  or  more  was registered  in  87  patients  (2.4%)  of  which  50  completed  the  study  and  12  withdrew  due  to gastrointestinal disease. Post marketing experience Since its  first  market  launch  in  December  1998,  an extensive  number  of  patients  have  been treated with celecoxib for arthritis outside of clinical trials. An assessment of the safety profile must therefore consider also the spontaneous reports by health professionals or health authorities, or from medical literature, as presented in the Periodic Safety Update Report (PSUR). Post marketing surveillance Study N49-01-06-024 was an open label multicenter study of the long-term safety of celecoxib. A total of 5157 patients with osteoarthrosis (2920) or rheumatoid arthritis (2237) originally included in double blind studies of celecoxib entered the study and 2660 completed it. The mean age was 59 years with a range of 21-90 years. The mean weight was 80 kg for females and 93 kg for males. The initial dose of celecoxib of  100  and  200  mg  BID,  respectively,  could  be  increased  or  decreased  as  necessary  to  a maximum of 200 and 400 mg BID in patients with osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, respectively. Almost  none  of  the  patients  with  osteoarthritis  were  given  the  400  mg  BID  dose  while  half  with rheumatoid  arthritis  received  400  mg  BID  for  shorter  or  longer  periods  of  time  giving  a  total  of 1436 patient years exposure. Participants were evaluated at least every 3 months. A subset of patients (1620)  continued  in  the  study  after  a  protocol  amendment  had  terminated  data  capture  with  the exception of severe adverse events at 24 months. Duration of treatment included exposure time in the primary randomised studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

due to adverse events. A total of 210 patients (4%) withdrew due to gastrointestinal adverse events including  abdominal  pain,  dyspepsia,  gastroduodenal  ulcers,  diarrhoea,  and  nausea.  Rash  led  to withdrawal of 33 patients (&lt;1%).

A total of 685 patients (13%) reported 974 serious adverse events. The rate of events per 100 patient years  was  10%  without  significant  differences  between  dosages.  When  stated  as  incidence  as percentage of 100 patient years the most common serious adverse events were related to the body as a whole (1.4%; back pain: 0.5%), gastrointestinal tract (1.3%), ischemic cardiac disorders (1.2%), and respiratory disease (0.9%; pneumonia: 0.4%). Twenty-nine out of a total of 41 deaths occurred in or within 28 days of discontinuation of treatment. None  of  the  deaths  were  considered  to  be  related  to  celecoxib.  There  were  22  deaths  from cardiovascular causes, 6 from neoplasms and 5 due to serious infectious diseases. Periodic Safety Update Reports In  the  latest  PSUR,  the  cumulative  patient  exposure  is  estimated  from  the  sales  volume.  Since December 1998, 21.5 million patients are estimated to have been exposed to celecoxib based on an average  daily  dose  of  200  mg  and  a  6  month-treatment  period  per  patient.  From  a  qualitative  and quantitative  evaluation  of  the  current  and  previous  PSURs  it  is  considered  that  overall  the  safety information deriving from spontaneous reports is consistent with the drug profile as characterised in the arthritis clinical trials. Reports  from  post-marketing  experience  in  patients  with  OA/RA  include  headache,  nausea  and arthralgia, also the following very rare &lt;1/10,000 and isolated reports: Allergic reactions: serious  allergic  reactions,  anaphylactic  shock,  angioedema;  Blood  and  the lymphatic system disorders: pancytopenia; Cardiac disorders: heart failure, myocardial infarction; Gastrointestinal disorders: gastrointestinal haemorrhage, acute pancreatitis; Immune system disorders: vasculitis,  myositis;  Hepato-biliary  disorders:  hepatitis,  jaundice;  Psychiatric  disorders:  confusion, hallucinations; Renal and urinary disorders: acute renal failure; Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders: bronchospasm; Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: isolated reports of skin exfoliation including: Stevens-Johnson syndrome, epidermal necrolysis, erythema multiforme. The last periodic safety update covers January through June 2001. During this period the sales were 922.000.000 200 mg capsules and 203.000.000 100 mg capsules. The number of patients exposed was calculated  assuming  an  exposure  of  6  months  per  patient.  Approximately  15.000  patients  were exposed in clinical trials. With  regard  to  spontaneous  reports  no  new  safety  concerns  were  identified.  The  most  frequently reported events were dermatitis (384), rash (201), gastrointestinal haemorrhage (236), abdominal pain (182),  oedema  (169),  pruritus  (165),  urticaria  (154),  hypersensitivity  (118),  diarrhoea  (112).  All  of these reactions are already listed in the SPC. Serious  adverse  event  reported  during  clinical  trials  were  planned  surgery  (73),  malignancies  (66), gastrointestinal bleeds (51), myocardial infarction (42), arthritis (41), back pain (32), abdominal pain (31), accidental injury (29), cerebral vascular disorders (28), and cardiac failure (26). These events are either listed in the SPC or frequently occurring in the patient population treated. No new interactions were identified. Discussion on clinical safety Medicinal product no longer authorised

Safety  data  in  patients  with  FAP  are  limited.  The  only  pivotal  clinical  trial  which  is  part  of  the submitted documentation does not allow for any firm conclusions with reference to safety of celecoxib 400 mg BID in patients with FAP. Observation time is very short in comparison with the anticipated life-long treatment of patients with FAP. The small sample size is insufficient to draw any conclusion and to allow for a proper assessment of differences with reference to serious adverse events between celecoxib and placebo and to gastrointestinal safety. Generally, celecoxib was well tolerated in FAP patients  and  neither  incidence  nor  character  of  adverse  events  differed  statistically  significantly between placebo and celecoxib groups.  However, the observations of intestinal anastomotic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

ulcerations  are  worrying  and  together  with  the  trend  towards  more  frequent  episodes  of  blood  per rectum in patients on celecoxib 400 mg BID they raise concern. Although a thorough analysis of the available safety data has been performed, long-term safety with the high dosage in the intended target population has not been proven and treatment should probably be discontinued for a considerable time in relation to surgery.

As with other medicinal products known to inhibit prostaglandin synthesis, fluid retention and oedema have been observed in patients taking celecoxib. Therefore, celecoxib should be used with caution in patients  with  history  of  cardiac  failure,  left  ventricular  dysfunction  or  hypertension,  and  in  patients with  pre-existing  oedema  from  any  other  reason,  since  prostaglandin  inhibition  may  result  in deterioration of renal function and fluid retention. Caution is also required in patients taking diuretic treatment or otherwise at risk of hypovolaemia.

Safety  data  from  studies  in  patients  with  other  conditions  than  FAP  are  submitted  as  supportive evidence. In two large safety studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis, 3987 and 5157 patients, respectively, received celecoxib in doses of up to 400 mg BID for up to 30 months. The data  from  these  studies  indicate  that  the  use  of  high  doses  of  celecoxib  is  associated  with  definite adverse events but no new safety issues were detected. There is no evidence of cumulative toxicity with prolonged use. Celecoxib does induce injury in gastrointestinal tract and increase the incidence of blood per rectum. Compared with the FAP patients these data relate to a much older population with more risk factors. In this respect the results are reassuring. Furthermore,  in  order  to  further  support  long-term  safety,  the  applicant  provided  a  complementary analysis presented as a cohort, age-matched to the FAP cohort. The new analysis was performed at 90day  intervals  and  shows  an  absence  of  cumulative  GI  and  CV  risk  in  patients  receiving  celecoxib 400 mg BD for up to one year. However, these data are in arthritis patients and may not be directly comparable to FAP patients. In addition, the applicant confirms that two separate, independent Data Safety Monitoring Boards in their review of ongoing placebo-controlled trials of celecoxib in patients with SAP reported no safety concerns after 1 year. This provides additional supportive evidence for the long-term safety of Onsenal. Because of the limited number of patients with FAP, long-term data in a large population of FAP patients cannot be expected. Given the risk setting for FAP disease, the growing evidence of long-term safety in arthritis and SAP patients provides support for a similar risk profile in FAP patients at 400 mg BD. No useful information derives on the other hand from the age stratification related to patients &lt;56 years not on aspirin. The  reported  incidence  of  anastomotic  ulcerations  in  the  FAP-001  trial  (5.2%)  is  similar  to  that reported at St. Mark's hospital during routine surveillance (6.4%). These data are reassuring, even if it is not known how many of these patients did in fact receive NSAIDs. However, in view of the fact that all surgical patients are given NSAIDs postsurgery when their anastomoses are most vulnerable this issue can be considered resolved as far as the FAP study is concerned. Furthermore, photographs of anastomatic  ulcerations  presented  by  the  applicant  indicate  that  these  lesions  are  minor  and  do  not appear to be clinically significant. However,  caution  should  be  observed  in  patients  with  a  history  of  gastrointestinal  ulceration  and related  inflammatory  conditions  or  in  patients  at  special  risk.  Most  spontaneous  reports  of  fatal gastrointestinal events have been in elderly or debilitated patients. If an anastomotic ulcer is present, patients should not receive concomitant treatment with anticoagulants or acetyl salicylic acid. In  general  the  drug  appears  safe  and  well  tolerated,  but  the  claimed  superiority  as  compared  to conventional NSAIDs remains to be established, at least with the proposed doses. Celecoxib at 400 mg BID has not been shown to be significantly better than conventional NSAIDs in terms of serious upper gastrointestinal (GI) complications. The authors of the CLASS study conclude that celecoxib at supratherapeutic dosages was associated with a lower incidence of symptomatic ulcers and ulcer complications than the comparator NSAIDs given at standard dosages. However, even though the combined incidence of symptomatic ulcers or POBs  associated  with  celecoxib  was  significantly  lower  than  with  the  comparator  drugs,  careful examination of the data shows that the rate of ulcer complications alone, the primary end point of the study, was not. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the event of elderly patients with mild to moderate cardiac dysfunction requiring therapy, special care and follow up is warranted.

In patients on concurrent therapy with warfarin or similar agents, serious bleeding events have been reported.  Because  increases  in  prothrombin  time  (INR)  have  been  reported,  anticoagulant  activity should be monitored after initiating treatment with celecoxib or changing the dose.

Familial  Adenomatous  Polyposis  (FAP)  is  a  genetic  disease  resulting  from  an  autosomal  dominant genetic  alteration  of  a  tumor  suppressor  gene,  the  adenomatous  polyposis  coli  (APC)  gene.  Polyps with  the  APC  mutation  overexpress  COX-2  and  left  untreated,  these  polyps  continue  to  form  and enlarge in the colon or rectum resulting in essentially a 100% chance of developing colorectal cancer. Celecoxib is an orally active selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2).

Experience with celecoxib in patients with mild or moderate renal or hepatic impairment is limited, therefore such patients should be treated with caution. The  safety  issues  identified  have  been  appropriately  addressed  in  the  SPC  and  Package  Leaflet. However, since the prospective analysis was limited to 6 months, careful post-marketing surveillance will be required and the Applicant has committed to provide further longer-term safety and efficacy data for Onsenal as part of a post-marketing programme. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of the product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. There are no unresolved quality issues, which have a negative impact on the Benefit/Risk balance of the product. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology The  pharmacodynamic  rationale  for  celecoxib  in  FAP  is  its  COX-2  inhibitor  effect,  possibly  its molecular configuration independently of its COX-2 inhibition, or perhaps a combination of the two. For  the  pharmacodynamic  evaluation  of  the  effect  of  celcecoxib  related  to  treatment  of  FAP,  a chemical (AOM-induced ACF model) and a genetic (Apc Min-mouse model) rodent model were used. These  cancer  models  involve  tumour  types  that  are  known  to  express  COX-2  and  are  sensitive  to conventional NSAIDs. Celecoxib was shown to reduce the tumour burden in the Min mouse and the AOM  rat  models  in  a  dose-dependant  manner,  in  particular  in  the  middle  (jejunum,  ileum  (Min mouse)) and distal (colon (AOM rat)) parts of the intestine. However, these results do not support an extrapolation  of  the  possible  clinical  effect  on  polyps  in  the  colon  and  other  intestinal  segments expressing COX-2 to the rest of the gastrointestinal tract e.g. the duodenum. The  preclinical  safety  profile  of  celecoxib  does  not  differ  significantly  from  the  earlier  approved indications  of  osteoarthritis  and  rheumatoid  arthritis,  i.e.  gastrointestinal  toxicity  and  associated secondary  toxicity.  No  main  adverse  findings  were  observed  in  safety  pharmacology  studies,  but exposures were low. The  results  of  rat  and  rabbit  teratology  studies  suggest  that  Celecoxib  acts  as  a  teratogen  in  both species  without  any  treatment-related  clinical  sign  or  change  in  body  weight  of  dams.  The  induced diaphragmatic hernia is the same phenotype as occurred spontaneously in maternal animal, suggesting the presence of a genetic susceptibility background. Celecoxib  is  contraindicated  in  pregnancy,  in  women  who  can  become  pregnant  unless  using  an effective method of contraception and in breast-feeding and this is sufficiently covered by the SPC and Package Leaflet. Efficacy Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Experimental  evidence  shows  that  the  mechanism(s)  of  action  by  which  celecoxib  leads  to  tumour death  may be related to induction of apoptosis and inhibition of angiogenesis. Inhibition of COX-2 may have consequences on tumour viability that are unrelated to inflammation.

Celecoxib  has  been  shown  to  reduce  the  number  and  size  of  adenomatous  colorectal  polyps.  A randomized double-blind placebo controlled study was conducted in 83 patients with FAP. The study population included 58 patients with a prior subtotal or total colectomy and 25 patients with an intact colon.  Thirteen  patients  had  the  attenuated  FAP  phenotype.  The  mean  reduction  in  the  number  of colorectal polyps following six months of treatment was 28% (SD + 24%) for celecoxib 400 mg BID which was statistically superior to placebo (mean 5%, SD +16%) for placebo (p=0.003). The reduction in polyps observed with celecoxib 400 mg BID was statistically superior to placebo at the six-month time point.

A reduction in duodenal adenoma area was also observed compared with placebo (14.5% celecoxib 400 mg BID versus 1.4% placebo), which however was not statistically significant. Surgery could be an aggravating factor and the usefulness of a pharmacological tool should be taken in consideration in this subset of severely ill patients. Whether long-term treatment with celecoxib may allow  for  a  delay  in  colon  surgery  and  possibly  a  reduction  in  the  life-long  risk  of  cancer  in  FAP patients  remains  to  be  established.  The  primary  end-point  of  the  pivotal  efficacy  study  was  the  % reduction in colorectal polyp numbers. The approved indication is therefore ' for the reduction of the number of adenomatous intestinal polyps in Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), as an adjunct to surgery and further endoscopic surveillance. The effect of Onsenal-induced reduction of polyp burden on the risk of intestinal cancer has not been demonstrated. ' Treatment  with  celecoxib  in  FAP  has  been  studied  for  up  to  6  months  and  has  not  been  shown  to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal or other form of cancer or the need for surgery. The usual care of FAP  patients  should  not  be  altered  because  of  the  concurrent  administration  of  celecoxib.    In particular, the frequency of routine endoscopic surveillance should not be decreased and FAP-related surgery should not be delayed. Careful post-marketing surveillance will be required and the Applicant has committed to provide further longer-term safety and efficacy data for Onsenal as part of a postmarketing programme. Safety Safety  data  in  patients  with  FAP  are  limited.  The  only  pivotal  clinical  trial  which  is  part  of  the submitted documentation does not allow for any firm conclusions with reference to safety of celecoxib 400 mg BID in patients with FAP. Observation time is very short in comparison with the anticipated life-long treatment of patients with FAP. The small sample size is insufficient to conclude on potential differences  in  the  frequency  of  serious  adverse  events  between  celecoxib  and  placebo  and  on gastrointestinal safety. Generally, celecoxib was well tolerated in FAP patients and neither incidence nor character of adverse events  differed  statistically  significantly  between  placebo  and  celecoxib  groups.  However,  the observations  of  intestinal  anastomotic  ulcerations  are  worrying  and  together  with  the  trend  towards more frequent episodes of blood per rectum in patients on celecoxib 400 mg BID they raise concern. Although a thorough analysis of the available safety data has been performed, long-term safety with the high dosage in the intended target population has not been proven and treatment should probably be discontinued for a considerable time in relation to surgery. In  general  the  drug  appears  safe  and  well  tolerated,  but  the  claimed  superiority  as  compared  to conventional NSAIDs remains to be established, at least with the proposed doses. Celecoxib at 400 mg BID has not been shown to be significantly better than conventional NSAIDs in terms of serious upper gastrointestinal (GI) complications. The  safety  issues  identified  have  been  appropriately  addressed  in  the  SPC  and  Package  Leaflet. However, since the prospective analysis was limited to 6 months, careful post-marketing surveillance will be required and the Applicant has committed to provide further longer-term safety and efficacy data for Onsenal as part of a post-marketing programme. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Benefit/risk assessment

Following the assessment of the supplementary documentation provided by the Applicant, a number of key issues regarding clinical aspects of Onsenal treatment were identified that needed to be addressed at an Oral Explanation before the CPMP:

1. The clinical relevance of the set of submitted data remains controversial and should be further addressed by the Applicant with reference to the predictive value of a reduced number of polyps (primary endpoint of the pivotal trial) for the risk of rectal and duodenal cancer. 2. Polyp regression during COX-2 inhibitor therapy is unlikely to be a random phenomenon.  It is therefore  foreseen  that  selection  of  resistant  polyps  will  occur.    This  view  appears  to  be supported by the results of the long-term prophylaxis study by Giardiello et al. (NEJM 2002) and their treatment study (NEJM 1993) where there seems to be a loss of activity over time. The Applicant is therefore requested to discuss whether there are any non-clinical  or clinical data addressing the risk for cancer development in polyps showing a COX-2 resistant phenotype compared with sensitive polyps. 3. In  spite  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  Applicant,  the  quality  of  data  is  not  fully  satisfying.  The Applicant should further address the lack of data on intra-observer variation as well as the large inter-observer variation.  Risk of unblinding, especially during the duodenal assessment, should be discussed. 4. The Applicant should address the long-term safety in FAP  patients, related to both gastrointestinal complications and increased cardiovascular risk. During this hearing, the Applicant concluded that FAP patients have limited therapeutic options and an unmet medical need exists for treatments that supplement the surgical management. Unfortunately, there is no evidence to suggest that celecoxib reduces the overall risk of colon cancer in this setting. Moreover,  the  allegedly  improved  gastrointestinal  safety  of  celecoxib  400  mg  bid  vs  traditional NSAIDs was not confirmed by the CLASS trial as reflected by lack of statistical significance of the difference in the primary end-point of the study. The  Applicant  outlined  the  rationale  for  use  of  Onsenal,  stressing  that  surgery  is  the  appropriate standard of care and that Onsenal was not expected to change or replace surgical management or to eliminate cancer.  The current treatment options were reviewed and the trial aim and end points of the FAP 001 trial  described.    The  company  also  addressed,  during  the  oral  explanation,  the  long-term safety in FAP patients, the possible resistance to celecoxib and the ongoing studies to assess long-term effects of celecoxib use over time. In response to questions from the Committee, the company clarified that pharmacological intervention was  not  seen  as  the  treatment  of  choice,  but  could  be  used,  together  with  advanced  endoscopic methods,  following  primary  surgery,  thereby  possibly  delaying  the  time  to  more  radical  surgical intervention. It was also noted that studies to assess time to more aggressive surgery or to determine clinically relevant endpoints were not being considered in view of the ethical issues such studies raised (re cancer growth and possible delay in surgery).  With respect to when treatment would be stopped, it was  clarified  that  treatment  would  be  maintained  as  long  as  there  was  a  continuous  depression  in polyps but would be stopped in the event of an increase in polyp number. The  CPMP  considered  that  Onsenal  might  be  of  benefit  in  patients  who  had  already  undergone primary surgery and with residual disease and who are treated at specialised centres. While Onsenal was not seen as a substitute for surgical intervention and the impact of the treatment on cancer risk and on the need and timing of secondary surgical intervention was unknown, the product did appear to be of benefit to a proportion of patients in reducing polyp burden. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Treatment  with  celecoxib  in  FAP  has  been  studied  for  up  to  6  months  and  has  not  been  shown  to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal or other form of cancer or the need for surgery. Therefore, the usual care of FAP patients should not be altered because of the concurrent administration of celecoxib.  In

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

particular, the frequency of routine endoscopic surveillance should not be decreased and FAP-related surgery should not be delayed.

Following the review of the submitted documentation, the responses provided at the oral hearing and the proposed SPC and letter of undertaking, the CPMP agreed that further long-term data was needed to support the efficacy and safety of the product.

-

-

-

- 2/ If the answer to any aspect of the first question is no, would an alternative study design be more appropriate?

<!-- image -->

In  the  pivotal  trial  submitted  in  support  of  the  marketing  authorisation  application  for  Onsenal, celecoxib 400 mg BID was shown to induce a reduction in polyp number; colorectal polyp number was  decreased  by  28.05  from  baseline,  a  change  that  was  statistically  significant  (p=0.003)  when compared  to  the  change  in  polyp  number  in  patients  receiving  placebo.  However,  the  clinical relevance of such a decrease in polyp number was unclear. Therefore the CPMP asked the applicant, to provide a preliminary protocol of a prospective confirmatory controlled trial with reference to the efficacy and safety of Onsenal with clinically 'hard' endpoints. The applicant should also show that such a protocol is feasible. In  response  to  the  CPMP  request,  the  applicant  proposed  to  conduct  an  observational,  historically controlled FAP registry study designed to gather data on the long-term use and safety of Onsenal in current clinical practice and to assess the impact of its use on endoscopic surveillance and FAP-related outcomes. A number of issues were identified with reference to the proposed study that needed further discussion at a CPMP ad hoc Expert meeting: 1/ In the view of the experts, would the applicant's proposed protocol of a historically controlled registry study be adequate to provide useful information regarding the clinical relevance of the demonstrated reduction in polyp number? In particular, would it be possible, through this study, to evaluate 'hard' efficacy endpoints such as: · Prolongation of the time to FAP-related surgical events; · Prolongation of the time to FAP-related adverse events, defined as time to the first of any of FAP-related  cancers,  desmoid  tumors  requiring  procedural  intervention,  symptoms  related  to FAP that require hospitalisation/ procedural intervention, or death related to FAP. Furthermore,  would  the  proposed  study  be  adequate  to  optimise  the  collection  of  long-term safety data? The conclusions of the Experts were: No, the proposed registry study would not gather useful efficacy results for the following reasons: -Open design without randomisation. -Problems associated with the use of historical controls. -Definition of endpoints. -Room for introduction of biases due to the proposed study design. Influence of rectal bleeding on performance of polypectomy. Relevance of population to be studied. Lack  of  power  to  detect  statistically  significant  differences  between  recruited  patients  and historical controls. As a result the proposed study would yield uninterpretable efficacy results. However,  in  terms  of  safety  the  group  agreed  that  the  proposed  study  could  provide  some  useful information provided that a number of improvements were made to the protocol. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## The conclusions of the Experts were:

The group did not identify any plausible alternative design for a feasible study that would address the concerns of the CPMP, apart from a classical randomised controlled clinical trial design with a very long  duration.  Only  such  a  study  design  would  generate  interpretable  results.  Ideally,  such  a  study should be applied within the subset of the population that has already gone through colon resection with  sufficient  statistical  power  to  detect  the  endpoints  chosen.  However,  such  a  study  would  be impossible within acceptable timeframes. Furthermore, it was acknowledged that the wide off-label use of celecoxib might also further affect the feasibility of a randomised controlled clinical trial.

<!-- image -->

The  Applicant  addressed  issues  previously  defined  by  the  CPMP  related  to  the  feasability  of  the proposed protocol and the potential efficacy and safety data that the study might generate at an oral hearing during the CPMP ad hoc expert meeting and at an oral hearing before the CPMP. Following the review of all the submitted documentation, the responses provided at the oral hearings and the final SPC and final letter of undertaking, the CPMP agreed there is an unmet medical need for additional therapeutic tools in the management of patients with FAP. The committee considered that Onsenal  has  shown  efficacy  that  is  encouraging  and  may  be  clinically  relevant  and  that  allows  a conclusion on an acceptable benefit/risk despite the limited efficacy and safety data available. The CPMP concluded that a marketing authorisation for Onsenal will be granted under exceptional circumstances,  subject  to  fulfilling  the  quality  follow-up  measure  and  clinical  specific  obligation undertaken by the Applicant. The indication for which the medicinal product in question is intended is encountered so rarely that the Applicant cannot reasonably be expected to provide comprehensive data on the safety and efficacy of the medicinal product. In order to collect additional data, the applicant has  committed  to  complete  a  clinical  study  post-authorisation  within  pre-specified  time  frames,  the results of which shall form the basis of an annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile: Clinical aspects: The Company commits to undertake a registry-based observational study to generate further efficacy and safety data. The study will be initiated within 1Q2004, with analysis of historical controls and registration of new patients receiving celecoxib in the study. In Europe the study will start once the product is available, post-registration. Reports on recruitment and progress of the study will be provided on a biannual basis in line with submission of PSURs. The final study report will be submitted in 3 Q 2009. Recommendation 'Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by majority decision  that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Onsenal  for  ' the  reduction  of  the  number  of  adenomatous intestinal  polyps  in  familial  adenomatous  polyposis  (FAP),  as  an  adjunct  to  surgery  and  further endoscopic surveillance (See SPC section 4.4). The effect of Onsenal-induced reduction of polyp burden on the risk of intestinal cancer has not been demonstrated  (See  SPC  sections  4.4  and  5.1) ',  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the granting of the marketing authorisation under exceptional circumstances . Post-marketing experience Safety issues assessed through an Article 31 referral procedure started in July 2002. Medicinal product no longer authorised

6.

Further to a request from France, the CPMP, during its meeting held from 23 to 25 July 2002 decided to  start  a  referral  procedure  under  Article  31  of  Directive  2001/83/EC  as  amended,  for  medicinal products  containing  celecoxib,  etoricoxib,  parecoxib,  rofecoxib  and  valdecoxib.  The  questions identified  related  to  gastrointestinal  and  cardiovascular  safety.  In  October  2002,  the  CPMP  asked additional questions relating to serious hypersensitivity reactions (anaphylaxis and angioedema) and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

serious  skin  reactions  including  Stevens-Johnson  syndrome,  toxic  epidermal  necrolysis,  erythema multiforme and exfoliative dermatitis in patients treated with COX-2 inhibitors.

The conclusions for for medicinal products containing celecoxib are as follows:

· Gastrointestinal toxicity Available  data  indicated  that  significant  and  consistent  gastrointestinal  benefit  of  COX-2  inhibitors compared  with  conventional  NSAIDs  has  not  been  demonstrated.  The  clinical  data  provided specifically  for  celecoxib  were  consistent  with  a  GI  benefit  compared  with  naproxen.  GI  safety concerning complicated ulcers was similar to ibuprofen and diclofenac. Therefore,  a  general  statement  has  been  added  in  section  4.4  'Special  warnings  and  special precautions  for  use'  and  5.1  'Pharmacodynamic  properties'  of  the  SPC  for  all  COX-2  inhibitors relating to patients at risk of developing gastrointestinal complications with NSAIDs. It  is  unknown  whether  the  gastrointestinal  toxicity  profile  of  COX-2  inhibitors  in  association  with acetylsalicylic acid is inferior to conventional NSAIDs given with acetylsalicylic acid but there is no evidence  to  suggest  it  would  be  superior.    Based  on  the  current  data  on  celecoxib  require  that  the product information should be updated to include the potential for increase in gastrointestinal toxicity compared with COX-2 inhibitors or acetylsalicylic acid alone. Further  to  discussions  and  considering  the  assessment  of  the  data  presented  for  all  the  COX-2 inhibitors,  the  section  4.4  'Special  warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use'  of  the  SPC  has  been updated  regarding  concomitant  use  of  all  COX-2  inhibitors  with  a  general  statement  on  COX-2 inhibitors and acetylsalicylic acid association. · Cardiovascular toxicity The  available  pre-clinical  data  raised  concern  about  cardiovascular  (CV)  safety,  in  particular myocardial infarction (MI), however, conflicting results have often been obtained. The difference in antiplatelet activity between some COX-1 inhibiting NSAIDs and COX-2 selective inhibitors may be of clinical significance in patients at risk of thrombo-embolic reactions. It can be considered that there is a trend towards a higher MI risk associated with the use of celecoxib compared to naproxen and diclofenac.  In contrast to COX-1 inhibiting NSAIDs, COX-2 inhibitors, including celecoxib, have no anti-platelet effects in therapeutic doses.  With respect to CV risk, it can be  considered  that  there  may  be  a  small  safety  disadvantage  of  COX-2  inhibitors  compared  to conventional  NSAIDs.    Therefore,  the  SPC  has  been  updated  for  all  COX-2  inhibitors,  including celecoxib, in its section 4.4 'Special warnings and special precautions for use' by adding a warning statement  for  patients  with  a  medical  history  of  cardiovascular  disease  or  those  using  low  dose  of ASA-treatment for prophylaxis of cardiovascular thrombo-embolic diseases. · Hypersensitivity and serious skin reactions When celecoxib was compared to NSAIDs, especially to diclofenac, the incidence of skin reactions, especially  of  rash,  was  significantly  higher  in  MAA  Trial,  CLASS  and  SUCCESS.  Results  from clinical  trials  give  reason  for  the  conclusion  that  celecoxib-treated  patients  are  at  higher  risk  for developing rash than diclofenac-treated patients and possibly also at higher risk of developing urticaria than patients treated with other NSAIDs. Spontaneous  reports  of  hypersensitivity  reactions  (anaphylaxis/angioedema)  were  not  very  frequent for celecoxib. Because of the lack of relevant information no further statement on possible risk factors for the development of angioedema/anaphylaxis in celecoxib-treated patients can be met. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Furthermore, single cases of serious cutaneous adverse reactions, i.e., Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis have been reported for celecoxib. The absolute numbers and estimates for frequency  suggest  that  these  adverse  reactions  occur  very  rarely  and  frequency  seems  not  to  be different from conventional NSAIDs.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  statement  in  section  4.4  'Special  warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use'  relating  to hypersensitivity  and  serious  skin  reactions  with  Onsenal  was  already  in  line  with  these  adopted conclusions resulting of this referral procedure. Therefore, no update was requested at this stage.

## · Conclusion

<!-- image -->

Further  to  the  finalisation  of  the  referral  procedure  under  Article  31  of  Directive  2001/83/EC  as amended, for medicinal products containing celecoxib, etoricoxib, parecoxib, rofecoxib and valdecoxib, gastrointestinal and cardiovascular data have been updated in the SPC and in the PL for Onsenal: -to  promote  the  safe  use  of  Onsenal  by  adding  or  strengthening  warnings,  in  particular recommending caution for patients with underlying gastrointestinal and cardiovascular risks, -to include the potential for increase in gastrointestinal toxicity compared with COX-2 inhibitors or acetylsalicylic acid alone, -to add a warning statement for patients with a medical history of cardiovascular disease or those using low dose of ASA-treatment for prophylaxis of cardiovascular thrombo-embolic diseases. Medicinal product no longer authorised