---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:17:22
document_pages: 31
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/optaflu-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: optaflu-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 18.7825307
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-30 08:43:31.097121
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 1. Introduction

Annual  influenza  epidemics  are  associated  with  substantial  morbidity  and  mortality,  especially  in elderly and in those with underlying diseases. Although in healthy adults clinical influenza infections generally have an uncomplicated course, it may have a substantial economic impact, e.g. due to days lost from work.

The main objective of influenza vaccination in elderly is reducing the number of deaths caused by influenza  infections.  In  younger  populations,  influenza  associated  morbidity  is  more  important  than mortality risk, especially in those at good health. In children, adults and elderly, vaccination against influenza  is  recommended  as  a  single  injection  containing  of  each  of  the  three  components  of  the trivalent vaccine (i.e. the A/H3N2, A/H1N1 and B strain). The selection of the A and B influenza virus strains for the vaccines is based on the annual WHO and Committee for Human Medicinal Products (CHMP) strain recommendations. These viruses are the predominant strains most appropriate to the epidemiological situation in each hemisphere. Antibody development may start as early as one week following vaccination, but peak antibody responses are observed after approximately 4-6 weeks. Since their development, inactivated influenza vaccines have been produced in the allantoic cavity of embryonated hen eggs. However, the efficiency of the method is low, requiring one or more eggs for each dose of the vaccine produced. The use of mammalian cell lines eliminates the reliance on the supply of embryonated eggs and generates more flexibility, adequate availability of substrate for virus growth and the possibility of higher virus yields. In addition, the cell culture-derived vaccines do not require  extensive  advance  planning  and  can,  in  principle,  be  vital  in  responding  to  the  threat  of  an emerging pandemic. Novartis  has  developed  an  influenza  vaccine  produced  in  the  mammalian  cell  line  Madin  Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK). Optaflu is an inactivated, detergent disrupted and purified product, which contains 15 µg per dose of haemagglutinin (HA) antigen from each of the three influenza virus strains Type A (H1N1), Type A (H3N2) and Type B filled up to volume (0.5 mL) with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer. The composition of the influenza strains will be the officially recommended ones by  the  appropriate  regulatory  bodies.    The  final  product  is  preservative-free,  non-adjuvanted  and presented in pre-filled syringes. The vaccine is intended for seasonal use. The approved indication is: 'Prophylaxis  of  influenza  for  adults,  especially  in  those  who  run  an  increased  risk  of  associated complications.' Immunisation should be carried out by intramuscular (IM) injection. This  was  a  complete  and  independent/stand-alone  Marketing  Authorization  Application,  i.e.  a complete  dossier  with  administrative,  quality,  pre-clinical  and  clinical  data,  in  accordance  with Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended. Accelerated  review  of  the  dossier  was  granted  by  the  CHMP  during  its  December  2005  meeting. However  since  during  the  first  round  a  major  objection  regarding  Quality  had  been  identified,  the expedited review was revoked in November 2006 and a regular timetable applied for the remainder of the procedure. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. Quality aspects

## Introduction

Novartis  has  developed  an  influenza  vaccine  produced  in  the  mammalian  cell  line  Madin  Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK). Optaflu is an inactivated, detergent disrupted and purified product, which contains 15 µg per dose of haemagglutinin antigen from each of the three influenza virus strains Type A (H1N1), Type A (H3N2) and Type B buffered with PBS buffer and filled up to a final volume of 0.5 ml.

MDCK cell substrate: The MDCK cell line was initially established from the kidney of an apparently normal,  adult,  male  cocker  spaniel  in  1958  by  S.  H.  Madin  and  N.  B.  Darby  at  the  University  of California, Berkeley (USA). Novartis' MDCK cell line has been adapted to grow in suspension under serum- free, protein-free (PF) conditions. The MDCK cell line has been passaged over 500 times from its initial establishment in culture. Early stages of passage were conducted with calf serum and/or in the  presence  of  other  animal  derived  components.  In  later  stages  of  passage  the  use  of  human  and animal derived components has been eliminated at the primary level.

The composition of the influenza strains will be the officially recommended ones by the appropriate regulatory bodies. The final product is preservative-free, non-adjuvanted and presented in pre-filled syringes. The vaccine is intended for seasonal use. Active Substance The drug substance is a sterile, cell free, monovalent bulk containing purified virus surface antigens from a single influenza strain. Each monovalent bulk is prepared from influenza virus propagated in a suspension culture adapted Madin Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cell line. The  monovalent  bulk  antigen  preparations  are  clear  to  slightly  opalescent  and  contain  mainly neuraminidase (NA) and haemagglutinin (HA) antigens. Haemagglutinin  content  must  be  at  least  90µg/mL  at  the  monobulk  stage.  The  presence  of neuraminidase is confirmed on the first three monovalent bulks for each working virus seed. Host cell impurities in the monovalent bulk are limited such that each blended trivalent contains less than 20 ng/mL (10ng/0.5 mL dose) of DNA and not more than 40µg of protein other than haemagglutinin per dose per virus strain. Monovalent bulk preparations from three distinct influenza virus strains are blended and formulated in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to produce a trivalent bulk harvest. · Manufacture Description of Manufacturing Process and Process Controls The production process of the drug substance, i.e. monovalent bulk, comprises three main steps: 1) Virus propagation in fermenter culture and virus clarification, 2) Virus purification and subunit preparation, 3) Filling monovalent bulk in storage vessel. Cell Culture and harvest Influenza  Seed  Virus:  The  reference  virus  strains  provided  by  the  WHO  Reference  Centres  are considered  the  master  virus  seed  from  which  working  seed  lots  are  prepared.  Each  reference  virus strain  obtained  from  WHO  Reference  Centres  is  propagated  and  passaged  in  MDCK  cells  to characterize its growth characteristics and to expand the incoming reference virus stock. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Cell substrate banking system: A four-tiered cell bank system represented by research seed, master, working, and end- of-production cell (EoP) banks was established. The current set of cell banks was

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

established  after  protein  free  adaptation.  Working  cell  banks  (WCB)  derived  from  a  single  MDCK master cell bank will be used for commercial production of monovalent bulk and influenza working seed virus. The WCB represents 5 passages (~ 10 population doubling levels) from the MCB. Cells used for monovalent bulk manufacturing are stored in liquid nitrogen.

## Virus propagation in fermenter culture and virus clarification

The  starting  material  for  each  monovalent  bulk  is  a  single  vial  of  the  MDCK  working  cell  bank (WCB).  The  cells  are  propagated  in  a  chemically  defined  media  to  optimize  cell  growth  during production. The WCB are expanded by sequential passage in spinner flasks followed by scale up in larger fermentation vessels. The limit of MDCK cell passage from culture initiation to virus infection is specified. Virus propagation in the fermenter is performed over a period of two to four days.

<!-- image -->

The inactivation studies performed provide a sufficient degree of safety with regard to influenza virus inactivation time and concentration of BPL. The inactivation process by BPL is followed by detergent splitting of the purified virions and separation of subunit antigens, which has been shown to be very effective in inactivation/elimination of enveloped and non-enveloped viruses.

At the end of the infection cycle the virus suspension is centrifuged and filtered to remove residual intact cells from the culture harvest. The centrifuged, filtered bulk termed clarified virus harvest, is the end of the fermentation process. The clarified virus harvest may be stored at room temperature (16- 25 °C) in a stainless steel storage vessel for up to 24 hours. Purification and filling The influenza virus is purified by chromatography and ultra-/diafiltration steps, inactivated by betapropiolactone  (BPL)  and  disrupted  by  cetyltrimethylammonium  bromide  (CTAB)  to  solubilize  the viral surface antigens HA and NA. The drug substance production process concludes with a filtration of the concentrate into the final bulk vessel  to  obtain  monovalent  bulk.  Each  monovalent  bulk  is  released  according  to  established specifications for identity, safety, purity and potency. The monovalent bulk can be stored at 2- 8 °C for 18 months. Control of Materials The  following  starting  materials  used  in  the  production  of  the  monovalent  bulk  are  of  biological origin: Influenza seed virus, MDCK cell substrate, recombinant human insulin, and porcine trypsin. In general,  sufficient  detailed  information  is  provided  on  the  control  and  source  of  these  starting materials. Controls of critical steps and intermediates In-process controls are envisaged along the cell culture and purification process. Viability, cell growth kinetics, purity and morphology are verified during expansion phase. Control cells and virus harvests have been identified as intermediates. Control cells are taken before virus inoculation to check for extraneous agents. Process validation and/or evaluation Process validation and  evaluation have  been  conducted  for the upstream  (fermentation) and downstream  (protein  purification)  processes,  BPL  inactivation  of  influenza  virus,  BPL  inactivation (hydrolysis) and removal of host cell residuals (DNA, proteins and intact cells) and column reuse and regeneration. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The  production  process  has  been  validated  to  reduce  process-related  impurities  to  acceptable  low levels. In cases where levels are more significant (in terms of quality/safety), specifications have been set.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Manufacturing process development

Basic  research  on  cell  culture  based  production  methods  and  the  first  manufacturing  runs  in  small scale fermenter systems began in 1992. Formal process development was initiated in 1995.

Material for a preclinical toxicity study in rabbits and for phase I/II clinical trial use was successfully produced in 2002 using a 100 L pilot scale manufacturing process.

The upscale from a 100 L to 2500 L fermentation process was completed in 2003. Material for clinical consistency for phase III study for the EU was successfully produced under cGMP conditions in 2004 and 2005 at the 2500 L scale which is the planned commercial scale.

Characterisation The active  pharmaceutical  ingredients  (API)  in  influenza  subunit  vaccines  are  viral  haemagglutinin (HA)  and  neuraminidase  (NA)  proteins.  Appropriate  activity  and  quantity  of  these  proteins  are generally  conducted  with  international  reference  standards  intended  for  conventional,  egg-derived antigens. The basic integrity of the vaccine antigens (HA &amp; NA) has been confirmed in preclinical and clinical efficacy trials. Detailed analysis of the antigen purity (HA/total protein, SDS-PAGE), physicochemical and biological properties of the Optaflu-derived HA protein has been conducted with an emphasis on comparative  analysis  to  egg-derived  antigens  from  the  manufacturers  other  marketed  influenza vaccines. The results of physicochemical and biological analysis of the Optaflu HA and NA proteins support  the  general  comparability  of  egg  and  MDCK-  derived  antigens  (protein  sequence,  tertiary structure, pI, and presence of N-glycosylation). Although small physico-chemical differences between the MDCK and egg derived vaccines were observed, the results from the mice immunization studies did not indicate that these differences impact the vaccine's immunogenicity. · Specification Control of Drug Substance The proposed testing protocol for the monovalent bulk complies with the Ph.Eur. monograph. Potency of  the  drug  substance  is  determined  by  the  quantification  of  the  Haemagglutinin  antigen  using  the single radial diffusion (SRD) assay, which also serves as identity test. The analytical procedures (principle, equipment, standards/solution, procedure, measurement/ evaluation) are concisely described and the validation reports provided. Haemagglutinin antigen, neuraminidase, sterility, residual infectious influenza virus, purity and total protein are determined and specified according to Ph. Eur. Polysorbate and CTAB are tested chromatographically and colorimetrically, respectively. Batch analysis The batch analysis results (three  monovalent bulks each of three virus strains: demonstrate that the monovalent bulk production process is fairly consistent as regards to HA content and process-related impurities. Container Closure System The monovalent bulk is stored in polypropylene containers. Full product specifications are provided. Information is provided by the container manufacturer on product validation, including cytotoxicity, abnormal toxicity testing, leak proof, and trace metal analysis. Results from stability studies do not raise concern as regards to container-drug substance compatibility. · Stability Medicinal product no longer authorised

All test results (up to 18 months at 2-8°C) for the 3 batches per strain of the consistency batches are well  within  specifications,  including  6  months  data  under  accelerated  conditions  at  23-27  °C.  In summary all different strains investigated so far show stability up to 18 months at 2-8 °C.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Finished Product

The vaccine is an inactivated, detergent disrupted and purified product to contain 15 µg per dose of HA  antigen  from  each  of  the  three  virus  strains.  The  final  product  is  PBS  buffered  solution, preservative-free and non-adjuvanted. It is a clear to slightly opalescent liquid for injection presented in 1 mL, type I glass (Ph. Eur.) pre-filled syringes.

Table: Composition of Optaflu

| Component                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Quantity per dose = 0.5 ml    | Reference to standards                   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Active substance:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                               |                                          |
| Influenza virus surface antigens of: • A/New Caledonia/20/99 (H1N1) like strain (Reass. IVR-116) • A/California/7/2004 (H3N2) like strain (NYMC X-157) • B/Shanghai/361/2002 like strain (B/Jiangsu/10/2003) The vaccine complies with the WHOrecommendation (northern hemisphere) and EU decision for the 2005/2006 season. | 15 µg HA* 15 µg HA* 15 µg HA* | WHO/NIBSC authorised                     |
| Excipients:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                               |                                          |
| PBS Water for injection (WFI) included in the buffer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Up to 0.5 ml                  | WFI: Ph.Eur. Buffer: International Spec. |

In  general,  MDCK cells themselves are not likely to bear any risk of transmitting TSE as they are derived from dogs, which are excluded from the European TSE note for guidance (EMEA/410/01). However, the cells have been in culture for a total of more than 500 passages since 1958 and have been exposed to human and ruminant derived media components over this period. However, neither human nor animal derived components, at the primary level, have been used as media supplements since 1996. The only secondary level component (material used to prepare media components) with animal origin is bovine milk (casein) of New Zealand origin that has been used to produce amino acids components in the culture media. In view of this situation a TSE risk reduction factor of 10 31 has been determined based on the dilution of the cells in protein free media since the passaging starting in 1996. The materials used to propagate MDCK cells since 1981 have been carefully traced and supporting documentation acquired where available. It was determined that no potential TSE risk materials have

HA* = Haemagglutinin · Pharmaceutical Development The  formulation  of  the  drug  product  is  chosen  on  the  experience  of  the  company's  egg-based  flu vaccine and has not changed during development. The composition has varied in accordance with the annual  strain  recommendation.  Minor  changes  have  been  introduced  to  the  manufacturing  process. Due to liquid losses during withdrawal, an overfill of 0.1 ml for 1 ml syringes without needle and 0.05 ml  overfill  for  1  ml  syringes  with  a  needle  is  chosen.  The  overfill  has  not  changed  during development. Also the HA antigen overage has been reduced based on results of stability studies for this product at 2-8 °C and assay optimization. The  integrity  of  the  container  closure  system  is  sufficiently  proven  by  the  stability  studies  for  the product,  which  includes  sterility  tests.  The  compatibility  of  the  drug  product  with  the  container  is proven by the stability studies. · Adventitious Agents Nonviral Adventitious Agents (TSE aspect) Separate  TSE  assessments  have  been  conducted  for  the  MDCK  master  cell  bank  (MCB)  and  the Optaflu manufacturing process. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

been or are used in the virus seed materials, nor in the routine production of the subunit vaccine. The use of ruminant derived materials complies with the requirements of the current TSE note for guidance (EMEA/  410/  01).'  TSE  Certificates  of  Suitability  have  been  obtained  for  the  MDCK  chemically defined media (CDM) medium component recombinant insulin.

Overall, sufficient data is provided to demonstrate compliance with the CHMP TSE NfG. The risk of transmitting TSE by Optaflu is very remote.

<!-- image -->

Viral Adventitious Agents The  company  has  made  significant  efforts  to  substantiate  the  safety  of  Optaflu  as  regards  to adventitious agents potentially present. Different aspects have been taken into consideration such as the  biological  characteristics  of  the  different  starting  materials  (seed  virus,  cell  substrate)  and characteristics of the production process (cell cultivation, virus propagation, purification) including the virus inactivation/clearance performance of the production process. The Applicant has satisfactorily supported the strategy for routine virus screening of the seed virus lots by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) methodology instead of in vivo/in vitro testing  in  accordance with Ph.Eur. 2.6.16. In addition, the Applicant committed to generate additional validation data by performing retrospectively  the  full  extraneous  agent  testing  according  to  the  Ph.Eur.  in  comparison  with  the applicant's PCR procedure on seeds produced for clinical trials and other available seed material from past production campaigns, in order to validate the  PCR testing approach for influenza virus seed lots by providing evidence from parallel tests  with in  vitro / in  vivo testing  that  both  methods  render  the same end results. Following a step-by-step approach according to an established time-table as agreed by the CHMP, information is submitted to support the PCR methodology and omit the conventional Ph.Eur. in vitro / in vivo testing. Therefore, it can be concluded that the company has sufficiently assured that the Optaflu is safe as regards to adventitious agents. · Manufacture of the Product Manufacture / Controls of critical steps and intermediates The  manufacturing  process  comprises  blending  of  the  three  monovalent  bulks  to  produce  trivalent bulk and filling into the final container, i.e. syringes. The monovalent bulks of three different  influenza  strains  are  formulated  according  to  their  antigen concentration determined by single radial diffusion (SRD) assay. Resulting monovalent bulk volumes and sterile PBS are directly added to the sterile formulation steel-container under aseptic conditions. Sterile  filtration  for  commercial  batches  will  be  done  after  transportation,  at  the  filling  site  prior  to filling of the vaccine into the syringes. The sterile filtration is integrated in-line with the filling process (in-line  sterile  filtration).  Each  container  is  tested  for  sterility  and  transported  to  the  filling  and packaging facilities. During the transportation and storage the temperature is kept at 2-8 °C. The vaccine (one dose = 0.5 ml) is filled into 1 ml, type I glass syringes. The final containers are filled by machine in a clean environment. During the filling process the filling volume is checked regularly by weighing. The filled products are labelled and packed at room temperature. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In-process controls (IPCs) are set during blending and filling. Overall, the proposed IPCs are sufficient to monitor the manufacturing process and specifications for the final bulk are set.

## Process validation and/or evaluation

Validation  of  a  homogenous  blending  procedure  is  performed  with  three  formulations  under production  conditions  as  part  of  the  manufacturing  of  phase  III  clinical  material.  Critical  process

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

parameters for the filling are the control of the sterility and homogeneity of the product filled into the final container. The blending and filling procedures are sufficiently validated.

## · Product Specification

Specifications  for  the  trivalent  (final)  bulk  and  drug  product  are  provided  and  are  in  line  with  the Ph.Eur.

The  analytical procedures (principle, equipment,  standards/solution, procedure,  measurement  / evaluation) are concisely described but are well known.

Testing for trivalent (final) bulk: Sterility, total protein, pH and density are tested according to Ph. Eur. Osmolality is tested according USP and total DNA content is tested using the Threshold method and specified according to Ph. Eur. Specifications  for  Optaflu  drug  product:  Sterility,  endotoxin,  haemagglutinin  antigen  and  identity, ATT, extractable volume and appearance are tested and specified according to Ph. Eur. Batch analysis Batch  analysis  results  of  three  consecutively  filled  batches  demonstrate  consistent  production  of Optaflu drug product. · Stability of the Product Stability are available for the consistency batches stored at 2-8 ºC and at 23-27 º C. Preclinical, Phase I/ II and Phase III material were also put on stability testing. These data were presented as supporting data. In general, the results support the shelf life and storage conditions as defined in the SPC (12 months at 2-8 ºC). Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Information on development, manufacture and control of the drug substance and drug product have been  presented  in  a  satisfactory  manner.  The  results  of  the  tests  carried  out  indicate  satisfactory consistency and uniformity of important product quality characteristics, and these in turn lead to the conclusion that the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. At  the  time  of  CHMP  opinion,  there  were  a  number  of  minor  unresolved  quality  issues  having  no impact on the Risk-benefit balance of the product. The applicant gave a Letter of Undertaking and committed to resolve these as follow-up measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe. 3. Non-clinical aspects Introduction Optaflu has undergone nonclinical testing designed to demonstrate immunogenicity (mice, rabbits, and ferrets),  nonclinical  efficacy  (influenza  challenge  in  ferrets),  lack  of  abnormal  toxicity  (mice  and Guinea pig), and lack of local or systemic toxicity (rabbits). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The nonclinical studies were performed using vaccine formulations that were comparable or identical to Optaflu that will be commercialized. Abnormal toxicity studies were performed on toxicology and clinical lots according to Pharmacopoeia Europa (Ph. Eur.).  The ferret challenge study was performed according to Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) with a clinical lot of Optaflu. The pivotal GLP rabbit toxicology study was performed with an Optaflu lot that is comparable to clinical and consistency lots. The trivalent  vaccine  used  in  the  pivotal  toxicology  study  included  seasonal  influenza  virus  strains [A/New  Caledonia/20/99  (H1N1),  B/Guangdong/120/00  (B),  and  A/Panama/2007/99  (H3N2)]  that

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

may differ from strains tested in the clinical development program or to be produced commercially, but strain changes in the vaccine do not constitute a 'difference' in the drug product.

## Pharmacology

- Primary pharmacodynamics

The primary pharmacological effect of the vaccine is the induction of antibodies to influenza antigens and protection against infection. Therefore, the demonstration of antibody induction (immunogenicity) and efficacy (protection in an animal model of influenza virus challenge) was the focus of the nonGLP nonclinical pharmacology studies. Mouse immunogenicity studies were performed using the intraperitoneal (IP) route to demonstrate the comparability  of  MDCK-derived  antigens  to  conventional  egg-derived  antigens  of  the  same  type. Based on mouse immunogenicity results, MDCK-derived and conventional egg-derived antigens were comparable. In addition, the immunogenicity of the vaccine was dose-dependent. Haemagglutinationinhibiting (HI) titres were lower following administration of 1/100th of the 15µg HA per strain clinical dose versus 1/10th of the 15µg HA per strain clinical dose. Immunogenicity was also evaluated in the pivotal GLP toxicology study in which rabbits were given 2 intramuscular administrations of Optaflu, the reference vaccine  Agrippal, or placebo. HI results for serum  antibodies  to  two  of  the  strains  (A/New  Caledonia  and  B/Guangdong)  showed  no  titre  pretreatment and an increase in titre after the second vaccine dose of Optaflu or Agrippal. There were background  titres  against  strain  A/Panama  in  control  animals  and  pre-treatment  in  Optaflu  and Agrippal-treated  animals,  which  were  attributed  to  nonspecific  binding.  However,  a  trend  towards increasing amounts of A/Panama antibody titre could be seen after the second vaccine dose. Immunogenicity and protection against influenza virus challenge has also been addressed in the ferret, which is currently considered to be the best animal model for infection with human influenza viruses. In the pivotal ferret study, animals were first primed intranasally with a heterologous virus, and then immunized twice with Optaflu, a comparator vaccine (Agrippal) or water (control). Seven days after the  second  immunization,  animals  were  challenged  intranasally  with  live  virus  homologous  to  the vaccine.  Vaccine  efficacy  was  evaluated  based  on  body  weights,  body  temperatures  and  clinical symptoms.  In  addition,  viral  shedding,  leukocyte  counts,  and  antibody  titres  were  assessed.  In  this study,  Optaflu  was  considered comparable to Agrippal because differences between the two groups were not statistically significant. Both vaccines reduced viral shedding and prevented  body temperature increase as apparently the most sensitive endpoints. During the development of the ferret challenge model, two range-finding studies were conducted to evaluate  various  concentrations  of  the  challenge  virus  to  determine  an  appropriate  dose  for  use  in challenge  studies.  Subsequently,  four  nonpivotal  challenge  studies  were  performed  using  naive (unprimed) ferrets. In these challenge studies, ferrets were vaccinated twice with vaccine formulations, and then challenged with live virus homologous to the vaccine. These animals were immunologically naive (not primed with a heterologous virus). Although the vaccine formulations were well tolerated, the immunogenicity and challenge results were highly variable. Relevant effects on endpoints such as temperature  increase  were  only  seen  in  one  of  these  four  studies;  however,  there  were  also  low responders in the negative control group. There was no clear and consistent effect of vaccination, with the  positive  control  vaccine  or  with  the  test  vaccine.  The  lack  of protection  seen  in  these  studies  is consistent  with  published  literature  where  naïve  (unprimed)  ferrets  did  not  produce  HA-specific antibody  following  immunization  with  concentrations  of  antigen  shown  to  produce  high  titres  of serum antibody and immunity in humans. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  the  pivotal  ferret  study,  animals (8  animals  per  group) were  first  primed  intranasally  with  a heterologous  virus  (A/Panama/2007/99  [H3N2]),  and  then  immunized  twice  with  Optaflu  (A/New Caledonian/20/99 [H1N1], A/New York/55/2004 [H3/N2], B/Jsiang/10/2003), a comparator vaccine (Agrippal)  (based  on  the  same  antigens,  also  called  positive  control)  or  water  (control).  Two

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

immunizations were given intramuscularly 3 weeks apart. Seven days after the second immunization, animals were challenged intranasally with live virus homologous to the vaccine (A/New Caledonian/20/99 [H1N1]). Vaccine efficacy was evaluated based on body weights, body temperatures  (see  below)  and  clinical  symptoms.  In  addition,  viral  shedding,  leukocyte  counts,  and antibody titres were assessed. In this study, Optaflu was considered comparable to Agrippal because differences  between  the  two  groups  were  not  statistically  significant.  Both  vaccines  reduced  viral shedding and prevented body temperature increase.

· Secondary pharmacodynamics No  secondary  pharmacodynamic  studies  were  performed  according  to  the  Note  for  Guidance  on Preclinical Pharmacological and Toxicological testing of vaccines (CPMP/465/95) and Guideline on Adjuvants in Vaccines for Human Use (EMEA/CHMP/VEG/134716/2004). · Safety pharmacology programme No studies investigating safety pharmacology were warranted based on the nature of the product and the existing nonclinical and clinical safety/tolerability profiles. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No studies investigating pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions were warranted based on the nature of the product. Pharmacokinetics Experimental studies to demonstrate absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of the active ingredients  in  Optaflu  have  not  been  performed.  This  is  in  line  with  the  relevant  guideline CPMP/SWP/465/95. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity Single  dose  data  in  mice  and  Guinea  pigs  with  Optaflu  administered  by  the  intraperitoneal  route confirmed the absence of abnormal toxicity. Single-dose  toxicity and  local tolerability of Optaflu  was  evaluated  in  rabbits  following  the administration of the first dose in the repeat-dose toxicology study. Two intramuscular injections were given 7 days apart into alternate hind limbs. Each site, therefore, received a 'single-dose' of Optaflu. No animals died in this study. There was no evidence of systemic toxicity after a single dose based on in-life evaluations. No detectable erythema or edema was observed at the injection sites in any animal. Histopathological findings at the injection site indicated that the vaccine was well tolerated. · Repeat dose toxicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  pivotal  GLP  study  assessed  the  local  and  systemic  toxicity  of  Optaflu  in  New  Zealand  White rabbits after two administrations and determined the reversibility of findings. Agrippal served as the reference  article.  Phosphate  buffered  saline  (PBS)  was  the  control  article  (placebo).  The  study consisted of three groups of 6 animals/sex/group. Rabbits received an intramuscular injection of 0.5 ml of  either  the  test  or  reference  article  or  placebo  on  Days  1  and  8.    The  two  doses  administered  to rabbits  in  this  study  exceeded  the  intended  number  (one)  proposed  for  annual  interpandemic immunization.

Results  showed that two intramuscular injections of the test article,  Optaflu,  given  one  week  apart, were immunogenic and very well tolerated in test rabbits. There were no treatment related adverse

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

effects  on  clinical  observations,  dermal  scoring,  body  weights  and  temperatures,  food  consumption, clinical pathology (haematology, coagulation, and clinical chemistry), organ weights, or macroscopic evaluations. Histopathological evaluation revealed the expected reactions (necrosis and haemorrhage) at  the  injection  sites,  which  were  seen  in  all  experimental  groups,  attributed  to  the  intramuscular injection, and partially to fully resolved by the end of the recovery period.

- Genotoxicity

No genotoxicity studies were conducted. This is in line with the relevant guidelines (CPMP/SWP/465/95 and CHMP/VEG/134716/2004).

Impurities: There  are  three  compounds  used  in  the  manufacturing  process  that  are  considered  to warrant  a  toxicological  assessment:  cetyltrimethylammonium  bromide,  polysorbate  80  (Tween  80), and β -propriolactone  (BPL).    An  extensive  review  of  the  available  toxicity  literature  on  these compounds was performed.  The maximum amount of each compound theoretically contained in a vaccine  dose  poses  no  risk  to  the  target  human  populations  receiving  the  product.  Although  this application  is  not  for  pediatric  use,  no  toxicity  at  the  levels  discussed  would  be  anticipated  in  a pediatric  population.  Tolerability  and  toxicity  of  any  intentional  or  unintentional  compounds  were tested in the GLP toxicology study in ~ 3kg rabbits. Animals received two clinical doses within a oneweek period. Based on body weights, these doses to rabbits (~3 kg) represented approximately a 4× to

· Carcinogenicity No carcinogenicity studies were conducted, in line with the relevant guidelines. · Reproduction Toxicity No reproduction toxicity studies were conducted, in line with the relevant guidelines. · Local tolerance Local tolerability was evaluated during the repeat-dose toxicology study in rabbits.  The only notable finding was mild, reversible inflammation seen at the intramuscular injection sites, which is consistent with the administration of an immunogenic vaccine by this route. · Other toxicity studies Tumorigenicity : Optaflu is manufactured in a novel mammalian cell substrate, therefore, an extensive panel of studies was performed to characterize the MDCK cell line. MDCK cells have been reported to exhibit varying degrees of tumorigenicity, depending upon which cells are tested and the model in which they are tested. Weakly tumorigenic MDCK cells can be converted to high tumorigenicity upon the introduction of oncogenes or genes expressing growth-related factors. Consistent with current international guidelines for the qualification of a new cell line as a platform for vaccine production, the Applicant performed studies with intact MDCK cells, lysates of MDCK cells, and  purified  DNA  obtained  from  MDCK  cells.    These  studies  were  designed  to  characterize  the tumorigenic or oncogenic potential of materials from the manufacturing process at progressive stages: intact  cells,  lysates  prepared  from  these  cells,  and  purified  DNA  from  influenza  virus  infected  and uninfected  MDCK cells.  Very sensitive  species  were  selected  to  optimize  the  detection  of  possibly very rare events leading to tumorigenicity or oncogenicity: adult nude mice and infant animals (&lt;4 days old) of three rodent species (nude mice, rats, and hamsters) with immature immune systems at the time of dosing. Each study had a 150-day duration and was designed to allow time for any potential adverse effects to emerge. Only intact MDCK cells were tumorigenic. MDCK cell lysates and purified DNA were not oncogenic in  three  species  of  infant  rodents.    Although  tumorigenic  at  low  cell  numbers,  MDCK  cells  are completely removed during the manufacturing process of the vaccine. Therefore, whole cells do not pose a risk in the final product. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

20× multiple of a single dose to a child (12 kg) or an adult (60 kg). The safety or tolerability of any intentional or unintentional residuals would, therefore, have been tested.

## Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment

An  environmental  risk  assessment  on  this  product  is  not  needed  based  on  the  final  Guideline  on Environmental risk assessment of non-GMO products.

|                                        | 18-60 years   | >60 years   |
|----------------------------------------|---------------|-------------|
| Mean increase in GMT**                 | >2.5          | >2          |
| Seroconversion or significant increase | >40%          | >30%        |
| Protected post- vaccination            | >70%          | >60%        |

Discussion on the non-clinical aspects The documentation provided on immunogenicity and nonclinical efficacy (in ferrets) showed that Optaflu is able to induce relevant protection against an influenza challenge. Furthermore, the toxicological documentation for Optaflu is regarded to be adequate and in line with the relevant guidelines. The rabbit study addressing repeated dose toxicity as well as local tolerance revealed no concerns regarding the safety of the vaccine. The vaccine is produced on MDCK cells, a cell substrate up to now not used for the manufacturing of licensed vaccines. Since these cells are known to be tumorigenic, specific studies were conducted to address  that  issue.  Tumorigenicity  of  MDCK  cells  was  confirmed  in  the  studies  performed  by  the applicant. However, no tumorigenicity was observed for cell lysates or DNA, extracted from MDCK cells under different conditions. In conclusion, the data provided are regarded to sufficiently address the issue of oncogenicity/tumorigenicity of the MDCK cell substrate and to resolve any corresponding safety concern regarding the vaccine. As impurities present in the vaccine, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), polysorbate 80 and β -propiolactone (BPL) are addressed in the preclinical part of the dossier. Based on literature data, and since  these  substances  are  not  novel  excipients  for  vaccines,  the  concentrations  present  in  the  final vaccine raise no safety concern. In  conclusion,  the  toxicological  analysis  is  adequate  for  this  new  vaccine  and  reveals  no  concern regarding the safety of Optaflu. 4. Clinical aspects Introduction For the approval of egg-derived influenza vaccines, it is an accepted policy that clinical efficacy trials are considered dispensable if serological criteria as defined in the 'Note for guidance on harmonisation of requirements for influenza vaccines' (CPMP/BWP/214/96) are properly met. These CPMP criteria* are defined as follows for healthy adult and elderly populations: Medicinal product no longer authorised

* Applicable to immunogenicity data based on HI-assay &amp; SRH assay .

In HI tests seroconversion corresponds to negative prevaccination serum / postvaccination serum ≥ 40 and a significant  increase  to  at  least  a  fourfold  increase  in  HI-titre.  In  SRH  tests  seroconversion  corresponds  to negative prevaccination serum / postvaccination serum: area ≥ 25 mm 2 and a significant increase to at least a 50% increase in area. Protected post vaccination is defined as a titre of ≥ 40  (HI-assay) or ≥ 25  mm2 (SRHassay)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## **GMT: geometric mean titre

Generally, these criteria apply to the annual strain update of egg-derived influenza vaccines and in the clinical  evaluation  of  annually  produced  influenza  vaccines  at  least  one  of  the  above  three  criteria should  be  met  for  each  strain.  However  in  order  to  demonstrate  efficacy  for  newly  developed inactivated  influenza  vaccines,  such  as  this  cell  culture  derived  inactivated  influenza  vaccine  more stringent primary clinical endpoints were defined in the CPMP guideline for cell culture inactivated influenza vaccines (CPMP/BWP/2490/00). The guideline states that all three criteria, seroprotection, seroconversion and sufficient increase in GMTs, as described as geometric mean ratio (GMR) should have  been  met,  with  postvaccination  seroprotection  and  GMR  being  the  most  important.  These parameters observed in a clinical trial of cell-derived vaccine should be non-inferior to that obtained with an equivalent egg-derived vaccine.

| Study   | Influenza   | Hemisphere   | Influenza virus strains   | Influenza virus strains   | Influenza virus strains   |
|---------|-------------|--------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| Number  | Season      |              | A/H1N1                    | A/H3N2                    | B                         |

GCP The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. Pharmacokinetics No  clinical pharmacology  studies  describing the pharmacokinetic  properties of  Optaflu  were conducted in support of this application, since they do not provide useful information for establishing adequate dosing recommendations (CPMP/EWP/463/97). Pharmacodynamics In relation to vaccines, pharmacodynamic studies are essentially compromised of the immunogenicity studies  that  characterise  the  immune  response  to  vaccines.  The  detailed  characterisation  of  the immunological response to the proposed vaccine is the surrogate parameter for efficacy and these data are discussed below. Clinical efficacy · Dose response studies Dose finding studies were not performed. · Main studies Five  clinical  studies  have  been  conducted  for  the  European  development  programme.  For  each influenza  season,  the  respective  influenza  virus  composition  that  was  used  during  the  clinical programme for Optaflu is shown in the table below. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

|         |             |          | A/New Caledonia/20/99 IVR-116   | A/Panama/2007/99 RESVIR 17   | A/Wyoming/3/2003 IVR-X-147   | A/New York/55/2004-X-157   | B/Guangdong/120/2000   | B/Shangdong/7/97   | B/Jiangsu/10/2003   |
|---------|-------------|----------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------|--------------------|---------------------|
| V58P1   | 2001/2002 a | Northern | +                               | +                            |                              |                            | +                      |                    |                     |
| V58P2   | 2003        | Southern | +                               | +                            |                              |                            |                        | +                  |                     |
| V58P4   | 2004/2005   | Northern | +                               |                              | +                            |                            |                        |                    | +                   |
| V58P4E1 | 2005/2006   | Northern | +                               |                              |                              | +                          |                        |                    | +                   |
| V58P9   | 2005/2006   | Northern | +                               |                              |                              | +                          |                        |                    | +                   |
| V58P5   | 2005/2006   | Northern | +                               |                              |                              | +                          |                        |                    | +                   |

The in- and exclusion criteria were the same for all studies. Only subjects were included that fulfilled the age criterion of 18 to 60 years (adults) or 61 years and older (elderly), were mentally competent to understand the nature, scope, and consequences of the study; willing to give written informed consent, available for all the visits scheduled in the study and resident in the study area and were in good health as determined by medical history, physical examination and clinical judgment of the investigator. In short, the exclusion criteria encompassed unwillingness to give written informed consent; participation  in  another  trial;  suffering  from  an  acute  infectious  disease;  presence  of  any  serious disease  such  as  cancer,  autoimmune  disease  (including  RA),  advanced  arteriosclerotic  disease  or complicated  diabetes  mellitus,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  (COPD)  requiring  oxygen therapy, acute or progressive hepatic disease, acute or progressive renal disease or congestive heart failure.  Furthermore  exclusion  criteria  included  planned  surgery;  bleeding  diathesis;  history  of hypersensitivity  or  anaphylaxis  to  any  component  of  the  study  medication,  allergy  to  eggs  or  egg

V58P1 V58P2 V58P4 V58P4E1 V58P9 V58P5 a Phase 1/2 study V58P1 was conducted during influenza season 2002/2003 but used the recommended influenza vaccine composition from the preceding season. The population studied contained subjects from different countries, continents, and hemispheres and from different influenza seasons. The European clinical development program to support licensure of Optaflu consisted of 2 exploratory studies  (V58P1,  V58P2)  and  3  main  studies  (V58P4,  V58P4E1,  V58P9).  The  clinical  studies  were designed  to  evaluate  the  immunogenicity,  safety  and  clinical  consistency  of  Optaflu  and  that  of  an equivalent egg-derived control vaccine. The  control egg-derived influenza vaccine (Agrippal: inactivated, subunit), licensed for use in Europe, was selected due to its similarity to Optaflu (i.e., both are inactivated subunit vaccines produced by the same manufacturer). An additional clinical Phase II study  (Study  V58P5)  was  initiated  in  the  US  evaluating  the  2005/2006  seasonal  influenza  virus vaccine composition in subjects 18-49 years of age using a US licensed egg-derived subunit vaccine (i.e.,  Fluvirin,  also  from  the  same  manufacturer)  as  comparator.  The  results  of  this  study  were presented as supportive data in the dossier. All  studies  used  the  same  observer  blinded  design,  and  the  same  methods  for  patient  selection  and randomisation. Study V58P4 was the pivotal trial, and study V58P4E1 was the one-year follow up trial, in which a subset of study V58P4 was revaccinated in a newly randomised trial. METHODS Study Participants Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

products,  mercury-containing  compounds,  or  to  any  other  vaccine  component;  known  or  suspected impairment/alteration  of  immune  function,  history  of  drug  or  alcohol  abuse,  laboratory-confirmed influenza disease in the past 6 months; receipt of influenza vaccine within the past 6 months; receipt of another  vaccine  or  any  investigational  agent  within  the  past  60  days,  or  planned  within  3  weeks following the study vaccination; acute respiratory disease, infections requiring systemic antibiotic or antiviral therapy or fever of 38°C or higher within the past 3 days; pregnant/breast feeding women.

<!-- image -->

All immunogenicity results were evaluated in the context of the CHMP criteria for influenza vaccines (CPMP/BWP/214/96) for adult (18-60 years) and elderly (&gt;60 years) populations (see table above). The  phase  1  and  2  studies  (V58P1  and  V58P2)  evaluated  immunogenicity  according  to  the CPMP/BWP/214/96 requirements that at least one of the above three criteria should be met for each strain. The non-pivotal phase 3 studies (V58P9 and V58P4E1) also considered all three criteria. For the  pivotal  phase  3  study  (V58P4),  however,  the  primary  objective  was  to  actually  meet  all  three CHMP criteria for all three strains in accordance with Annex CPMP/BWP/2490/00 for both adult and elderly subjects.

Treatments In  all  studies  the  experimental  Optaflu  consisted  of  a  0.5  ml  dose  of  MDCK  cell-culture-derived influenza subunit vaccine contains purified viral envelope-glycoproteins hemagglutinin (15 μ g) each of A/H1N1, A/H3N2 and B recommended for the influenza season in which the study was performed. Subjects assigned to the control group received a single 0.5 ml dose of egg-derived influenza subunit vaccine, containing Influenza virus antigens as recommended for the respective influenza season. The vaccines were administered by IM injection in the deltoid muscle preferably of the non-dominant arm. For evaluation of the antibody response blood samples were collected immediately before immunization (day 1) and three weeks after immunization (day 22). Objectives The primary  immunogenicity  objective of  all  studies  was  to  evaluate  immunogenicity  of  a  single 0.5 mL  IM  injection  of  the  cell-culture-derived  and  egg-derived  influenza  subunit  vaccines,  in compliance with the requirements of the European Union recommendations (CPMP/BWP/214/96).  In addition, in study V58P4 secondary immunogenicity objective was formulated in the protocols as 'To demonstrate  non-inferiority  of the correlates of  protection  (seroprotection,  seroconversion  and sufficient  increase  in  GMT)  of  a  single  0.5  mL  IM  injection  of  the  cell  culture-derived  influenza subunit vaccine versus a single 0.5 mL IM injection of the egg-derived influenza subunit vaccine.' The studies also used the same safety objective, i.e. 'To evaluate safety and tolerability of a single 0.5 mL IM injection of the cell-culture derived and egg-derived influenza subunit vaccines.' In addition study V58P9 also defined a secondary safety objective, i.e. to compare the safety between 3 lots (A, B and C). Outcomes/endpoints As  recommended  by  the  CPMP/BWP/214/96  guideline,  sera  were  assayed  for  anti-HA  antibody against the homologous vaccine strains in clinical studies by haemagglutination inhibition (HI) as well as by single radial haemolysis (SRH) to evaluate efficacy of Optaflu. In all studies (phase I to III) the HI test was performed.  In addition in studies V58P1 and V58P2 the SRH test was conducted. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Sample size

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study V58P4: The planned total sample size of 1188 evaluable subjects (583 adults, 605 elderly) per group provided more than 90 % power to demonstrate non-inferiority for each of the 3 vaccine strains and  each  of  the  3  assessment  criteria  (GMR,  seroprotection  and  seroconversion)  accounting  for  a global Type I error of 0.025 (1-sided). The following assumptions were made:

1. Lower limit for GMR ratios: 0.5, common standard deviation: 1.0
2. Non-inferiority margin for rates: -10% for the difference in incidences (test - control)
3. Assumed rates (equal rates assumed in both vaccine groups): adults - seroprotection rates: 80%, rates for seroconversion or significant increase: 60% elderly - seroprotection rates: 65%, rates for seroconversion or significant increase: 50%

Considering a 10% drop-out rate, approximately 2650 subjects (1300 adult, 1350 elderly) were to be enrolled. The overall power for demonstrating non-inferiority was less than 80% in the elderly. Study  V58P4E1: This  was  an  extension  study  to  study  V58P4.  Thus,  no  formal  sample  size calculation took place. Study  V58P9: Sample  size  was  based  on  safety  considerations  allowing  for  a  sufficiently  large database to assess safety. Randomisation Except study V58P9 patients were randomised 1:1 (cell-derived / egg-derived vaccine) in blocks of 6 according to a computer generated allocation scheme provided by the Applicant. Randomisation was done separately for the predefined age strata and (in study V58P4E1) for the treatment in the parent study V58P4. In study V58P9 patients were randomised 2:2:2:1 in blocks of length 7 to one of 3 cellderived lots or the egg-derived vaccine respectively. RESULTS Baseline data Demographic  characterisation  was  quite  complete  for  all  studies.  Overall  the  study  groups  seem balanced  at  baseline,  as  far  as  age,  gender  and  vaccination  history  was  concerned.  Only  in  study V58P1  the  vaccination  history  in  the  control  group  was  substantially  higher.  As  this  was  a  first exploratory analysis the finding is considered less relevant. Numbers analysed The number of subjects in the PP population was smaller than in the safety population, since the PP population  in  study  V58P4E1  only  included  subjects  in  the  predefined  immunogenicity  subset (subjects with blood samples taken for immunogenicity analyses) and excluded subjects with major protocol deviations. In the extension study V58P4E1, conducted in 2 consecutive influenza seasons (the  first  was  the  initial  study  V58P4),  adults  and  elderly  subjects  who  had  received  Optaflu  or comparator vaccine in the previous study were randomized at a 1:1 ratio to receive either Optaflu or comparator vaccine the subsequent year, resulting in 4 treatment groups: Optaflu / Optaflu, Optaflu /comparator, comparator/ Optaflu, and comparator/comparator. Subjects continuing from study V58P4 into the extension, V58P4E1, are therefore counted twice in the total PP and safety populations. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Study   | Design*   | Numbers           | Numbers           | Numbers   | Numbers   | Mean age       | Mean age       | Mean age            | Mean age            | Vaccination history (%)   | Vaccination history (%)   | Vaccination history (%)   | Vaccination history (%)   | Vaccination history (%)   |
|---------|-----------|-------------------|-------------------|-----------|-----------|----------------|----------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|         |           | Immuno- genicity@ | Immuno- genicity@ | Safety    | Safety    | Adults (18-60) | Adults (18-60) | Elderly ( ≥ 61 yrs) | Elderly ( ≥ 61 yrs) | Adults (18-60)            | Elderly ( ≥ 61 yrs)       | Elderly ( ≥ 61 yrs)       | Elderly ( ≥ 61 yrs)       |                           |
|         |           | Optaflu           | Con               | Optaflu   | Con       | Optaflu        | Con            | Optaflu             | Con                 | Optaflu                   | Con                       | Optaflu                   | Con                       |                           |
| V58P1   | OB,R,C    | 119               | 120               | 120       | 120       | 37.0           | 35.1           | 65.4                | 64.1                | 23                        | 23                        | 40                        | 62                        |                           |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| V58P2   | OB,R,C   |   110 |   113 |   110 |   113 | 47.2   | 46.7   | 68.9   | 70.5   | 82   | 72   | 94   | 96   |
|---------|----------|-------|-------|-------|-------|--------|--------|--------|--------|------|------|------|------|
| V58P4   | OB,R,C   |  1322 |  1318 |  1330 |  1324 | 38.7   | 38.3   | 69.1   | 68.0   | 38   | 42   | 59   | 59   |
| V58P4E1 | OB,R,C   |   242 |   241 |  1104 |  1131 | 42.0   | 39.0   | 69.0   | 69.2   | 100  | 100  | 100  | 100  |
| V58P9   | OB,R,C   |  1017 |   168 |  1028 |   171 | 32.6   | 32.6   | -      | -      | 23   | 26   | -    | -    |
| total   |          |  2810 |  1960 |  3692 |  2859 |        |        |        |        |      |      |      |      |
| V58P5   | OB,R,C   |   307 |   303 |   309 |   304 | 33.8   | 34.    | -      | -      | 19   | 19   | -    | -    |

- @ number for immunogenicity are the per-protocol figures - in study V58P4E1 these numbers include only the subset of subjects who were randomised to the different group in study V58P4  i.e. approx. ¼ of the total exposed population.

| GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   | GEOMETRIC MEANRATIO postvaccination   |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                                       | H3N2                                  | H3N2                                  | H1N1                                  | H1N1                                  | B                                     | B                                     |
| ADULTS                                |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |
|                                       | Optaflu                               | Control                               | Optaflu                               | Control                               | Optaflu                               | Control                               |
| V58P1                                 | 11 (7.5-16)                           | 8.6(6-13)                             | 27 (18-38)                            | 20 (14-29)                            | 7.2(5.4-9.5)                          | 6.5(4.9-8.5)                          |
| V58P2                                 | 3.1(2.3-4.2)                          | 2.2(1.6-3.0)                          | 2.3(1.6-3.3)                          | 4.2(2.9-6.0)                          | 3.1(2.4-4.0)                          | 3.2(2.5-4.1)                          |
| V58P4                                 | 4.9(4.4-5.3)                          | 5.5(5.0-6.1)                          | 7.6(6.9-8.5)                          | 7.1(6.4-7.9)                          | 10(9.1-11)                            | 8.8(8.0-9.6)                          |
| V58P4E1                               | 7.1(5.9-8.4)                          | 3.8(3.2-4.5)                          | 2.0(1.8-2.3)                          | 1.9(1.7-2.2)                          | 2.3(2.0-2.7)                          | 1.9(1.7-2.3)                          |
| V58P9                                 | 9.5(8.8-10)                           | 11(9.4-13.0)                          | 13(12-14)                             | 12(10-15)                             | 7.1(6.6-7.6)                          | 5.9(5.0-7.0)                          |
| ELDERLY                               |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |
|                                       | Optaflu                               | Control                               | Optaflu                               | Control                               | Optaflu                               | Control                               |
| V58P1                                 | 8.0(5.5-12)                           | 5.2(3.6-7.6)                          | 7.9(5.5-11)                           | 6.4(4.5-9.1)                          | 4.8(3.4-6.7)                          | 4.9(3.5-7.0)                          |
| V58P2                                 | 2.5(1.9-3.3)                          | 1.7(1.3-2.2)                          | 1.9(1.5-2.4)                          | 1.7(1.4-2.2)                          | 3.1(2.3-4.0)                          | 3.0(2.3-3.9)                          |
| V58P4                                 | 5.9(5.4-6.5)                          | 6.5(5.9-7.2)                          | 4.6(4.2-5.1)                          | 4.6(4.2-5.1)                          | 9.6(8.8-11)                           | 7.8(7.1-8.6)                          |
| V58P4E1                               | 8,2(6.9-9.9)                          | 5.6(4.7-6.7)                          | 2.1(1.8-2.4)                          | 2.1(1.8-2.4)                          | 2.3(2-2.6)                            | 2.2(1.9-2.5)                          |
| V58P9                                 | -                                     | -                                     | -                                     | -                                     | -                                     | -                                     |

Con= control, Agrippal for the first 5 studies, Fluvirin for study V58P5 * OB= observer blinded, R=randomised, C=controlled The PP population also excludes an additional 35 subjects with major protocol deviations. The number of subjects excluded was balanced between the two vaccine groups and the most common reason for exclusion was failure to provide the second blood sample. In addition, the all-randomized population is reported for the demographic and baseline characteristics, which  includes  all subjects, regardless of actual treatment, in order to demonstrate  that  the randomization  resulted  in  balanced  vaccine  groups.  The  safety  and  all-randomized  populations differed  by  only  a  single  subject  in  study  V58P9.  There  were  also  no  relevant  differences  in demographic or baseline characteristics between the all-randomized and PP populations. Outcomes and estimation The Geometric Mean Ratio (GMR) (= ratio of the postvaccination Geometric mean titre (GMT) v.s. the prevaccination GMT), seroprotection rates pre-and postvaccination and seroconversion/ significant increase are tabled for all 5 finished trials. For results in italic the lower bound of the GMT was below the limit set for the CHMP criterion. For results in bold and italic the point estimate was below the limit set for the respective CHMP criterion. Geometric mean ratio Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Seroconversion/ significant increase

| SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   | SEROCONVERSION / SIGNFICANT INCREASE postvaccination (%)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                            | H3N2                                                       |                                                            | H1N1                                                       |                                                            | B                                                          |                                                            |
| ADULTS                                                     |                                                            |                                                            |                                                            |                                                            |                                                            |                                                            |
|                                                            | Optaflu                                                    | Control                                                    | Optaflu                                                    | Control                                                    | Optaflu                                                    | Control                                                    |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| V58P1   | 75 (62-85)   | 73 (60-83)   | 90 (79-96)   | 87(76-94)   | 68(55-80)   | 66(53-78)   |
|---------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| V58P2   | 30(19-44)    | 23(13-36)    | 21(12-34)    | 40(28-54)   | 36(23-50)   | 28(17-42)   |
| V58P4   | 58(54-62)    | 62(58-66)    | 63(59-67)    | 64(60-67)   | 78(75-81)   | 73(70-77)   |
| V58P4E1 | 69(60-77)    | 56(47-65)    | 18(11-25)    | 24(13-29)   | 24 (17-33)  | 21(14-29)   |
| V58P9   | 79(76-81)    | 82(78-86)    | 80 (77-82)   | 81(76-85)   | 71(68-74)   | 71(66-76)   |
| ELDERLY | ELDERLY      | ELDERLY      | ELDERLY      | ELDERLY     | ELDERLY     | ELDERLY     |
|         | Optaflu      | Control      | Optaflu      | Control     | Optaflu     | Control     |
| V58P1   | 68(54-79)    | 52(38-65)    | 58(44-70)    | 52(38-65)   | 46(33-59)   | 53(40-67)   |
| V58P2   | 20(11-34)    | 9(3-20)      | 17(8-29)     | 13(5-24)    | 35(23-49)   | 19(22-48)   |
| V58P4   | 65(61-68)    | 62(59-66)    | 48(44-52)    | 47(44-51)   | 76(72-79)   | 67(64-71)   |
| V58P4E1 | 79(70-86)    | 72(63-90)    | 23(16-31)    | 22(15-31)   | 26(19-35)   | 21(11-32)   |
| V58P9   | -            | -            | -            | -           | -           | -           |

| SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   | SEROPROTECTION prevaccination (%)   |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
|                                     | H3N2                                |                                     | H1N1                                |                                     | B                                   |                                     |
| ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              | ADULTS                              |
|                                     | Optaflu                             | Control                             | Optaflu                             | Control                             | Optaflu                             | Control                             |
| V58P1                               | 32 (20-45)                          | 32 (21-45)                          | 15 (7-27)                           | 11 (5-22)                           | 12 (5-23)                           | 10 (4-20)                           |
| V58P2                               | 66(52-78)                           | 72(58-83)                           | 54(40-67)                           | 47(34-61)                           | 7(2-17)                             | 2(0-9)                              |
| V58P4                               | 61(57-64)                           | 60(56-64)                           | 25(22-28)                           | 25(22-29)                           | 9(7-11)                             | 10(8-13)                            |
| V58P4E1                             | 19(13-27)                           | 16(10-24)                           | 66(57-74)                           | 57(48-66)                           | 47(38-56)                           | 44(35-53)                           |
| V58P9                               | 18(15-20)                           | 18(12-25)                           | 26(23-29)                           | 30(23-37)                           | 16(14-19)                           | 17(12-24)                           |
| ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      | ELDERLY longer                      |
|                                     | Optaflu                             | Control                             | Optaflu                             | Control                             | Optaflu                             | Control                             |
| V58P1                               | 34(22-47)                           | 40(27-53)                           | 15(7-27)                            | 28(17-41)                           | 12(5-23)                            | 22(13-35)                           |
| V58P2                               | 69(54-80)                           | 73(60-84)                           | 65(51-77)                           | 55(41-69)                           | 4(0-13)                             | 7(2-17)                             |
| V58P4                               | 64(60-67)                           | 57(53-61)                           | 23(20-26)                           | 22(19-25)                           | 13(10-15)                           | 11(9-14)                            |
| V58P4E1                             | 25(17-33)                           | 26(19-35)                           | 48(38-57)                           | 41(32-50)                           | 51(42-60)                           | 44(35-54)                           |
| V58P9                               | -                                   | -                                   | -                                   | -                                   | -                                   | -                                   |

| SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   | SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) product   |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
|                                              | H3N2                                         |                                              | H1N1                                         |                                              | B                                            |                                              |
| ADULTS                                       |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |
|                                              | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      |
| V58P1                                        | 90 (79-96)                                   | 87 (76-94)                                   | 97(88-100)                                   | 94(84-98)                                    | 80(68-89)                                    | 73(60-83)                                    |
| V58P2                                        | 91(80-97)                                    | 91(81-97)                                    | 80(68-90)                                    | 86(74-94)                                    | 48(35-62)                                    | 40(28-54)                                    |
| V58P4                                        | 98(97-99)                                    | 98(97-99)                                    | 86(83-88)                                    | 86(83-89)                                    | 83(80-86)                                    | 82(79-85)                                    |
| V58P4E1                                      | 83(75-89)                                    | 76(68-84)                                    | 92(85-96)                                    | 84(76-90)                                    | 79(71-86)                                    | 78(70-85)                                    |
| V58P9                                        | 89(87-91)                                    | 93(88-96)                                    | 93(91-94)                                    | 93(89-97)                                    | 83(81-85)                                    | 79(72-85)                                    |
| ELDERLY                                      |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |                                              |
|                                              | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      | Optaflu                                      | Control                                      |
| V58P1                                        | 80(67-89)                                    | 88(77-95)                                    | 73(60-84)                                    | 83(71-91)                                    | 63(49-75)                                    | 79(67-89)                                    |
| V58P2                                        | 87(75-95)                                    | 91(80-97)                                    | 85(73-93)                                    | 79(66-88)                                    | 44(31-59)                                    | 46(33-60)                                    |
| V58P4                                        | 97(96-98)                                    | 98(96-99)                                    | 76(72-79)                                    | 74(71-78)                                    | 84(81-87)                                    | 79(76-82)                                    |
| V58P4E1                                      | 89(82-94)                                    | 86(79-92)                                    | 78(69-85)                                    | 70(62-78)                                    | 83(75-89)                                    | 80(71-86)                                    |
| V58P9                                        | -                                            | -                                            | -                                            | -                                            | -                                            | -                                            |

<!-- image -->

- Analysis performed across trials (pooled analysis)

Seroprotection SEROPROTECTION postvaccination (%) Ancillary analyses Medicinal product no longer authorised

Although studies were carried out individually, the similarity of study design across studies allowed data  pooling.  The  applicant  performed  multivariate  analyses  of  pooled  data,  with  the  objective  to maximize the power to assess potential associations of specific variables with the efficacy outcome.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A total of 4287 subjects were evaluable for the immunogenicity assessment and were included in this primary analysis (HI assay with egg-derived antigen type) providing 4770 pre-vaccination and 4770 post-vaccination  titres  (subjects  in  studies  V58P4  and  the  extension  V58P4E1  had  more  than  one observation) for each of the three viral strains (H1N1, H3N2, B). For clarity, the 4770 observations per strain  are  referred  to  as  'subjects'.    A  total  of  2810/4770  (59%)  subjects  received  the  cell-derived vaccine  and  1960/4770  (41%)  received  the  egg-derived  vaccine  in  5  randomized  clinical  trials (V58P1, V58P2, V58P4, 58P4E1 and V58P9).  The mean age of the subjects at enrolment was 48.8 years (range: 18-92 years of age) and 62% were adults, whilst 38% were elderly subjects. Females accounted for 58% (2744/4770) of the total study population. At the time of enrolment, 2311 subjects (48.5%)  had  never  received  an  influenza  vaccine,  2359  subjects  (49.5%)  had  received  at  least  one previous  influenza  vaccination,  and  2%  of  subjects  did  not  remember  their  pre-vaccination  status. Subjects who had HI titre higher or equal to 40 at baseline (seroprotection): 29% (n=1360) for the H1N1 strain, 45% (n=2146) for H3N2, and 16% (n=743) for the B strain.

As  could  be  expected,  previous  vaccination  for  influenza  and  baseline  antibody  titres  strongly influenced the postvaccination immune responses. This means that , irrespective of  baseline titre, a subject with vaccination history tends to respond to influenza vaccination with lower postavaccination antibody titres, but not seroprotection rates. There was a trend showing a better immune response in females  and  in  the  adults,  however,  the  magnitude  of  these  effects  did  not  appear  to  be  clinically relevant and were variable depending on the statistical method used. · Other ancillary analyses HI versus SRH Tests Both the HI and SRH tests were used in the first two studies to assess the immunogenicity of Optaflu. The two tests were similar in terms of CHMP criteria, which were met for all three strains in adults and elderly and in both Optaflu and comparator vaccine groups, except for two cases: In Study V58P1, the adult seroprotection criterion (&gt;70%) using the egg-derived antigen was achieved for strain A/H3N2 for both Optaflu and comparator vaccines when measured with HI, whereas with SRH it was not achieved for either vaccine group. In Study V58P2, the adult seroprotection criterion (&gt;70%) using the egg-derived antigen was achieved for strain A/H1N1 for Optaflu when measured with HI, whereas with SRH it was not achieved. In addition, the HI assay showed slightly lower values both at baseline and after vaccination against the  B  strain  when  compared with SRH, for both antigen sources and age groups. This is consistent with previous findings that suggest that the HI assay is less sensitive against the B strain. Egg-derived versus Cell-derived Test Antigens The HI findings did not change for the 3102 observations (from studies V58P1, V58P2 and V58P4) when cell-derived test antigens were used. For the H1N1 and H3N2 strains, the HI titres were higher when the cell derived rather than the egg-derived antigen was used (p&lt;0.0001). For the B strain, no differences were detected (p=0.206). Subpopulations - Subjects According to Previous Exposure Medicinal product no longer authorised

As  shown  in  an  extensive  exploratory  analysis  (pooled  data),  both  baseline  antibody  titres  and previous influenza vaccination appeared to influenced the immune response. This influence of each of the  factors  is  independent  of  the  other  factors,  which  means  that  both  factors  exert  an  influence  on immune response regardless of the presence or absence of the other.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Interchangeability of Vaccines

In study V58P4E1, the achievement of the CHMP criteria in the adults was not influenced by whether or not Optaflu or comparator vaccines had been used previously. Thus, it can be concluded that both vaccines are interchangeable for annual vaccination campaigns.

## Persistence of Antibody Titres

In study V58P9, the seroprotection rates remained above the CHMP criterion of 70% until 6 months after  vaccination,  against  the  two  A  influenza  strains.  GMTs  remained  greater  than  2.5-fold  above baseline. At 6 months to the seroprotection was in agreement to CHMP criteria regardless of baseline titre status or whether the subjects had received a previous influenza vaccination. No study was designed to evaluate the  persistence  of  the  immune  response  after  1  year.  However, persistence  could  be  assessed  in  subjects  of  study  V58P4  who  continued  in  the  extension  study V5P4E1 one year later, and whose baseline titres at day 1 therefore could reflect the persistence of antibody at 12 months (although there could be a contribution from natural exposure, the study did not allow  for  a  differentiation  between  the  two  factors).  Due  to  annual  variation,  subjects  in  V58P4E1 were exposed to only two of the three strains in the previous year's vaccination administered in V58P4 and  therefore,  persistence  could  only  be  assessed  against  the  two  identical  strains  in  the  vaccine previously administered (A/H1N1 and B). Although after one year, the GMTs had fallen to about half their previous value against A/H1N1 and to about one third of their previous value for the B strain, seroprotection rates remained significantly higher  for  the  identical  strains  for  both  adults  and  elderly  subjects  than  one  year  previously  (i.e., before vaccination). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Persistence of antibody titers at 1 year after vaccination in V58P4 in PP population of V58P4E1 (N=4770).

<!-- image -->

B

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

H3N2 (drift from 2004) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Clinical studies in special populations

The vaccine was studied in adults and elderly in accordance with the relevant guideline. Seroresponses were assessed in the elderly population, stratified into 5 year age intervals (i.e., 60-64, 65-69, 70-74, 75-79, ≥ 80 years). The geometric mean ratios (GMRs) were used to investigate possible differences between the  age  strata.  Within  the  confines  of  the  small  sample  sizes  of  each  of  the  age  strata,  no marked differences in the immune responses among the age and vaccine groups were observed.

The  studies  were  not  designed  to  evaluate  other  specific  high-risk  groups.  Nonetheless,  during  the programme  a  significant  number  of  elderly  subjects  developed  medical  conditions  and  therefore became representative of those who are at increased risk for complications from influenza. In subjects with conditions associated with an increased risk of complications, e.g., cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions and diabetes mellitus, the incidence of these conditions in subjects of Optaflu and  control  groups  was  similar.  Underlying  conditions  classified  under  circulatory  system  affected 17% and 21% of subjects in Optaflu and control group, respectively, diabetes mellitus affected 3% of subjects in each vaccine group, and conditions of the respiratory system affected 2% of subjects in each vaccine group. Due to the relatively high number of subjects with underlying disease in V58P4 compared  with  the  other  studies,  this  was  the  most  appropriate  study  in  which  to  evaluate  at  risk populations. In  V58P4,  for  both  Optaflu  and  control  vaccines,  all  CHMP  criteria  were  passed  in  the  subset  of subjects  (N  =  448)  with  cardiovascular  and  pulmonary  conditions  as  well  as  diabetes  mellitus. Therefore, both vaccines induced acceptable immune responses also in at risk subjects with underlying medical conditions. No other special populations, including children, were studied · Supportive study With the exception of a difference in the age range of adult subjects (18-49 years in V58P5 vs. 18 - 60 years in the European programme), the demographic and other baseline characteristics were consistent with those of the European programme. These data from the statistically powered study V58P5 demonstrate all three CHMP criteria were met for both vaccine groups. Summary of Immunogenicity of study V58P5 according to CHMP criteria Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Test (antigen type)                          | Test (antigen type)                          | HI (egg-derived antigen)       | HI (egg-derived antigen)       | HI (egg-derived antigen)       | HI (egg-derived antigen)       | HI (cell-derived antigen)      | HI (cell-derived antigen)      | HI (cell-derived antigen)      | HI (cell-derived antigen)      |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Serological Criteria                         | Serological Criteria                         | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        | Vaccine                        |
| to meet CPMP/BWP/214/96                      |                                              | Cell-Derived (N=307)           | Cell-Derived (N=307)           | Egg-Derived (N=304)            | Egg-Derived (N=304)            | Cell-Derived (N=307)           | Cell-Derived (N=307)           | Egg-Derived (N=304)            | Egg-Derived (N=304)            |
| requirements                                 | AGE                                          | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    | GROUP: 18-49 years (adults)    |
|                                              |                                              | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) | A/New Caledonia/20/99 (A/H1N1) |
| Seroprotection ≥                             | 70%                                          | 96%                            | +                              | 98%                            | +                              | 97%                            | +                              | 98%                            | +                              |
| GMR                                          | (day 22/day 1) ≥ 2.5                         | 6.88                           | +                              | 7.98                           | +                              | 7.03                           | +                              | 7.96                           | +                              |
| Seroconversion or significant increase ≥ 40% | Seroconversion or significant increase ≥ 40% | 61%                            | +                              | 63%                            | +                              | 60%                            | +                              | 63%                            | +                              |
|                                              |                                              | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     | A/California/7/2004 (H3N2)     |
| Seroprotection ≥ 70%                         | Seroprotection ≥ 70%                         | 93%                            | +                              | 97%                            | +                              | 96%                            | +                              | 98%                            | +                              |
| GMR                                          | (day 22/day 1) ≥ 2.5                         | 12                             | +                              | 15                             | +                              | 11                             | +                              | 14                             | +                              |
| Seroconversion or                            | Seroconversion or                            | 85%                            | +                              | 90%                            | +                              | 86%                            | +                              | 90%                            | +                              |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| significant increase ≥ 40%                   | significant increase ≥ 40%                   |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |                     |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
|                                              |                                              | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 | B/Shanghai/361/2002 |
| Seroprotection ≥ 70%                         | Seroprotection ≥ 70%                         | 86%                 | +                   | 87%                 | +                   | 85%                 | +                   | 79%                 | +                   |
| GMR                                          | (day 22/day 1)                               | 7.09                | +                   | 6.5                 | +                   | 6.83                | +                   | 5.38                | +                   |
| Seroconversion or significant increase ≥ 40% | Seroconversion or significant increase ≥ 40% | 69%                 | +                   | 70%                 | +                   | 69%                 | +                   | 61%                 | +                   |

· Discussion on clinical efficacy Immunogenicity was assessed using HI-assay, according to predefined CPMP criteria, both at baseline and 3 weeks post vaccination.  Overall the serological responses to Optaflu were comparable to the egg-  derived  comparator  vaccines  for  all  parameters,  i.e.  GMT  ratio,  seroresponse  (defined  as significant increase or seroconversion) and postvaccination seroprotection. In addition to the HI assay, the  SRH  assay  was  applied  in  2  studies  (V58P1  and  V58P2).  In  both  studies,  the  seroprotection criterion was achieved with HI, but not with SRH The  applicant  also  evaluated  egg-derived  versus  cell  derived  test  antigens  for  the  HI-assays.  In general, it appeared that the cell -derived antigens resulted in slightly higher HI responses. However, the formal assessment according to the CPMP criteria was based upon the egg-derived test antigens. In  most  studies  all  3  criteria  were  met,  except  for  southern  hemisphere  study  V58P2  and  extension study V58P4E1.  In study V58P2, 72-95% of the vaccinees and in study V58P4E1 all vaccinees were immunised  in  the  previous  year  as  well.  In  these  studies  especially  geometric  mean  ratio  and seroresponse were less likely to meet the CPMP criteria. However, postvaccination seroprotection rate was always met.  In addition, in these two studies where the population had a high vaccination history, it  was also shown that with the use of alternative SRH assay, the criteria were met. For all 3 strains and  2  age  bands,  only  the  cell  derived  SRH  assay  consistently  fulfilled  the  postvaccination seroprotection rate, and appeared to be the most sensitive to achieving the other parameters as well. It was concluded that the finding was most likely an issue related to the variability of these assays. With regard to extension study V48P4E1, not all CPMP-criteria were met for strains A/Caledonia and B/Shanghai.  Since  these  latter  2  strains  were  not  changed  compared  to  the  previous  year,  the possibility  of  residual  immunity  for  these  strains  was  considered  as  explanation  for  the  inability  to achieve the criteria dealing with significant titre rise and GMR. The applicant provided the baseline data,  and  stratified  analysis  for  baseline  titre  (i.e.  &lt;10  vs ≥ 10),  which  supported  the  assumed responsiveness (as far as GMT increase is concerned) in relation to baseline titre. In the other studies, fewer individuals had received a vaccination in the previous year, although it still ranged  between  23-42%  in  the  adults  and  between  40-62%  in  the  elderly.  In  the  meta-analysis  the applicant  reports  that  vaccination  history  is  an  independent  factor  for  postvaccination  response. However, this  is  based  upon  proportions  of  subjects  with  prevaccination  seroprotection  and  not  on prevaccination  titre.  Others  (Beyer  W.  E.  et  al.,  2004)  have  shown  that  using  logistic  regression models, vaccination history is only predictive for prevaccination titre, but not postvaccination titre. Persistence  of  antibody  titres  was  addressed  in  extension  study  V58P4E1.  Although  the  titres decreased over time, the predefined seroprotection level (HI&gt;40) was still maintained after 12 months in  approximately  half  of  the  population  at  the  time  of  revaccination  (i.e.  the  prevaccination seroprotection rate of study V58P4E1). Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  addition,  it  was  noted  that  day  180  immunogenicity  data  for  study  V58P9  showed  the  lowest postvaccination seroprotection rate for B-strain, falling below 70% in both treatment arms, during an influenza epidemic season where also B strain circulated.

A specific issue with the HI titre is the between laboratory variability, which can exceed 300%. This may seriously hamper between study comparisons. However, this concern could be dismissed since all assays were performed in one laboratory only.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Overall the study population comprised of mostly healthy adults and elderly, although a proportion of individuals had underlying disease and as such was not in agreement with the inclusion criteria. The applicant  provided  stratified  analyses  and  a  tabulation  of  all  conditions.  The  small  numbers  in  the subanalyses  precluded  conclusions  for  these  individual  studies.  The  meta-analysis,  however,  also addressed co-morbidity. Analysis of this variable did not indicate a difference between the cell derived and egg derived formulation for the subgroup with comorbidity.

<!-- image -->

| Studies                                                                            | Adults Optaflu   | Control   | Elderly Optaflu   | Control   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|-----------|-------------------|-----------|
| Study V58P1                                                                        | 60               | 62        | 60                | 58        |
| Study V58P2                                                                        | 56               | 57        | 54                | 56        |
| Study V58P4                                                                        | 652              | 648       | 678               | 676       |
| Study V58P4E1 (exposed for the first time to specific formulation / total exposed) | 261/533          | 274/534   | 281/571           | 297/597   |
| Study V58P9                                                                        | 1028             | 171       |                   |           |
| Subjects exposed/ doses administered                                               | 2057/2329        | 1212/1472 | 1073/1363         | 1087/1387 |

Especially in the elderly population the mean age of the vaccinees was relatively young. As it is known that immune responsiveness to influenza vaccine decreases with age, it was considered important that stratified analyses in different age categories in the elderly population (i.e. 60-64, 65-69, 70-74,75-79 ≥ 80 years) were provided. Non-adjusted analyses were provided for the 5-year age bands. Although for the small studies an age related decline in GMR was observed this was only obvious for A/H1N1 strain in  the  pivotal  study  V58P4.  An  overall  analysis  was  not  provided.  Since  in  all  age  strata  the  CHMP criteria  were  met,  it  is  however  unlikely  that  an  overall  analysis  would  change  the  conclusions substantially. Finally, in a subset of study V58P9, the clinical outcome Influenza Like illness (ILI) was addressed. As such data may be important to extend the knowledge on the efficacy of seasonal influenza vaccines and Optaflu, the applicant provided details on the 7 cases of culture confirmed influenza B infections, but  a  detailed  analysis  was  not  available.  The  infections  occurred  between  131  and  178  day postvaccination.  Of  interest  was  that  none  of  the  patients  showed  a  significant  increase  in  HI-titre against the vaccine strain postinfection, which might indicate mismatch between circulating strain and vaccine  strain  or  co-circulation.  The  applicant  should  provide  incident  rate  based  calculations  and compare the epidemic characteristics for  the  study  area  (Lithuania)  with  the  EU,  as  such  data  may provide  some  insight  into  the  expectation  for  the  European  setting  based  on  these  data  (Follow-up measure). Clinical safety The safety of the vaccine has been evaluated in a total of 3693 subjects receiving at least 1 dose of the different Optaflu vaccine formulations. In the main safety study V58P4E1 2235 subjects were enrolled thereof  1105  received  the  candidate  vaccine  Optaflu  and  1131  an  egg-derived  purified  influenza vaccine, (Agrippal) as active control. The study population was age stratified, 1067 were adults (18-60 years of age) and 1168 belong to the elderly (&gt;60 years of age). · Patient exposure In all 5 studies safety profiles were evaluated in adult subjects following 2329 doses of Optaflu and 1472 doses of the comparator vaccine. Four of these studies also evaluated safety in elderly subjects following 1363 doses of Optaflu and 1387 doses of the comparator vaccine. Table: Numbers of Subjects and doses (Safety Population) Studies Study V58P1 Study V58P2 Study V58P4 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Total completed   | Total completed   |   2312 |   1457 |   1351 |   1375 |
|-------------------|-------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| Withdrawal        | Withdrawal        |     18 |     15 |     13 |     11 |
| Reason            | Adverse event     |      0 |      0 |      3 |      3 |
| Reason            | Withdrew consent  |      7 |      4 |      5 |      5 |
| Reason            | Lost of follow up |     11 |     11 |      5 |      3 |

<!-- image -->

| Study                         | Solicited AEs   | All non solicited AEs   | Non solicited AEs leading to premature withdrawal longer   | Non solicited AEs necessitating physician visit   | All SAEs*     |
|-------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| V58P1 (Safety lab. day 1 +22) | Day 1 to 7      | Day 1 to 22             |                                                            |                                                   | Day 1 to 22   |
| V58P2                         | Day 1 to 7      | Day 1 to 22             |                                                            |                                                   | Day 1 to 22   |
| V58P4                         | Day 1 to 7      | Day 1 to 22             | Day 22 to 181                                              |                                                   | Day 22 to 181 |
| V58P4E1                       | Day 1 to 7      | Day 1 to 22             |                                                            | Day 22-181                                        | Day 22 to 181 |
| V58P9                         | Day 1 to 7      | Day 1 to 22             |                                                            | Day 22-181                                        | Day 22 to 181 |

| Indicator           |        | Weighted risk ratio (95% CI)   | Weighted risk ratio (95% CI)   | Weighted risk ratio (95% CI)   |
|---------------------|--------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
|                     | Adults | Adults                         | Elderly                        | Elderly                        |
| Injection site pain | 1.28   | (1.11, 1.47)                   | 1.42                           | (1.09, 1.84)                   |
| Ecchymosis          | 0.96   | (0.69, 1.32)                   | 0.91                           | (0.63, 1.31)                   |
| Erythema            | 0.93   | (0.79, 1.09)                   | 1.04                           | (0.82, 1.30)                   |
| Induration          | 0.93   | (0.75, 1.16)                   | 1.15                           | (0.83, 1.60)                   |
| Swelling            | 0.91   | (0.68, 1.22)                   | 1.02                           | (0.68, 1.53)                   |
| Chills              | 0.99   | (0.70, 1.40)                   | 1.08                           | (0.71, 1.64)                   |
| Malaise             | 1.01   | (0.82, 1.23)                   | 1.04                           | (0.82, 1.31)                   |
| Myalgia             | 0.92   | (0.71, 1.19)                   | 1.06                           | (0.78, 1.43)                   |
| Arthralgia          | 1.19   | (0.84, 1.70)                   | 1.05                           | (0.76, 1.44)                   |
| Headache            | 1.11   | (0.92, 1.33)                   | 1.01                           | (0.80, 1.29)                   |

· Adverse events An extensive  overview  was  given  for  the  local  and  systemic  reactogenicity.  The  data  are  analysed descriptively and according to so-called weighted risk ratios for any, local, systemic, or other indicator of reactogenicity, a ratio of 1 indicates no difference. All safety data were analysed separately for adult and elderly subjects. Table: Monitoring Periods for Safety Assessment *SAEs: serious adverse events Solicited AEs There was no statistically significant difference between the two vaccines for any of the individual solicited local or systemic reactions except for pain at injection site, as was shown by the 95% confidence intervals (CIs) (a ratio of 1.0 indicates no difference). Solicited reactions classified as severe were very rare, but were balanced between the two vaccine groups in all cases (the severe indicators of reactogenicity were too infrequent in the elderly in many cases for weighted risk ratios to be calculated). Table: Indicators of Reactogenicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Sweating   |   1.08 | (0.77, 1.52)   | 1.07 (0.79, 1.46)   |
|------------|--------|----------------|---------------------|
| Fatigue    |   1.02 | (0.84, 1.25)   | 1.01 (0.81, 1.27)   |
| Fever      |   0.52 | (0.23, 1.17)   | 0.90 (0.35, 2.35)   |

Within each study, the percentages of adult subjects experiencing at least one solicited AE within a week of vaccination were balanced between the vaccine groups (Optaflu: 36% - 77%, control 33% 72%). However, higher percentages of subjects from the phase 1 and phase 2 studies (V58P1, V58P2) reported  solicited  AEs  compared  with  the  phase  3  studies.  When  pooled  across  studies,  the percentages of subjects experiencing any solicited AE only differed by 2% between vaccine groups. The  weighted  risk  ratios  suggested  no  difference  in  local  reactions,  systemic  reactions,  and  other indicators of reactogenicity between the Optaflu and control vaccines.

<!-- image -->

The percentages experiencing local reactions (range, 25% - 60%) were higher than systemic reactions (range, 16% to 48%) within each study. Other indicators of reactogenicity (range, 2% to 11%) were relatively infrequent and balanced between the groups. The most common local reactions in both vaccine groups were pain and erythema (range, 15% - 18%). The  most  common  systemic  reactions  in  both  vaccine  groups  were  headache,  fatigue,  and  malaise (range, 11% - 13%). Within  each  study,  the  percentages  of  elderly  subjects  experiencing  at  least  one  solicited  local  or systemic reaction within a week of vaccination were balanced between the vaccine groups (Optaflu: 26% - 63%, control 25% - 76%). However, higher percentages of subjects from the phase 1/2 and phase 2 studies (V58P1, V58P2) reported solicited reactions than the phase 3 studies. When pooled across studies the percentages experiencing any reaction between vaccine groups only differed by 1%. The  weighted  risk  ratio  with  95%  CIs  suggested  no  difference  in  overall  percentages  experiencing local reactions, systemic reactions, and other indicators of reactogenicity between Optaflu and control vaccines. The percentages experiencing local reactions (range, 16% - 62%) were higher than systemic reactions  (range,  13%  -  40%)  when  compared  between  vaccine  groups  within  each  study.  Other indicators of reactogenicity (range, 2% to 9%) were relatively infrequent and balanced between the groups. Pain and erythema were the local reactions experienced by the highest percentages in both vaccine groups (range, 6% - 10%). Fatigue, headache, and malaise were the systemic reactions experienced by the  highest  percentages  in  both  vaccine  groups  (range,  9%  -  10%).  There  was  no  statistically significant difference between the two vaccines for any solicited reactions except for pain for which the  Optaflu  groups  had  a  weighted  risk  of  1.42  over  the  control  group  with  95%  CIs  that  do  not include 1. The subsequently submitted supportive US study versus a different US licensed comparator, Fluvirin, did not show the same trend. Further data are needed to exclude that pain may occur more frequently in subjects receiving Optaflu (follow up measure). Reactogenicity after a second dose (Studies V58P4 and V58P4E1): The extension study allowed an assessment of safety after vaccinations given in consecutive years. Adult and elderly subjects were enrolled at a 1:1 ratio into Optaflu and comparator vaccine groups of the  extension  study  (V58P4E1)  conducted  in  the  subsequent  influenza  season.  Each  vaccine  group contained equal proportions of subjects vaccinated with Optaflu and comparator vaccine the previous year.  Overall  frequencies  of  solicited  AEs  (especially  the  systemic  reactions)  were  lower  after  the second dose. Results were independent of the type of influenza vaccine given previously and were similar for the two vaccine groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

However, for Optaflu there was a slightly higher incidence of reactions in subjects receiving EGG/ Optaflu than in those receiving Optaflu / Optaflu (notably the systemic reactions malaise and myalgia for elderly, and pain for adult).

## Table: Overview of reactogenecity: Percentages of subjects who received two doses, one year apart

| Age   | Type of   | V58P4 (N=2654)   | V58P4E1   |
|-------|-----------|------------------|-----------|

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| group   | reaction   | Optaflu (652 adult/ 678 elderly) %   | EGG (648 adult/ 676 elderly) %   | Optaflu / Optaflu (N=272 adult) (N=290elderly) %   | Optaflu /EGG (N=274 adult) (N=297elderly) %   | EGG/ Optaflu (N=261 adult) (N=281elderly) %   | EGG/EGG (N=260 adult) (N=300 elderly) %   |
|---------|------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Adult   | Any        | 40                                   | 41                               | 33                                                 | 31                                            | 39                                            | 34                                        |
| Adult   | Local      | 32 (N=209)                           | 31 (N=200)                       | 29 (N=78)                                          | 27 (N=73)                                     | 32 (N=84)                                     | 29 (N=76)                                 |
| Adult   | Systemic   | 22 (N=144)                           | 23 (N=147)                       | 15 (N=41)                                          | 17 (N=46)                                     | 18 (N=46)                                     | 16 (N=42)                                 |
| Elderly | Any        | 34                                   | 32                               | 23                                                 | 26                                            | 28                                            | 24                                        |
| Elderly | Local      | 22 (N=149)                           | 18 (N=121)                       | 16 (N=47)                                          | 17 (N=51)                                     | 20 (N=50)                                     | 16 (N=47)                                 |
| Elderly | Systemic   | 22 (N=146)                           | 22 (N=147)                       | 13 (N=37)                                          | 13 (N=40)                                     | 17 (N=47)                                     | 12 (N=37)                                 |

Non-solicited Adverse Events Within each study, the percentages of adults experiencing at least one non-solicited AE within 3 weeks after vaccination were balanced between the vaccine groups (Optaflu: 9%-25%, comparator 7%-31%). However, higher percentages of subjects from the phase 1 and 2 studies (range, 17%-31%) reported non-solicited  AEs  than  in  the  phase  3  studies  (range,  7%-15%).  When  pooled  across  studies  the percentages experiencing any non-solicited AE only differed by 1%. The weighted risk ratio with 95% CIs indicated no difference between Optaflu and comparator vaccines. Most AEs were either common illnesses expected in this population or known vaccine side effects. There were no differences in severity profiles between the vaccine groups for all non-solicited AEs when compared by study or between the pooled vaccine groups. Overall, most non-solicited AEs were mild and only 9 subjects of Optaflu group and 6 subjects of the control group experienced severe AEs. The percentages of elderly subjects across studies experiencing at least one non-solicited AE within 3 weeks of vaccination were balanced between the vaccine groups (Optaflu: 8%-28%, control 6%-30%). However, higher percentages of subjects from the phase 1/2 and phase 2 studies (range, 15%-30%) reported  non-solicited  AEs  than  the  phase  3  studies  (range,  6%-13%).  The  percentages  of  nonsolicited AEs between vaccine groups for the pooled population differed by only 2%. The weighted risk  ratio  with  95%  CIs  showed  no  difference  overall  between  the  pooled  Optaflu  and  control vaccines.  Most AEs were either common illnesses expected in this population or known vaccine side effects. There were no differences in severity profiles between the vaccine groups for all non-solicited AEs when compared by study or between the pooled vaccine groups. The  numbers  and  percentages  of  subjects  experiencing  non-solicited  AEs  within  6  months  during study V58P4 were similar to those reported within 3 weeks in both the adult and elderly subjects. This reflects  the  change  in  the  criteria  for  assessment  of  safety  after  3  weeks,  which  only  required  that SAEs and AEs leading to premature withdrawal from the study were monitored. · Serious adverse event/deaths There were three SAEs leading to death reported, during the 3- week safety follow-up. All three deaths were in  study  V58P4,  all  in  elderly  subjects:  carbon  monoxide  poisoning,  cerebrovascular  accident and hypertension, adenocarcinoma of the lung. Medicinal product no longer authorised

For the studies V58P4E1 and V58P9, and the US study V58P5, four additional SAEs reported after the 3-week  follow-up  led  to  death  in  adult  and  elderly  subjects  (compression  of  the  neck,  cerebral haemorrhage on day 127, sudden cardiac death on day 33, acute myocardial infarction on day 59). All were judged to be unrelated to the vaccination.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Overall, 57 subjects experienced a total of 68 non-fatal SAEs within the 3 weeks follow up or at any time for V58P4, all were judged as unrelated to the vaccinations. The criterion for seriousness in all but  one  SAE  (elderly  subject  of  V58P4  [i.e.,  pneumonia,  Optaflu  group])  included  hospitalization. Three of these non-fatal SAEs led to premature withdrawal from the study. The majority of non-fatal SAEs (53/68) were reported by elderly subjects.

## · Laboratory findings

Clinical hematological and urinary routine analyses (hematological, including erythrocyte sedimentation  rate,  hematochemical,  urinary  analyses)  were  carried  out  on  samples  provided  by participants in V58P1 on the day of, but prior to vaccination and 21 days after the administration of the flu vaccines. There were no consistent significant changes. · Safety in special populations There were no specific studies in special populations. · Discontinuation due to adverse events In the adult population none was due to an AE.  In elderly, there was one withdrawal due to an SAE in the Optaflu group in study V58P1 as follows: a 79-year old man (the oldest subject in the study) was administered Optaflu. On day 17 he was hospitalized due to syncope, which was classified in the case report form (CRF) as severe. The subject withdrew from the study, at which time the AE persisted. With the exception of 3 deaths, there were no other discontinuations for AEs in the elderly population in study V58P4. In extension study V58P4E1 serious AEs lead to the discontinuation of 2 elderly subjects (one in each group) (both acute myocardial infarction). · Discussion on clinical safety The preclinical  and  quality  dossiers  did  not  suggest  that  the  differences  observed  between  the  eggderived  and  cell  cultured  formulation  has  changed  the  antigenic  characteristics.  Therefore  clinical evaluation  of  safety  according  to  the  CHMP  criteria  laid  down  in  Annex  (CPMP/BWP/2490/00)  is acceptable. With regard to the sample size, however, it was noted that a substantial number of subjects (n=2235)  were  entered  twice  in  2  different  studies  with  an  interval  of  one  year;  hence  it  was considered questionable whether these individuals could be handled as independent variables in the safety assessment. In an extensive re-analysis of the reactogenicity data it was shown that exclusion of extension study V58P4E1 did not significantly change the outcome. A drawback, however, was that the total exposure in the experimental group decreased to 2588 adult and elderly vaccinees. For the purpose of reactogenicity assessment, this sample size is still well above the minimum requirement and  in  agreement  with  the  requirements  of  the  Annex.  Concerning  adverse  events,  given  the experience  of  the  egg-derived  formulation,  the  sample  size  is  considered  sufficient  for  the  present application,  provided  that  the  follow  up  on  safety  and  reactogenicity  of  the  new  formulation  is sufficiently addressed in the Risk Management Plan. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Furthermore,  the  observed  lower  frequency  of  local  and  systemic  reactions  in  the  extension  study seemed related to the fact that those individuals who had less local or systemic reactions continued in the  extension  group.  The applicant reported on a planned extension study (V58P4E2), including all subjects  originally  enrolled.  Although  the  study  seems  interesting  and  informative  as  far  as  the questions  concerning  immunogenicity  and  reactogenicity  following  repeated  annual  vaccination  are concerned, it does not seem adequate to solve the question with regard to selection bias.

With regard to the other prerequisites for the safety analysis, all studies were conducted as observer blinded studies, and the pivotal study V58P4 was followed up of 6 months. An extensive overview was given for the local and systemic reactogenicity. Only injection site pain was found to occur more frequently in subjects vaccinated with Optaflu. On the basis of the data provided, it cannot be excluded

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

that injection site pain is a result of a local reaction to the injection, which may be more frequent for Optaflu  formulation  compared  to  the  control  formulation  Agrippal.  Since  it  concerns  an  event generally graded as mild and self-limiting, it is considered appropriate that the applicant commits to active surveillance and a proper statement in the SPC.

In  addition,  although  overall  the  vaccine  seems  to  be  well  tolerated,  and  comparable  to  the  control vaccine, it is questioned why only severe cases of systemic reactogenicity were reported in subjects who  received  2  subsequent  doses  of  Optaflu  (in  2  subsequent  years).  One  cannot  fully  exclude increased systemic reactogenicity to Optaflu. However, the overall safety evaluation and the statistical analysis  provided,  indicated  that  these  systemic  events  occur  at  a  very  low  frequency  and  will probably not be of major clinical relevance. The measures proposed seem appropriate.  The applicant commits to address this issue in the Risk Management Plan.

Non-solicited (severe) adverse events were reported at a low frequency in both treatment groups and age categories. There were no marked differences between groups, and more importantly no specific safety signal. None of the severe adverse events were considered to be related to the cell cultured or egg  derived  vaccine.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  reported  frequencies  did  not  suggest  a  significant difference  between  the  cell  derived  and  egg  based  formulations,  in  adult  subjects  vaccinated  with Optaflu in the second year, more SAEs were reported (2% vs. 1% in the controls). All adverse events will be meticulously monitored in the PSUR (Follow-up measure). The distribution and characteristics of the severe adverse events in the elderly population also reflect the  underlying  health  status  of  the  population,  despite  the  inclusion  criterion  of  being  'healthy'.  It highlights the need for stratified analysis of the population with and without comorbidity. Despite the fact that high risk individuals will mostly benefit from influenza vaccination, there are no safety data available  for  patients  at  particular  risk  for  influenza  complications  (adults  and  elderly  with  poorly controlled underlying diseases and children). A post-marketing, prospective cohort study is planned, which  will  include  both  healthy  individuals  and  those  with  underlying  conditions  or  potential complicating conditions. The concept on how these issues (both with regard to immunogenicity and safety) will be studied is addressed in the RMP. 5. Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described by the applicant fulfils the legislative requirements. Risk Management Plan The MAA submitted a risk management plan. Populations  not  studied  include  children,  pregnant  or  lactating  women  and  patients  with  relevant  comorbidities or certain disease severity. Vaccinations  in  pregnant  and  lactating  women  should  be  followed-up.  Furthermore,  the  applicant should discuss in PSURs the cumulative results of the observations in pregnant and lactating women. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The applicant should provide an updated Pharmacovigilance/risk management plan within two months following a positive CHMP decision, including full details of planned, ongoing and completed studies, as  for  instance  the  second  extension  study,  the  study  in  children  and  adolescents  and  the  safety surveillance study (including protocols and timelines for the studies to be carried out).

## Table Summary of the risk management plan

| Safety concern   | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities   | Proposed risk   |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                                               |                                                                                                                                          | minimisation activities                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Identified risks                                                              |                                                                                                                                          |                                                           |
| Severe systemic reactions associated with repeated dosing                     | Extension study V58P4E2, Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, PSURs                                                                     | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Increased frequency of injection site pain compared to egg-based flu vaccines | Post-marketing prospective cohort study (V58T24), additional information from other trials , PSURs, Routine Pharmacovigilance activities | Listed as ADR in section 4.8 Specific note in section 4.8 |
| Potential risks                                                               |                                                                                                                                          |                                                           |
| Anaphylaxis                                                                   | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, PSURs, Post-marketing prospective cohort study V58T24                                              | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Transient thrombocytopenia                                                    | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, PSURs, Post-marketing prospective cohort study V58T24                                              | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Guillain Barré syndrome                                                       | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, Post- marketing prospective cohort study V58T24, PSURs                                             | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Vasculitis                                                                    | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, Post- marketing prospective cohort study V58T24, PSURs longer                                      | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Encephalomyelitis                                                             | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, Post-marketing prospective cohort study V58T24, PSURs                                              | Listed as ADR in section 4.8                              |
| Missing Information                                                           |                                                                                                                                          |                                                           |
| Use in children                                                               | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities PSURs, clinical trial in children and adolescents (V58P12) no                                       | Indication in section 4.1                                 |
| Use in pregnant/lactating women                                               | Routine Pharmacovigilance activities, PSURs (cumulative data)                                                                            | SPC section 4.6                                           |
| Concomitant administration of other vaccines                                  | Study arm in extension study V58P4E2, Routine Pharmacovigilance activities                                                               | SPC section 4.5                                           |

<!-- image -->

The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 6. Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality During  the  evaluation  of  Optaflu  one major  objection  was  identified  concerning  the  adventitious agents risk. Satisfactory responses have been provided to resolve it. Other minor concerns have been adequately addressed, however, several commitments are made by the applicant and several follow-up measures are defined to provide further information post-approval. In conclusion, all quality issues are resolved. Medicinal product no longer authorised

At  the  time  of  CHMP  opinion,  there  were  a  number  of  minor  unresolved  quality  issues  having  no impact on the Risk-benefit balance of the product. The applicant gave a Letter of Undertaking and committed to resolve these as follow-up measures after the opinion, within an agreed timeframe.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

Regarding the comparability between egg-derived and MDKC derived vaccines, the primary Ferret study  (CBI-PCS  007)  clearly  shows  the  comparability  between  the  egg-derived  Agrippal  (used  as positive  control)  and  the  cell-cultured  product  Optaflu.  No  significantly  different  results  were observed in all the parameters analysed when comparing the test and positive control products.

Efficacy The clinical database to substantiate the immunogenicity of Optaflu includes an appropriate number of vaccinees  to  address  the  relevant  questions.  The  consistent  use  of  the  same  observer  blinded randomised design, patient selection, study methods and the follow up period of 6 months allows for an overall analysis of the immunogenicity and safety data. Overall  the  studies  indicate  similar  immunogenicity  to  the  egg-based  comparator  vaccine,  although there  are  still  a  few  remaining  follow  up  measures  (FUM).  The  immunogenicity  and  safety  profile appears to be acceptable, and comparable to the egg-derived control vaccine. From the data presented no new safety issues were identified compared to the current influenza vaccines. In a agreement with the recommendation laid down in Annex (CPMP/BWP/2490/00) to the 'Note for guidance  on  harmonisation  of  requirements  for  influenza  vaccines'  (CPMP/BWP/214/96),  which extends  this  NfG  with  specific  requirements  pertinent  to  the  marketing  authorization  of  influenza vaccines produced in cell culture, the MAA has shown an acceptable immunogenicity (and safety) for Optaflu. The lack of information in children is an important issue, although at present, the vaccine is claimed for  use  in  adults  aged  18  years  or  older.    The  applicant  is  requested  to  provide  details/outlines  of paediatric studies and time-lines when these will be carried out. Safety From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. · User consultation A diagnostic readability test (technical readability/traceability/comprehensibility/applicability) including scoring has been performed on the English version of the Patient Information Leaflet (PIL) and from the results it can be concluded that the relevant information is accessible and understandable for the user. Risk-benefit assessment A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that: Medicinal product no longer authorised

-  pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns.
-  no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Recommendation

Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered that the risk-benefit balance of Optaflu in the 'Prophylaxis of influenza for adults, especially in those who run an  increased  risk  of  associated  complications'  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the granting of the marketing authorisation.

<!-- image -->