---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:52:35
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/osigraft-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: osigraft-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.1236537
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-27 17:47:25.146397
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scienfitic discussion for the approval of Osigraft. This scientific discussion has been updated  until 1 October  2004. For information on changes after 1 October 2004 please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Osigraft is a product that stimulates the normal healing process of bone by initiating and enhancing regeneration  and  growth  of  new  osseous  tissue.  The  product  was  originally  marketed  under  its temporary  tradename:  Ost eogenic  Protein  1  Howmedica  International  S.de.R.L ,  which  has  been changed  into  Osigraft . The  product  contains  recombinant  human  Osteogenic  Protein-1:  BMP-7 (eptodermin alfa) as active ingredient and osteoconductive type I bovine bone collagen. In  the  sicientific  discussion  below,  the  active  substance  will  be  referred  to  as  OP-1.  Each  vial  of Osigraft  contains  3.5mg  of  OP-1  in  one  gram  of  vacuum  dried  collagen.  Osigraft  is  a  lyophilised powder,  which  is  reconstituted  prior  to  use  with  sterile  sodium  chloride  solution  for  injection. The Implant is intended to be surgically implanted at bony sites. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Osigraft  is  manufactured  by  combining  the  active  ingredient,  OP-1  and  the  excipient,  the  bovine collagen matrix, vacuum drying the material and then sterilising it by using gamma radiation. Type I collagen was selected as the support matrix because it is biocompatible, osteoconductive and resorbable.  Terminal  sterilisation  by  gamma  irradiation  was  chosen  as  the  method  for  sterilisation. During development, the stability of the product during lyophilisation was ensured. Before use, the Osigraft is wetted with 3 ml of sterile 9 mg/ml sodium chloride solution for injection. The vial is gently swirled to aid in mixing and then allowed to stand for at least 2 minutes while the product expands to a maximum volume (4 ml). The reconstituted Osigraft is then removed from the vial using a sterile spatula or curette and placed at the site of the bone defect. The amount of Osigraft used is that volume which is necessary to fill the defect. Osigraft is packaged  in  a  borosilicate glass  tubing vial which  has  a  grey-butyl,  siliconised, lyophilisation stopper and an aluminium crimp seal. The crimped vial is packaged in a thermoform tray, sealed with a lid and in which the product is sterilised by gamma radiation. Active substance Recombinant  Human  Osteogenic  Protein  (OP-1)  is  a  vacuum  dried  protein  produced  from  a genetically altered recombinant Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cell line. It is also known as BMP-7. The cDNA for the OP-1 gene was cloned from human c-DNA libraries using a probe based on peptide sequences of bovine osteogenic proteins. The host cell line used for the construction of the production cell line is a Chinese Hamster Ovary cell line. Details on the preparation, testing and storage of the cell banks were provided. Medicinal product no longer authorised

During fermentation of OP-1, raw materials from animal origin are used.  Assurance has been given that these raw materials do not present a risk of BSE/TSE

The purification process entails ultrafiltration, viral filtration and column chromatography steps.  Viral clearance has been validated with reference to the appropriate CPMP guidelines.  In-process controls and specifications are appropriate to ensure consistency and quality of the active substance.

The  active  substance  has  been  characterised  using  a  range  of  protein  chemistry,  biological  and immunological techniques.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Other ingredients

The final product contains Type I collagen as an excipient. The starting material for the production of collagen  matrix  is  bone  powder  derived  from  the  midshaft  of  bovine  femurs.  The  bovine  bone  is sourced from animals of USA origin.

The collagen is manufactured by chemical extraction of crushed bone. The collagen is particulate and is sieved to ensure a specific particle size range.

The production process has been validated to ensure viral clearance using appropriate viral models. The  collagen  matrix  has  been  characterised  by  protein  chemistry,  biological  and  immunological techniques.

Product development and finished product OP-1, the active substance and Osigraft are manufactured at Stryker Biotech in West Lebanon, NH, USA. Osigraft is terminally sterilised by gamma  irradiation at Isomedix Operations Inc., Northborough,  MA,  USA  utilising  a  Batch-Carrier  radiator  process.  Process  validation  studies evaluated the critical parameters. Appropriate release specifications have been set for the finished product. Stability of the product Twelve months data on 3 full scale production batches and stored at 2 - 8 °C have been presented in the initial application. A shelf life at 2 - 8 °C as indicated in the SPC has been accepted. A  new  stability  study  has  been  designed  in  accordance  with  ICH  guidelines  for  the  final  product. The applicant has committed to make the results available at the 6, 12 and 24 months timepoints. Stability data were presented for the shelf life of the product after reconstitution with 9 mg/ml sodium chloride solution for injection (0.9%).  The SPC states that the product  should be used immediately after reconstitution. 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics Eptodermin  alfa  (OP-1)  is  a  member  of  the  TGF-ß  superfamily  of  proteins.  OP-1  was  originally isolated from bone based on its ability to induce new bone formation in vivo . In vitro studies: Recombinant human OP-1 has been found to promote cell proliferation and collagen synthesis in osteoblast-enriched primary cultures. It also stimulates alkaline phosphatase synthesis and secretion,  and  cAMP  production  in  response  to  parathyroid  hormone,  osteocalcin  synthesis,  and mineralisation of the extracellular matrix in osteoblast-enriched cultures. Osteoinduction is a cascade of events which includes recruitment of mesenchymal stem cells to  the implant  site,  believed  to  be  mediated  by  rh-OP-1.  Mesenchymal  stem  cells  differentiate  to  mature osteoblasts which secrete the organic matrix of bone around themselves. They are subsequently placed within the lacunae in the intercellular substance and become osteocytes. Osteoblasts add successive new layers of bone to osseous surfaces. Medicinal product no longer authorised

OP-1 has been found to increase BMP type I and type II receptor expression in a concentration and time-dependent  manner.  Receptor  mRNA  is  also  detected  in  other  tissues  besides  osteoblasts  and chondrocytes. However, BMP receptors in other tissues will not be exposed to significant doses of OP-1  since  OP-1  from  the  product  does  not  reach  significant  concentrations  in  other  tissues.  If receptors  on  other  cells  are  interacting  with  OP-1,  the  fate  of  these  cells  is  determined  by  their development lineage, tissue environment including matrix proteins, and the dose of OP-1. A number of local interactions of OP-1 with other tissue types (heart, kidney and central nervous system) have been described in literature. The risk of 'systemic' non-specific actions is likely to be low following local administration of Osigraft and release of OP-1 from the implant.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The therapeutic efficacy of Osigraft is claimed to be directly related to the receptor binding specificity of OP-1. Type I bovine collagen is not considered to exert any pharmacodynamic effect, but is seen as a  means  for  osteoconduction.  Collagen  is  listed  as  an  excipient.  However,  collagen  matrix  alone  is capable of achieving bone growth and healing of voids in bone, but in the studies performed by the applicant and in the published studies, it is evident that healing of critical size defects using collagen matrix alone is unlikely. Minimal bone formation is observed, but there is no bridging. Bone formation following implantation of collagen matrix alone is likely to be due to osteoconduction and possibly the effect of local production of osteogenic factors.

In vivo studies: The osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties of Osigraft have been determined in a series of studies in various animal models. Bone formation in bone defect models, including rabbits, dogs and monkeys, demonstrated that the chosen dose of 3.5mg/g collagen is appropriate. General and safety pharmacology programme:  The  safety pharmacology  of OP-1  has been investigated by intravenous administration in rats. No studies have been performed with the Implant. Safety margins with regard to OP-1 exposure (AUC) have not been presented. On a dose/BW basis, the  high  doses  used  represent  a  safety  margin  of  23  times  the  anticipated  maximum  intraosseous human  exposure  (3  vials  of  3.5  mg  each/70  kg).  However,  substantial  interspecies  differences  in sensitivity to the effects of OP-1 have not been ruled out. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetics of Osigraft A  biodistribution  study  was  performed  in  rats  using  radiolabelled  Osigraft  (single  implantation). The results were inconclusive. A study was performed in vitro to study the release of OP-1 from Osigraft. In this study, serum was added to Osigraft and incubated for up to 6 hours. About 25% of the OP-1 was released into the serum by 3 hours, and release levelled off by 6 hours. A study examined the release of OP-1 from Osigraft following subcutaneous implant in rats. Implants were removed after 1 hour, 1, 3, 6 days. The results indicated that within 24 hours, only 20-25 % of the extractable OP-1 remained in the product; by 6 days, less than 6% remained. A timecourse study examined the bone formation following subcutaneous implant of Osigraft in rats. This study demonstrated that much of the product is resorbed by 21 days, with complete resorption by 28 days. A PK study was done in rabbits after intraosseous implantation using radiolabelled OP-1. The results indicate that following application of labelled Osigraft to a femur, the OP-1 remained well contained in the defect and was metabolised locally.  There was a limited system availability of the OP-1 (&lt; 2 % of total dose). Pharmacokinetics of OP-1 Medicinal product no longer authorised

125 I-OP-1 pharmacokinetics and distribution have been studied in the rat following single intravenous administration of the OP-1 protein. The plasma total radioactivity concentration-time data indicated that the terminal half-life of total radioactivity was independent of dose. The mean terminal half-life of total  radioactivity  was  8.0  hours  in  male  and  5.9  hours  in  female  rats.  The  AUC  also  increased  in proportion to the increase in dose. AUC24 values were higher in female rats at all doses. Parameters derived from plasma TCA-precipitable (protein-associated) radioactivity concentrations were consistent with data for total plasma radioactivity. The estimates for terminal half life were 9.6 hours in female and 15.1 hours in male rats.

The data do not indicate substantial and prolonged tissue or organ uptake of radioactivity after a single intravenous dose. The whole body autoradiographs were generally in agreement with the quantitative

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

distribution  study  results.  Measurements  of  the  proportions  of  TCA-precipitable  radioactivity  in plasma suggest rapid loss of 125 I from OP-1.

Placental transfer of radioactivity was  studied in pregnant rats following single intravenous administration  of 125 I-OP-1.  The  results  with  regard  to  placental  penetration  are  inconclusive,  but suggest  that  transfer  is  minimal.  Since  specific  embryogenic  and  organogenic  events  are  also controlled  by  TGF-ß's,  even  small  fractions  of  the  dose  in  the  implant  which  may  reach  the  foetus must be considered potentially harmful.

Two  additional  studies  were  conducted  to  investigate  the  pharmacokinetics  of  OP-1  in  rat  and  in monkeys following a single intravenous administration of OP-1.  Both studies used an ELISA assay to monitor  OP-1  concentration  in  serum.  In  the  rat  study,  no  differences  were  observed  in  serum clearance  between  the  dosage  groups,  and  clearance  was  consistent  with  glomerular  filtration. Data suggest that OP-1 does not distribute into deep compartments. The results of the monkey study were  consistent  with  those  seen  in  the  rat  study.  Elimination  was  rapid  and  consistent  with  renal clearance. Toxicokinetic studies No toxicokinetic studies have been performed. Collagen matrix Evidence for the resorption and remodeling of implanted type I bovine collagen in the case of Osigraft is  available  from  radiographic  studies,  DEXA  scans  and  histological  data  collected  during  the  dog tibial implantation study described previously. The histomorphology data indicated that the collagen matrix was replaced as the active  growth  of  bone  bridging  the  defect  proceeded. Resorption  of the implanted collagen and replacement with new bone were also evident in the rabbit, dog and monkey segmental defect studies. Toxicology The toxicology programme has generally utilised a combination of single subcutaneous administration studies on the finished product and single or repeated intravenous dose studies of OP-1. The  subcutaneous  route  was  chosen  because  it  allows  bone  formation  and  administration  of  large amounts  of  the  product.  The  subcutaneous  route  precludes  multiple  daily  exposure.  Extended durations of exposure to the finished product have been achieved by subcutaneous implantation of the maximum practical dose quantities followed by extended periods of observation. Single dose toxicity OP-1  has  been  evaluated  in  acute  intravenous  toxicity  studies  in  mice  and  rats.  No  deaths  were observed in the studies. No adverse clinical signs were observed and no abnormalities were noted at necropsy.  Histopathologic  evaluation  of  the  injection  site  in  both  control  and  test  animals  showed signs of subacute inflammation.  No dose-related changes of potential toxicological significance were observed in haematology and clinical chemistry variables. Osigraft  has  been  evaluated  in  two  acute  toxicity  studies  in  rats  using  subcutaneous  implantation. No abnormal clinical observations were noted during the studies. In  summary,  two  types  of  cellular  responses  were  observed  at  the  implantation  sites:  1)  an inflammatory response was seen in both the vehicle and Osigraft sites; 2) an osteogenic response was seen in the Osigraft group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Subacute and chronic toxicology

A  28-day  intravenous  OP-1  toxicity  study  in  rats  at  doses  0,  0.035,  0.35  and  3.5  mg/kg/day (0.23-23  times  the  maximum  anticipated  human  dose  was  performed.  Treatment-related  localised effects were seen at the injection site in all OP-1 groups. The frequency and severity of these local effects were dose-dependent. Four animals died during the study, one from the lowest dose group and three from the highest dose group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There  was  some  change  observed  in  erythroid  parameters  (suggesting  developing  microcytic anaemia), reduced ovary weight, reduced thymus weight (absolute and relative to BW) and increased adrenal weight. There appeared to be no histopathological indication of liver or kidney damage which could  have  affected  serum  protein  levels.  The  major  finding  was  inflammation,  ossification  and necrosis  at  the  injection  site.  There  were  no  signs  of  ossification  in  other  tissues  or  organs  at  the highest OP-1 dose. Minimal or mild chronic inflammation of the liver was observed in one male and one female rat at the highest dose.

A single Osigraft dose study with 13 weeks of observation was carried out in rats. Control animals were only subjected to the surgical procedure, no material was implanted. There were no changes in laboratory parameters suggesting renal abnormalities, no dose-dependence was observed. No  treatment-attributable  findings  were  observed  in  urinalysis.  At  necropsy,  subcutaneous,  hard masses were found at the implantation site of the majority of animals treated with Osigraft, in all dose groups. Ectopic ossification was observed at the implantation site in all 15 males and 14/15 females at 500 mg Osigraft. No ossification was observed in control animals. A 12-week pharmacodynamic and toxicity study in dogs was performed. Mild osseous metaplasia was observed in one skin specimen which was not taken from the surgical site and in one specimen which was taken from the surgical site. Moderate osseous metaplasia was found in one skin specimen taken from the surgical site. Haematological and clinical chemistry findings did not reveal treatment-related trends. A subchronic dog tibial implant  study was performed. In this study 14 dogs  received Osigraft in  a critical size defect. The dogs were followed for 18 months and were assessed for bone healing as well as  systemic  effects.  Blood  samples  were  analysed  for  the  presence  of  anti-OP-1  and  anti  type  I collagen activity by ELISA. No systemic effects attributed to the exposure of Osigraft were observed. No neoplastic changes were observed in the distant organs or at the implantation site. A four-week intravenous toxicity study was performed in monkeys. In this study, female cynomolgus monkeys  were  dosed  three  times  weekly  for  4  weeks,  prior  to  an  8-week  recovery  period  and necropsy. Dose levels were 0, 0.01, 0.15 and 1.0 mg/kg. The high dose group represented a safety factor of 10 fold over the proposed human single dose of 2x3.5 mg units and were exposed to 13 doses over the treatment period. The results showed that there was localised damage to the blood vessels at the site of injection. This is consistent with the findings on repeat intravenous administration in rats. There were no signs of systemic toxicity. Immunogenicity Both  OP-1  and  bovine  collagen  are  immunogenic.  The  applicant  has  demonstrated  that  OP-1  was immunogenic in dogs and monkeys, and bovine type I collagen was immunogenic in dogs (not tested in monkeys). The apparently lower immunogenicity of OP-1 in monkeys compared to dogs might be the result of intravenous injections, followed by rapid elimination, as opposed to higher immunogenicity in dog following intraosseous implantation. In dogs, the time to detectable anti-OP-1 antibody formation was several weeks. By that time, it is likely that the OP-1 is no longer responsible for the bone healing process. This could explain the lack of apparent effect on the induction of bone formation in dogs, despite the anti-OP-1 antibody formation. Is it also unlikely that a toxicologically relevant finding was masked by the formation of neutralising antibodies. In absence of any experience with immune response following subsequent administration of Osigraft, the repeated use of Osigraft is not recommended (warning in the SPC). The applicant has provided data on cross-reactivity of antiOP-1 antibodies and a number of other members of the BMP and TGF-beta family, with reassuring results. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Reproductive toxicity

One intravenous developmental toxicity study with OP-1 was performed. Groups of 6 mated female rats were given intravenous OP-1 at dose levels of 0, 0.035, 0.35 and 3.5 mg/kg/day during gestation days. No abnormal maternal clinical or necropsy findings were noted. No external malformations were observed in any of the groups. The applicant gives the following justifications for not performing a full reproduction toxicity programme: 1) OP-1 is a recombinant form of an endogenous protein and is

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

intended for single administration in humans, 2) the extent of exposure to OP-1 is considered minimal. The results of the pharmacokinetic studies with regard to placental penetration were inconclusive, but suggest that transfer is minimal. However, since TGF-ß's have diverse effects on embryogenesis and organogenesis,  even  small  fractions  of  the  maternal  dose  could  be  harmful.    Use  of  Osigraft  is contraindicated during pregnancy.

There are no data on the secretion of OP-1 in milk. OP-1 Implant should be given to breast-feeding women only when the attending physician decides that benefits outweigh the risks. It is recommended that breast-feeding be discontinued following treatment with Osigraft.

Genotoxicity The applicant has carried out two in vitro studies. The results were negative. Carcinogenicity A general property of  TGF-ß's  is  their  ability  to  promote  cell  growth.  The  high  affinity  binding  of OP-1  to  two  sites  on  human  osteosarcoma  cells  is  of  concern.  From  published  literature,  it  seems unlikely that OP-1 and other BMPs promote tumorigenesis. Rather, evidence exists of the contrary, in which BMPs may play a mainly inhibitory role. This has been demonstrated in vitro . However, initial proliferative responses followed by cell differentiation have also been observed. The applicant conducted a 104-week carcinogenicity study in rats using subcutaneous administration of Osigraft. This study included a 52 week toxicity study.  There was a problem with the design of both  the  52-  and  104-week  studies,  however,  in  that  the  control  group  did  not  receive  a  positive control  for  solid-state  carcinogenicity  (see  below).  It  is  therefore  not  possible  to  extract  with  any certainty the effect of Osigraft from the effect of implantation per se. In both the 52-week toxicity study and the 104-week carcinogenicity study, neoplastic changes were observed  after  a  single  subcutaneous  administration  of  Osigraft.    These  consisted  of  pleiomorphic sarcomas at the site of implantation of Osigraft . The sarcomas showed a trend of increased incidence with dose of Osigraft. To  clarify  the  clinical  relevance  of  this  finding,  the  applicant  conducted  a  review  of  the  available literature, an additional analysis of the data from the 104-week carcinogenicity study, and a review of the clinical use of Osigraft. Taking into account the short-lived bioavailability of OP-1, the reported effects of bone morphogenetic proteins on malignant cell lines in vitro, the lack of genotoxicity and histology observations from several other studies, the known sensivity of the rat to the development of tumors at the site of subcutaneous implants, and the finding that sarcomas were observed at the site of the implant and ectopic ossification, it is concluded that it is unlikely that OP-1 initiates or promotes tumorigenesis. Nevertheless, Osigraft must not be applied in the vicinity of any tumours. It is likely that the  bone formation resulting from subcutaneous Osigraft was treated as a foreign body having the characteristics  which  are  known  to  induce  solid  state  carcinogenesis  or  'Oppenheimer  effect'  in reactive animal species. Local tolerance A submucosal implantation test was carried out in hamsters. No abnormal findings were recorded at gross necropsy. Special toxicity studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

The sensitising potential of Osigraft was evaluated in two studies, in which exposure to the test article was achieved by topical application. The relevance of these epicutaneous tests is unclear. A modified Buehler dermal sensitisation test was carried out in Hartley guinea pigs. No evidence of sensitisation was  observed.  DNCB  controls  all  showed  evidence  of  sensitisation.  A  second  study  using  the Epicutaneous Maximization Test was carried out in guinea pigs. No  evidence of delayed hypersensitivity  was  observed  in  test  group  animals,  whereas  8/10  positive  control  group  animals showed  evidence  of  sensitisation.  No  signs  of  irritation  were  noted  during  induction  phase  in  the negative control and treated groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Another study on sensitising potential (collagen-induced arthritis) was negative in mice.

Two cytotoxicity tests were performed with Osigraft. The first test was conducted in CHO cells, the second  using  L929  agar  overlay  method.  Results  of  the  CHO  cell  assay  indicated  that  salinereconstituted Osigraft was cytotoxic in both the presence and in the absence of S9. The results of this assay were considered 'anomalous' since the active ingredient of Osigraft is produced in CHO cells. In another experiment, polar and non-polar eluates of Osigraft were not found to be cytotoxic to CHO cells.  However,  in  this  experiment,  CHO  cells  were  not  in  direct  contact  with  the  reconstituted Implant.

The  second  study  using  an  L929  agar  overlay  test  for  cytotoxicity  was  negative,  providing  remote evidence that the cytotoxicity observed in CHO cells is due to direct contact with the Implant. The haemolytic potential of Osigraft was assessed in direct contact and saline extract tests. The results were anomalous and considered unreliable. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Bone autograft remains the treatment of choice for ununited fractures. Bone autografts have excellent osteoconductive  and  osteoinductive  capacity,  are  biocompatible  and  avoid  the  risk  of  disease transmission.  However,  the  use  of  bone  autografts  is  associated  with    certain  limitations  and  risks. These  include  the  need  to  sacrifice  portions  of  normal  skeleton  (usually  the  iliac  crest)  through  a second surgical site with additional operative morbidity (length of anaesthesia, increased blood loss, another  potential  site  for  wound  infection,  fracture  through  weakened  bone  or  herniation  through weakened  soft  tissue)  and  post-operative  discomfort.  Autografts  are  only  available  in  limited quantities, shapes and sizes. A review of the literature has not revealed any prospective studies in which treatment of non-union is examined in a group of patients who had failed previous autograft. Broderson et al. retrospectively reviewed  163  patients  with  tibial  nonunions.  They  noted  that  success  in  achieving  bony  union decreased  dramatically  after  the  third  operative  attempt  with  or  without  bone  graft.  For  the  first 3  attempts,  approximately  70%  success  rates  were  observed.  For  patients  having  4  attempts,  only 38.5% achieved success. No success was observed for patients having 8 or more attempts. Several other approaches have been used. Cadaveric bone allografts avoid donor site morbidity, offer good osteoconductive characteristics and are available in a higher quantity than autografts. However, allografts provide limited osteoinduction and their use is associated with a risk of disease transmission. The implications of immune responses to foreign proteins are not well characterised in this context. A number of commercially available bone graft substitutes have been developed and are widely used. These  substitutes  are  based  on  primary  structural  components  of  bone,  collagen  and  calcium compounds,  responding  to  the  need  for  osteoconductive  materials.  The  major  benefit  of  these substitutes  is  that  they  provide  some  graft  function  without  donor  site  morbidity,  have  acceptable biocompatibility and have limited/lower risk of disease transmission. However, they lack osteoinductive properties and the speed of repair characteristic of bone autografts. Therefore, Osigraft has been developed as a product with both osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

## Mechanism of action

OP-1 is osteoinductive, and functions in the bone formation process as the initiator of the biological cascade recruiting mesenchymal stem cells to the site where they differentiate and stimulate bone cell proliferation. The collagen matrix in Osigraft is a highly purified preparation of bovine bone-derived type I collagen. Type I collagen is not considered to exert any pharmacodynamic effect, but is seen as

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

a  means  for  osteoconduction.  Collagen  is  not  seen  as  an  OP-1  delivery  system  to  the  surrounding bone,  but  rather  a  physical  support  to  keep  the  OP-1  in  place  in  the  defect,  and  to  provide  an appropriate environment for cellular proliferation.

## Pharmacodynamic studies

Pharmacodynamic studies have not been carried out in man. Given the biological actions of OP-1 and the specific characteristics of this product, this is acceptable.

The applicant has not carried out any dose-ranging studies in man. This is acceptable due to the nature of the indication.

Pharmacokinetics General No pharmacokinetic studies have been carried out in man. Interaction studies The absence of clinical pharmacokinetic interaction studies is accepted in view of the unavailability of sufficiently sensitive methods to study the pharmacokinetics of OP-1 in the relevant clinical situation in man. Clinical efficacy Main Clinical studies Pivotal trial 91-01 A pivotal, phase III trial (Study 91-01) was conducted in 122 patients (61 patients were treated with Osigraft, 61 received autograft, all patients received an intramedullary rod). Clinical  and  radiographic  data  were  collected  at  several  time  points  and  efficacy  was  evaluated  at 9  months post-treatment.  Radiographs were obtained at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 24 months. Objective study analysis was performed by masked radiographic review, in which three radiologists independently evaluated the X-ray films, blinded to treatment group and time post-treatment. The  criteria  for  treatment  success  in  study  91-01  were  stringent.  According  to  published  literature, signs  of  clinical  healing  (stability,  weight  bearing,  reduced  pain)  are  considered  to  be  of  primary importance in the assessment of healing. The definition of non-union was stringent (at least 9 months, no surgical attempt or signs of healing within previous 3 months). The mean duration of non-union was 28 months in the Osigraft group and 31 months in the autograft group. For  the  treatment  to  be  considered  successful,  patients  had  to  meet  all  of  the  following  criteria  by 9 months: 1. a)  Evidence  of  cortical  and/or  trabecular bridging  of  the  non-union  gap  in  three  radiographic views (out of a possible four views including AP, lateral, internal oblique, and external oblique), OR b) evidence of bridging of three or more cortices out of a possible four; Medicinal product no longer authorised

2. Full weight bearing in the affected limb (scale of 0-2);
3. Patient is not suffering from severe pain in the affected limb (scale of 0-3);
4. No surgical intervention to the non-union site with the intention of promoting healing;
5. Absence of chronic donor site pain (less than moderate pain at the donor site greater than or equal to 3 months post-procedure in autograft patients).

Criterion 5 favours Osigraft over autograft, therefore analyses have been performed and presented by the applicant which exclude this criterion.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For the 'Comprehensive Analysis', a patient was considered to be an overall success if clinical and radiological criteria for success were met and if no surgical retreatment affecting the non-union site was performed. If any of the criteria were not met, a patient was considered failed. This was based on the study protocol and represents the most conservative analysis. Additional analyses were performed, including an Intent-to-Treat analysis (ITT) and a per protocol analysis. The ITT dataset includes those patients  who  were  evaluable  at  the  9  month  time-point  and  were  not  subsequently  censored  for interference from an intervention confounding their results.  Protocol violators are included in the ITT data set. The Per Protocol data set is a subset of the ITT data set and further excludes those patients who did not meet the protocol requirements.

| Basis of Analysis       | Osigraft   | Osigraft     | Autograft   | Autograft    | Upper 95% Confidence Limit longer   | Equivalent Statistical Outcome   |
|-------------------------|------------|--------------|-------------|--------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Basis of Analysis       | N*         | Success %(#) | N*          | Success %(#) | Upper 95% Confidence Limit longer   | Equivalent Statistical Outcome   |
| Clinical Analysis       | 37         | 81% (30)     | 35          | 77% (27)     | 11.8%                               | Yes                              |
| Radiographic Analysis   | 37         | 68% (25)     | 34          | 79% (27)     | 28.8%                               | No                               |
| Comprehensive Analysis  | 37         | 62% (23)     | 34 no       | 68% (23)     | 24.0%                               | No                               |
| Physician Satisfaction  | 37         | 84% (31)     | 35          | 86% (30)     | 15.8%                               | Yes                              |
| No Surgical Retreatment | 37         | 95% (35)     | 35          | 89% (31)     | 4.7%                                | Yes                              |

With  regard  to  clinical  healing,  similar  healing  rates  were  observed  in  patients  in  both  treatment groups, regardless of prior autograft treatment. In the Osigraft patients with prior autograft, 82% were healed  at  9  months.  In  the  Osigraft  patients  with  no  prior  autograft,  the  figure  was  81%.  In  the autograft  patients  with  prior  autograft,  the  figure  was  79%.  In  the  autograft  patients  with  no  prior autograft,  the  figure  was  88%.  These  results  are  encouraging  in  the  sense  that  patients  who  had received prior autograft had a remarkably longer history of non-union but healing rates with Osigraft (or autograft) were not worse compared to patients who had not received prior autograft.

One-sided 95% upper confidence interval was calculated for the difference between the proportions of success in the autograft group and the Osigraft group. For a finding of non-inferiority, this upper limit had to be less than or equal to 20%. For the ITT dataset, the one-sided confidence interval approach gave the result of non-inferiority of Osigraft on clinical analysis, comprehensive analysis, physician satisfaction and for no surgical retreatment. However, the radiographic analysis did not demonstrate non-inferiority.  For  the  Per  Protocol  dataset,  non-inferiority  could  not  be  shown  for  comprehensive analysis and radiographic analysis. Since the study was designed to show non-inferiority compared to autograft, the focus is on the results of the Per Protocol analysis. The following table is taken from the pivotal trial report: From study 91-01 it can be concluded that Osigraft was not inferior to the golden standard (autograft) in  terms  of  clinical  healing  rate  which  represents  the  most  meaningful  endpoint  for  benefit  for  the patient (less than severe pain, weight bearing). This is also the primary criterion of healing used in clinical  orthopaedic  practice.  However,  since  the  per  protocol  defined  radiographic  analysis  did  not confirm non-inferiority, Osigraft should not be considered first line treatment of tibial non-union. Subgroup analysis At the request of the CPMP, the applicant provided further efficacy analyses. The rationale for asking for additional analyses was to find out whether it would be possible to find data supporting a more restricted  indication  in  cases  where  autograft  has  failed.  Of  the  122  patients,  44  had  received  prior autograft. Of these, 27 received Osigraft and 19 received autograft. Medicinal product no longer authorised

With  regard  to  the  stringent  radiographic  success  criteria,  the  healing  rates  were  inferior  in  both subgroups of patients treated with Osigraft compared to those treated with autograft. The % success

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were  as  follows:  Osigraft,  prior  autograft  67%,  Osigraft,  no  prior  autograft  58%,  autograft,  prior autograft 79%, autograft, no prior autograft 71%.

With regard to additional analysis of radiographs with any signs of bridging, the results were more in accordance with clinical healing rates. The percentages were as follows: Osigraft, prior autograft 74%, Osigraft, no prior autograft 75%, autograft, prior autograft 84%, autograft, no prior autograft 83%.

## Supportive studies (open label)

A non-union treatment study of long bones (Study 95-01) was performed.  This study enrolled patients with nonunions which are &gt;9 months post-injury, with no evidence of healing for the previous three months and which have failed conventional therapy including autogenous bone grafting.

The study design was open, prospective, non-randomised, and multicenter. The inclusion criteria were chosen to encompass nonunions of all long bones, which had failed prior autograft treatment or were not eligible for autograft.    The study also allows the presence of infection, which often accompanies nonunions.    The  indication  was  specifically  chosen  for  its  severity  and  the  inherent  difficulty  in treating  this  patient  population  who  had  failed  conventional  autograft  treatment.    Mechanical stabilisation of the fracture was allowed to vary as appropriate for the individual fracture. Thirty patients were treated. The treated fractures included 18 of the tibia, 8 of the femur, and 4 of the humerus. Patients were followed with radiological and clinical evaluations performed at least every six weeks in addition to 9 and 12 months post-treatment.  Average follow-up for all patients (n=30) was 17 ± 9 months, ranging from 4 months to 3.3 years. Effectiveness was based on no further retreatment of the surgical site, clinical evaluation of function and pain at the nonunion site, and radiographic evidence of bridging as determined by consensus of two independent radiologists.  Safety was assessed from medical events and laboratory tests. Patients were required to meet all of the following criteria by 9 months to be considered successfully healed: -Less than severe pain with activity -Full  weight  bearing  in  lower  extremity  nonunions;  normal  or  slight  restriction  in  normal activities in upper extremity nonunions -At least 75% bridging callus, or 3 out of 4 cortices bridged by radiographic assessment -No surgical intervention to the nonunion site with the intention of inducing healing The  population  which  was  chosen  for  this  study  is  clinically  relevant  in  that  treatment  options  in patients who have failed prior autograft are very limited. Eighty-three percent of the patients in the safety and ITT populations had received prior autograft. In the ITT population, 48% of patients had atrophic nonunion, 56% had comminuted fracture at injury, 38% had open fracture at injury, 36% had Grade III, IIIa, IIIb, or IIIc fracture at injury and the mean age was 49 years (SD 18). The demographics of the Intent to Treat data set (n=29 patients) regarding established risk factors for fracture healing were examined.  All risk factors examined affected more than 35% of patients with the following factors affecting the majority of patients:  comminuted fractures (56%), prior autograft (83%), and tobacco/nicotine use (79%).  In addition, the mean duration of nonunion was &gt; 5 years with the median &gt; 3 years.  These factors describe a severely recalcitrant patient population. In the subgroup of patients with nonunion of tibia, the mean duration of nonunion was 6.1 years. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Efficacy: Clinical  analyses  as  assessed  by  function,  pain,  and  incidence  of  surgical  retreatment demonstrated &gt;50% success rates by 9 months, meeting the study criteria. A trend toward improved clinical outcomes was observed for the Visual Analog Pain scale and the SF-36 Physical Functioning indices  which  are  patient  self-assessments.      Radiographic  analysis  demonstrated  that  28%  of nonunions were healed according to the study criteria and nearly 50% demonstrated some bridging by the  final  follow-up.    Similar  outcomes  were  observed  by  the  treating  physician,  for  which  38%  of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

fractures were considered united and 59% were considered at least partially united with moderate bone formation.

In the group of 17 patients with tibial non-union, clinical success was reported in 47%, radiographic success  (stringent  per  protocol  criteria)  in  29%,  comprehensive  success  in  29%.  The  proportion  of patients showing any bridging in radiographs was 47%.

The 47% clinical success rate in this very recalcitrant population of 17 patients with tibial non-union signals that the product is effective. The stringent radiographic success rate was low (29%), but the proportion  of  patients  with  tibial  non-union  and  radiological  signs  of  bridging  was  similar  to  the clinical  success  rate  (47%  in  both  cases).  In  this  study,  65%  of  the  patients  had  more  than  3  prior treatments (including autograft).

The  conclusion  remains  that  the  safety  database  is  limited.  In  order  to  circumvent  this  major shortcoming, the applicant committed to provide additional supportive data regarding the immunogenicity  of  Osigraft  (including  tests  for  neutralising  antibodies)  from  the  ongoing  clinical trials. Safety and immunogenicity of the product will also be further evaluated in another randomised comparative clinical trial.

Clinical studies in other indications Study 94-01-E was a phase I/II fibula defect repair study. The study was performed in 2 phases: Phase I was designed to establish the model parameters, and Phase II was designed to compare the ability  of  Osigraft  and  collagen  matrix  in  healing  critical  size  defects.  Twenty  -four  patients  were treated: 6 patients were sham treated, 6 were treated with demineralised bone (DMB), 6 with collagen and 6 with Osigraft. In phase I, Sham was compared with DMB; in phase II, collagen was compared with Osigraft. Osigraft resulted in radiographic success in 4/6 patients within 10 weeks, and bridging was observed in 5/6 patients during follow-up. Bovine collagen did not result in radiographic success. Additionally,  a  number  of  small  scale  pilot  studies  have  been  performed  with  Osigraft  in  various indications. Clinical safety Patient exposure In addition to the above clinical trial data, the applicant has submitted a report of compassionate use experience  in  163  patients.  Altogether,  the  safety  database  includes  ~500  patients,  with  controlled clinical trial data in 97 long bone nonunions who have been treated with Osigraft. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths According  to  the  safety  database,  common  (&gt;1/100,  &lt;1/10)  undesirable  effects  are  erythema, tenderness and swelling over the implant site and ectopic ossification/myositis ossificans. Both rh-OP-1 and bovine type I collagen have been found to elicit immune responses in up to 14% of patients following the administration of Osigraft. Discussion on clinical safety The limited clinical trial safety database suggests that Osigraft has advantages over autograft in terms of local complications (including absence of autograft donor site pain and morbidity). There were no differences in the incidence of adverse events compared with patients who received bone autograft, except  in  the  case  of  osteomyelitis  for  which  the  incidence  was  statistically  higher  in  the  autograft group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment

## Quality

The  currently available information  demonstrates  a  consistent production  of  active  substance (Recombinant  human  Osteogenic  Protein-1:BMP-7)  with  a  well-defined  quality.  The  production

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

process of active substance is adequately controlled, and the active substance has been characterised thoroughly.

The viral validation reports have been written carefully in detail and the viral validation studies have been  performed  to  meet  the  following  CPMP  guidelines.  The  safety  with  regard  to  TSE  was demonstrated  according  to  CPMP/BWP/1230/98  Note  for  guidance  on  minimising  the  risk  of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via medicinal products. Compliance with the TSE guideline has been demonstrated for all ingredient of ruminant origin used as excipient (collagen) or reagents.

In general, no major deficiencies were observed in the applicant's measures to demonstrate the viral safety. The starting material for the active ingredient OP-1 and the collagenous matrix do not cause any special viral safety problems. The  cell banks have been adequately screened for viral contamination. The production process is robust in removing potential viral contaminants. The BWP agreed with the viral safety testing program. Commitments  have  been  made  by  the  company  to  answer  the  outstanding  points  identified  in  the assessment report. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Three issues were of initial concern to the CPMP: the relevance of preclinical toxicology studies for human risk assessment, immunogenicity of rhOP-1, and carcinogenicity. The  applicant  has  provided  a  review  of  possible  non-specific  effects  of  OP-1  based  on  available published literature. The preclinical toxicology findings in the light of pharmacodynamic and kinetic similarities  in  the  animal  species  studied  so  far  has  been  discussed.  However,  the  relevance  of  the toxicological  programme  to  human  risk  assessment  has  not  been  confirmed  due  to  the  absence  of pharmacokinetic data in man which would allow extrapolation in terms of systemic exposure (AUC) to OP-1. Preclinical  safety  studies  did  not  reveal  toxicologic  findings  which  would  raise  concern.  However, systemic exposure to OP-1 cannot be compared in experimental animals and man. As a consequence, the risks of treatment can only be judged based on clinical data. The  risk  of  'systemic'  non-specific  actions  is  likely  to  be  low  following  local  administration  of Osigraft and release of OP-1 from the implant. However, the development of neutralising antibodies to OP-1  could  have  an  important  systemic  effects.  The  applicant  has  provided  reassuring  preliminary data  on  cross-reactivity  of  OP-1  antibodies  and  a  number  of  other  BMP  and  TGF-beta  family members. Future studies to be performed will include the collection of neutralising antibody data. The applicant has provided a comprehensive review of published studies on the effects of OP-1 and other bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) on tumours and tumour cell lines. Published data on solidstate tumorigenesis (Oppenheimer effect) and a new assessment and expert opinion of the 104-week rat carcinogenicity study have been submitted. Altogether, the applicant has succeeded in clarifying a number of questions related to the oncogenic potential of OP-1 (BMPs) and subcutaneous implants, and helped to clarify the relevance of the 104-week study in rats for human risk assessment. Solidstate tumorigenesis initiated by ectopic ossification/foreign body reaction is a plausible explanation to the development of implantation site sarcoma in rats. The remaining issue is whether or not ectopic ossification following the use of OP-1 constitutes a risk for solid-state tumorigenicity in man. Based on the long  history  of  extensive  use  of  different  types  of  implants,  the  frequently  observed  ectopic ossification  associated  with  hip  prostheses,  and  the  paucity  of  reports  suggesting  any  potential association with tumours, the risk of solid-state tumorigenesis appears negligible in man. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Efficacy

According  to  study  91-01,  Osigraft  was  not  inferior  to  the  golden  standard  (autograft)  in  terms  of clinical healing rate which represents the most meaningful endpoint for benefit to the patient (less than severe pain, weight bearing). This is also the primary criterion of healing used in clinical orthopaedic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

practice.  However,  since  the  per  protocol  defined  radiographic  analysis  did  not  confirm  noninferiority, Osigraft should not be considered first line treatment of tibial non-union.

Further supporting evidence of efficacy is gained from study 95-01 which included 17 patients with an exceedingly  long  history  (mean  6.1  years)  of  tibial  nonunion,  and  who  had  either  received  prior autograft or were not eligible for autograft treatment.

## Safety

According to the updated safety database, common (&gt;1/100, &lt;1/10) undesirable effects are erythema, tenderness and swelling over the implant site and ectopic ossification/myositis ossificans. Heterotopic ossification is common following use of various implants and especially after total hip arthroplastia. In view of the long history of use of implants in humans and the very rare reports suggesting association of malignancy and implant use, heterotopic ossification is not considered to represent a tumorigenic risk  in  man.  However,  development  of  heterotopic  ossification  should  be  prevented  because  it  may have important local complications. The risk can be decreased by appropriate use of the product and surgical technique. Both rh-OP-1 and bovine type I collagen have been found to elicit immune responses in up to 14% of patients  following  the  administration  of  Osigraft.  The  immune  responses  have  been  transient. Although no clear association with clinical outcome (efficacy, safety) could be observed in clinical studies, the possibility of neutralising antibody development cannot be excluded based on the limited database.  Therefore,  further  clinical  studies  should  also  focus  on  the  possibility  of  neutralising antibodies and the clinical relevance (in terms of efficacy and safety) of the product's immunogenicity. The applicant has discussed the risk of ectopic ossification with Osigraft, and the risk for solid-state tumorigenesis  in  man,  together  with  implications  for  patient  management  and  follow-up.  In  this respect, a draft outline of the methods for surgeon training in the use of Osigraft has been presented. It  was  agreed  that  the  risk  in  humans  of  osteosarcoma  following  heterotopic  bone  formation  is extremely small and does not present a safety risk in association with the use of Osigraft. Benefit/risk assessment Nonunion of the tibia is an extremely disabling condition. The standard treatment of tibial nonunion is bone autograft. There is a need for other treatment alternatives to bone autograft. Approximately 70% success rates in tibial nonunion have been reported in the literature, with up to 3 prior failed autograft treatment attempts. After the third attempt, there appears to be a dramatic decrease in success rate. Bone autograft harvesting has been reported to be associated with major complications (lengthened hospital stay, additional surgery, causing significant disability) in 0.7% to 25% of patients and minor complications  in  9.4%  to  24%  of  patients.  In  the  pivotal  trial  91-01,  chronic  donor  site  pain  was reported  in  20%  of  autograft  patients  (in  5%  at  24  months).  Approximately  7%  of  patients  in  the autograft  group  reported  adverse  events  other  than  pain  related  to  donor  site,  including  hematoma, peripheral  nerve  injury  and  donor  site  infection.  Complications  resulting  from  previous  bone harvesting or unavailability of site(s) for bone harvesting can render use of bone autograft unfeasible. Medicinal product no longer authorised

According  to  study  91-01,  Osigraft  was  not  inferior  to  the  golden  standard  (autograft)  in  terms  of clinical  healing  rate  (representing  the  most  meaningful  endpoint  for  benefit  for  the  patient,  and  the primary criterion of healing used in clinical orthopaedic practice). Non-inferiority was not demonstrated in terms of the stringent criteria for radiographic healing defined in the study protocol. However, the clinical as well as radiograhic success rates in this patient population are nevertheless considered sufficient proof of efficacy to support a restricted indication.

Further supporting evidence of efficacy is gained from the open trial 95-01 which included 17 patients with  an  exceedingly  long  history  (mean  6.1  years)  of  tibial  nonunion,  and  who  had  either  received prior autograft or were not eligible for autograft treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

According to the updated safety database, common (&gt;1/100, &lt;1/10) undesirable effects are erythema, tenderness and swelling over the implant site and ectopic ossification/myositis ossificans. Heterotopic ossification is common following use of various implants and especially after total hip arthroplastia. The  risk  of  ectopic  ossification  can  be  decreased  by  appropriate  use  of  the  product  and  surgical technique.

Both rh-OP-1 and bovine type I collagen have been found to elicit immune responses in up to 14% of patients following the administration of Osigraft. Further clinical studies will focus on the possibility of neutralising antibodies and the clinical relevance (in terms of efficacy and safety) of the product's immunogenicity.

In  light  of  the  above,  the  CPMP  discussed  and  evaluated  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Osigraft  in  the following restricted indication: Treatment of nonunion of tibia of at least 9 month duration, secondary to trauma, in skeletally mature patients, in cases where previous treatment with autograft has failed or use of autograft is unfeasible. The justifications for the proposed indication are as follows: -A second line indication is necessary since non-inferiority to autograft was not demonstrated according to radiological criteria; -The described patient population covers the cases where 1) the 'golden standard' has failed and no alternatives (backed up by comparative, randomised trials) are available to further autograft attempt, and 2) cases where the 'golden standard' is not available; -There were 27 patients in study 91-01 and 17 patients in study 95-01 fully corresponding to the population described in the indication; 44 altogether (56% of the total number of patients with tibial nonunion in the two studies); -Efficacy  of  Osigraft  in  the  restricted  population  was  not  worse  compared  to  the  total  study population, neither in terms of clinical nor in terms of radiological success; -The overall efficacy data from study 91-01 (N=61) and the data in 17 patients in study 95-01 support the efficacy of Osigraft and cover the cases where use of autograft is unfeasible; The CPMP considered and accepted the clinical commitments from the company: and agreed with the letter of undertaking from the company. Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Osigraft was favourable in the following indications : Treatment of nonunion of tibia of at least 9 month duration, secondary to trauma, in skeletally mature patients, in cases where previous treatment with autograft has failed or use of autograft is unfeasible. Medicinal product no longer authorised