---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:00:34
document_pages: 23
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/osseor-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: osseor-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 6.2621007
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 00:04:37.986387
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Osseor.  For  information  on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Osteoporosis  is  a  systemic  skeletal  disorder  characterised  by  low  bone  mass  and  microarchitectural deterioration  of  bone  tissue,  leading  to  enhanced  bone  fragility.  The  clinical  consequences  of osteoporosis are vertebral and peripheral fractures. Postmenopausal osteoporosis affects women after menopause and results from an accelerated rate of bone loss mainly due to oestrogen deficiency. Thus, there is an increase in bone turnover, resulting in a decrease in bone mass and bone mineral density. The bone loss is more accelerated during the first years after menopause, and continues at a slower rate for the lifetime

There  is  considerable  and  recent  European  regulatory  experience  with  the  evaluation  of  medicinal products  for  the  treatment  and/or  prevention  of  postmenopausal  osteoporosis,  both  within  the Centralised and MR Procedures. In these evaluations, the requirements outlined in the CPMP Note for Guidance  on  postmenopausal  osteoporosis  in  women  (CPMP/EWP/552/95  rev.  1)  have  been reasonably consistently applied. Thus: · Osteoporosis is defined as BMD T score &lt;-2.5 at lumbar spine or hip (meaning proximal femur). · Osteopenia is defined as BMD T score between -1 and -2.5. · Established  (severe)  osteoporosis  is  defined  as  BMD  T  score  &lt;-2.5  in  the  presence  of  one  or more fragility fractures · The indication treatment of osteoporosis should be substantiated through placeboor comparator-controlled studies with the endpoint incidence of patients with new fracture (axial or peripheral). The wording of the indication should reflect the population studied and the efficacy / lack of efficacy documented for the key areas vertebra and hip. · The indication prevention of osteoporosis requires prior demonstration of anti-fracture benefit in treatment  of  osteoporosis  and  may  be  based  on  demonstration  of  efficacy  on  BMD  in postmenopausal women at increased risk of osteoporosis (early postmenopausal with at least one risk  factor  and  late  postmenopausal  women  with  osteopenia).  If  the  indication  prevention  of osteoporosis involves a dose or regimen different from that in treatment of osteoporosis, noninferiority of the new dose on BMD should be shown in the target population. · The evaluation of safety, especially bone safety should usually extend over at least three years and incorporate sufficient bone histomorphometric data. Osseor contains strontium ranelate, a molecule comprised of two atoms of stable strontium (Sr) and one  molecule  of  ranelic  acid  (RA).  Strontium  ranelate  dissociates  at  the  gastro-intestinal  level. Strontium  is  a  cation  chemically  and  physically  closely  related  to  calcium  (Ca).  Ranelic  acid  is  an organic, highly polar molecule without pharmacological activity. Strontium is a bone-seeking element that  is  suggested  to  act  through  dual  effects  on  bone  metabolism,  by  increased  bone  formation  and decreased bone resorption. The proposed indication is treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis to reduce the risk of vertebral and hip fractures. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The recommended daily dose is one 2 g sachet once daily by oral administration. Osseor is intended for long-term use. Osseor should be administered at bedtime, preferably at least two hours after eating, since the absorption of strontium ranelate is reduced by food intake. The product can be taken on an empty stomach.

No dose adjustment is recommended in relation to age, even in the very elderly. No dose adjustment is recommended in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment, while Osseor should not be used in patients with severe renal impairment (in the absence of bone safety data in this population).  No dose adjustment  is  required  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment.  Efficacy  and  safety  have  not  been established in children and adolescents and paediatric use is not recommended.

1/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. Quality aspects

## Composition

Osseor contains strontium ranelate as the active substance. The product is presented as granules for oral suspension containing 2 g of strontium ranelate. Other ingredients include aspartame, maltodextrin and mannitol.

Osseor is packaged in sachets composed of a paper/polyethylene/aluminium/polyethylene complex.

## Active substance

Strontium  ranelate  (nonahydrate)  is  an  achiral  non-hygroscopic  substance,  which  is  produced  in  a well-characterised single morphological form. The active substance is freely soluble in aqueous media of  low  pH  (&lt;  pH  2),  but  only  slightly  soluble  in  neutral  aqueous  media.  Strontium  ranelate  is practically insoluble in organic solvents.

The  active  substance  is  manufactured  via  a  validated  process.  The  critical  steps  in  the  synthesis process have been identified and are satisfactorily controlled. Appropriate  specifications  have  been  set  for  related  substances.  The  origin  and  mechanism  of formation  for  all  possible  synthesis  impurities  and  degradation  products  have  been  satisfactorily described. Active substance specification The active substance specification includes tests for identity, LOD, related substances, heavy metals, pH, strontium content, particle size and assay. The analytical methods used in the routine controls have been suitably described and validated, while the limits for organic impurities have been qualified and accepted based on the levels observed in toxicological studies. Batch analysis data for all batches used in non-clinical and clinical studies comply with the approved active substance specification. Stability The active substance has been subjected to stress testing, photostability testing, and stability studies under long-term, intermediate and accelerated conditions according to ICH guidelines. Six production scale batches packaged in two types of commercial package were studied under ICH conditions. The parameters evaluated during the stability studies were appearance, water content, IRspectrum, assay and impurities. The methods employed were validated and stability indicating. The stability data presented support the proposed re-test period for the active substance when stored under the specified conditions. Other ingredients All  excpients  used  in  the  product  are  of  non-animal  origin  and  comply  with  their  corresponding European Pharmacopoeia monographs. The immediate packaging material consists of a paper/polyethylene/aluminium/polyethylene complex and  complies  with  the  Community  legislation  for  materials  intended  to  come  in  contact  with foodstuffs. Product development and finished product Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  objective  of  the  development  was  to  develop  an  easily  dispersible  powder  without  sucrose  or sodium,  but  with  a  pleasant  taste  when  suspended  in  water.  Mannitol  was  selected  as  a  filler, maltodextrin as a binder and aspartame as sweetening agent.  Among the different formulations tested, the  to  be  marketed  formulation  was  considered  as  the  best  compromise  between  reconstitution properties, taste, and ease of manufacture.

The  manufacture  of  the  finished  product  is  a  standard  wet  granulation  process  and  involves  the following  steps:  mixing,  wetting,  granulation  and  drying.  The  granules  produced  are  subsequently sieved,  homogenised  and  filled  into  sachets.  The  manufacturing  process  has  been  satisfactory described and adequately controlled by appropriate in-process controls.

A  bioequivalence  study  has  demonstrated  the  equivalence  of  the  formulation  used  in  the  Phase  II clinical trials and the one intended for marketing.

2/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Product specification

The specification for the finished product at release and shelf life includes tests for characterisation, average mass, uniformity of mass, pH, microbial quality, identification (organic part and strontium), assay  (HPLC),  degradation  products,  assay  of  strontium  and  dissolution.  All  tests  included  in  the specification have been satisfactorily described and validated.

Batch  analysis  data  have  been  presented  from  7  finished  product  batches.  All  batches  met  the  test limits as defined in the release specification and test methodology valid at the time of batch release.

## Stability of the product

Stability study data have been presented for 3 batches. The samples were packaged in the intended for marketing packaging and stored in compliance with ICH requirements

In addition, one batch was subjected to photo stability studies according to ICH requirements and one batch was subjected to stress testing.

Strontium is distributed predominantly into bone and tooth, and accumulates in these tissues. For a compound with such characteristics, plasma levels may not be the most relevant measure for exposure comparisons.  Thus,  both  plasma  and  bone  exposures  are  commented  on  in  this  assessment.  In postmenopausal women treated with 2 g/d, strontium Cmax of 17+4 mg/l and AUC24 of 341+95 mg.h/l were established, and for ranelate Cmax of 0.6+0.4 mg/L and AUC24 of 10+7 mg.h/l. Mean iliac crest strontium levels were 1.6% Sr/(Sr+Ca) mmol/mmol after 2-3 years treatment, while an individual bone strontium content up to 3% has been observed after 5 years treatment.

The parameters studied included the ones specified in the shelf life specification. Testing for loss on drying was also performed for information. Data for uniformity of mass, strontium assay and microbial content have also been provided at the start of the stability studies and at selected time points. The high similarity of the two product strengths and the satisfactory stability results presented support the  proposed shelf life for the commercially packaged product under the conditions specified in the SPC. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects. The quality of Osseor is adequately established. In general, satisfactory chemical and pharmaceutical documentation has been submitted for marketing authorization. There are no major deviations from EU and ICH requirements. The active substance is stable, well characterised and documented. The excipents are commonly used in these types of formulations and comply with Eur. Phar. Requirements. The packaging material is commonly used and well documented. The manufacturing process of the finished product has been adequately  described.  Stability  tests  indicate  that  the  product  under  ICH  guidelines  conditions  is chemically stable for the proposed shelf life. 3. Non-clinical aspects Introduction The rat and monkey have been the main species in pharmacology and toxicity studies, the mouse and rat  were  used  for  carcinogenicity  testing.  Available  data  indicate  that  these  species  are  adequate models for human safety assessment. The monkey is considered particularly important, being a species with a human-type cortical 'bone remodelling'. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacology

## · Primary pharmacodynamics ( in vitro/in vivo )

The CPMP Note for Guidance (NfG) on postmenopausal osteoporosis in women (CPMP/EWP/552/95 rev1), addresses also non-clinical aspects for a compound to be used in postmenopausal osteoporosis. The applicant has obtained an extensive set of bone quality data (bone from all pivotal pharmacology

3/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

and  toxicity  studies  has  been  analysed),  in  accordance  with  CPMP/EWP/552/95  rev1,  to  support primary pharmacodynamics and assess bone safety.

In  vitro ,  strontium  increased  bone  formation,  at  least  in  certain  pre-osteoblastic  cell  systems,  and inhibited the bone resorption activity of osteoclasts. Strontium induced osteoclast apoptosis at higher concentrations (9 mM). Strontium acted as a full agonist at the Ca sensing receptor (CaR) expressed in non-bone cells, with about 30% lower affinity than Ca. At physiological Ca-levels, EC50s ranged from 0.8-5.7  mM.  It  is  not  known  if  it  acts  similarly  on  bone  cell  CaR,  or  to  what  extent  the  CaR  is important for bone cell function. Overall, in vitro effects were generally seen at 1 - 20 mM strontium, although apoptosis and CaR Emax occurred at 9-25mM. If these concentrations are relevant for the in vivo situation is uncertain. Moreover, the available information is not sufficient to establish by what mechanism strontium mediates its claimed effects on bone turnover.

The pivotal in vivo studies are those in OVX animals. The OVX model is characterised by stimulation of trabecular bone turnover and imbalance between bone resorption and formation in favour of bone resorption,  leading  to  bone  loss,  most  pronounced  at  sites  mainly  composed  of  trabecular  bone (vertebral body, long bone metaphyses).

Strontium ranelate did not produce any unexpected or toxic effects in the safety pharmacology studies, which  were  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  ICH  S7A  (CPMP/ICH/539/00).  With  respect  to cardiovascular  and  specifically  QT  effects, in  vitro (HERG channels,  rabbit  Purkinje  fibres)  and in vivo (dog,  monkey  single  and  repeated  dosing)  data  have  been  obtained.  No  cause  for  concern  has been identified in  vitro (concentrations 15 x and 700 x higher that clinical Cmax for strontium and ranelate), or in vivo (Cmax 7 x and 250 x higher than the clinical Cmax for strontium and ranelate). In specific  cardiovascular  drug-interaction  experiments,  strontium  ranelate  did  not  modify  the  acute cardiac effects of various drugs acting through Ca-dependent mechanisms, at plasma strontium levels similar  to  the  clinical  Cmax.  In  murine  renal  tubule  cells,  2  mM  strontium  or  calcium  ranelate inhibited (-30%) the 25(OH)D3-1 alpha-hydroxylase activity, but no effects occurred at 1mM Specific experiments focussing on ranelate showed that it had no primary pharmacodynamic effects in vitro, or any relevant interactions with a large number of receptor systems.

Strontium  ranelate  had  modest  effects  in  the rat model  of  'treatment  of  osteoporosis', i.e. when strontium  was  started  at  least  8  weeks  after  OVX.  There  were  positive  trends  ( e.g .  increased  bone mass),  but  statistical  significance  was  seldom  reached.  Bone  formation  appeared  maintained,  while inhibition of bone resorption was generally non-significant. In  the  pivotal  rat  study  to  support  'prevention  of  osteoporosis'  (up  to  625  mg/kg/d  for  52  weeks, initiated  at  OVX),  strontium  ranelate  partially  prevented  OVX-induced  trabecular  bone  loss.  There was no effect on resistance of bone sites consisting predominantly of cortical bone, while significantly increased resistance (high dose only) was seen in lumbar vertebra. The OVX-induced increased bone formation  appeared  maintained  by  strontium,  while  only  non-significant  trends  were  seen  for inhibition of bone resorption. Week 52 at 625 mg/kg/d, strontium plasma and bone levels were in the clinical range. The Ca content in bone was maintained or increased (0-5%) in the strontium groups. Two long-term studies were performed in OVX monkeys, using a 'prevention design'. In one study, 125,  250  or  625  mg/kg/d  strontium  ranelate  was  given  for  30  months.  Compared  with  non-treated OVX  monkeys  strontium  increased  bone  formation,  the  MD  was  most  effective.  There  were  also indications of increased bone resorption, although less than the increased formation. In the other study, 150 mg/kg/d given during 27 months increased markers of bone formation, and reduced some but not all  markers  of  bone  resorption.  Strontium  ranelate  had  no  significant  effects  on  bone  mass  or  bone strength  in  either  study.  In  all  dose  groups,  the  systemic  exposure  and  bone  levels  were  similar  to levels in women given intended therapy. Data  from  long-term  studies  in intact rats  and  monkey s indicated  increased  bone  formation  and decreased bone resorption, as well as positive effects on bone dimensions, micro-architecture and bone strength.  The  data  in  intact  animals  are  considered  of  less  relevance  than  those  obtained  in  OVX animals,  considering  the  indication  applied.  As  evident  from  above,  the  studies  in  OVX  rats  and monkeys provide weak support in terms of efficacy for the intended clinical use in post-menopausal osteoporosis. · Safety pharmacology Medicinal product no longer authorised

4/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Pharmacodynamic drug interactions

No drug interaction study was performed.

- Summary of salient findings

In vitro , strontium increased bone formation in certain pre-osteoblastic cell systems, and inhibited the bone resorption activity of osteoclasts. Strontium acted as a full agonist at the CaR expressed in nonbone cells, with lower affinity than Ca. In vitro, effects generally occurred at 1 - 20 mM strontium. In vivo ,  long-term dosing of OVX rats and monkeys with strontium ranelate resulted in increased bone formation, but only non-significant trends of reduced bone resorption. In rats, certain positive effects ( e.g. on bone mass) were seen but increased resistance was only observed at the highest dose tested for 52 weeks. In OVX monkeys, there were no meaningful effects on bone mass, or bone strength.

## Pharmacokinetics

Specific  analytical  methods  were  developed  to  measure  strontium  and  ranelic  acid  in  biological samples.  The  techniques  employed  involved  elemental  spectrophotometry  and  HPLC  analysis, respectively, to determine levels of strontium (as well as calcium) and ranelic acid in samples collected during non-clinical and clinical studies. The methods were validated and their performance, in terms of precision  and  accuracy,  was  adequate.  In  the  absence  of  metabolism  of  strontium  or  ranelate,  no metabolite was analysed. For distribution and excretion studies, radiolabeled [ 85 Sr]-strontium ranelate and strontium-[ 14 C]-ranelate were used. Some  of the centres performing strontium analytic determinations in the rat were not GLP-compliant. Therefore, the applicant performed a bridging study to validate data from these sites, with dose levels covering those observed in the previous non-clinical studies. No apparent difference in exposure was seen in comparison with those seen previously, and the results are thus acceptable. The pharmacokinetic parameters in the rat and the monkey were calculated using a population kinetic approach, based on available pharmacokinetic and toxicokinetic data. A four- (rat) or three-(monkey) compartment  model  was  fitted  to  the  data.  Slight  differences  for  some  parameters  obtained  in  the respective models were found when compared with those established in single studies. Strontium · Absorption- Bioavailability The bioavailability of strontium decreases with increasing dose. In rats, F was 20-7% from 75-to 1150 mg/kg strontium ranelate. In monkeys, Frel was 80 - 6% from 9 to 940 mg/kg strontium ranelate. The protein binding of strontium is moderate (25-30%) in rodents, monkey and human. · Distribution Tissue distribution has been studied after single and 8 weeks repeated administration in female albino rats. These data show that strontium is distributed predominantly into calcified tissues and accumulates there, while exposure of non-calcified tissues was low. Calcified tissue strontium levels were at least 400 x higher than corresponding blood levels. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Limited data on bone levels over time are available. In rats dosed for 26 weeks and followed thereafter for 26 weeks, Cmax in bone (~100 x background) was reached one week after the last dose. After 26 weeks recovery, bone and plasma levels were still significantly above background (73x in bone, 16x in plasma). Moreover, bone strontium content determined after 26, 41 and 104 weeks dosing in rats showed accumulation with time (e.g. in femur 3.4%, 3.7% and 4.9% (males) and 2.6%, 2.7% and 4.3% (females) at weeks 26, 41 and 104). Strontium levels in bone biopsies (iliac crest) from OVX monkeys were comparable at 9 and 27, or 12 and 30 months. Although these data are scarce, they do not indicate bone accumulation between 9-27 /12-30 months of treatment.The highest dose was 625 mg/kg/d for 30 months, with an iliac crest level of 2.9 - 3.4 % Sr/ (Sr+Ca). Thus, the available nonclinical data related to accumulation over time are not consistent, which may be related to species differences in bone turnover. Overall, the non-clinical data are insufficient to assess whether the bone strontium level reaches a plateau.

- Metabolism ( in vitro/in vivo )

Strontium ,  being  a  mineral  cation,  is  not  metabolised.  After  oral  administration  of 85 Sr  to  rodents, most radio activities were recovered in feces (80-90%), while 5% or less was recovered in urine. No

5/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mass  balance  data  are  available  for  other  species.  Strontium  passes  readily  into  rat  milk,  and  is accumulated  there  when  compared  to  plasma  (73-fold,  24  h  after  dose).  Moreover,  strontium  was detected in plasma and bone from pups that had been suckling treated dams

- Elimination

Different  elimination  profiles  for strontium were  seen  in  rat  and  monkey,  possibly  due  to  longer sampling after treatment in rats. The terminal half-life was 78 days (rats) and 23 days (monkey). In both species, this phase was ~10 % of the total elimination, possibly reflecting slow release from bone. The 'equilibrium' half-life was ~ 8-9 days (rats) and ~ 2-3 days (monkey), predicting that steady state is  reached  by  6  weeks  in  rats  and  2  weeks  in  monkey.  Vd  at  steady  state  was  71  (rat)  and  15  l (monkey). The plasma kinetics of strontium appeared time independent, with accumulation ratios upon repeated dosing of &lt;2 in rats and monkey. The elimination profiles in monkey and human were similar (based on comparable data sets).

Information on long-term effects was obtained in repeat dose toxicity studies with gavage dosing in rats (up to 750 mg/kg/d for 26 weeks) and monkeys (up to 1,250 mg/kg/d for 52 weeks). Data from diet studies related to carcinogenicity in mice (up to 7,500 mg/kg/d for 52 weeks, or 1,800 mg/kg/d for 104 weeks) and rats (up to 900 mg/kg/d for 104 weeks), as well as from pharmacodynamic studies in OVX rats and monkeys provided further information.

Ranelate The oral bioavailability of ranelate is low and variable (1-10% rat, 9-17% monkey). Protein binding for  ranelate  was  low  (5-30%,  in  mouse,  rat,  monkey,  human).  After  single  oral  administration  to hooded  rats,  distribution  of  labelled  ranelate  into  tissues  other  than  the  GI  tract  was  low,  but radioactivity  was  detected  in  e.g.  bone  marrow.  By  120  h,  no  radioactivity  remained.  Plasma  data showed large individual variation, resulting in uncertain pharmacokinetic profiles. After oral dosing, t1/2  was  7  h  (rat),  and  34  h  (monkey).  In  rats,  the  pharmacokinetics  of  ranelate  appeared  time independant. In monkeys, some accumulation was reported (ratio 1.3-3). Ranelate was not metabolised in  vitro,  using  hepatic  microsomes  from  rat,  rabbit,  dog,  monkey,  and  in  vivo  data  in  the  monkey confirmed  this  observation.  The  lack  of  data  for  mouse  is  considered  acceptable,  given  the  lack  of metabolism  in  all  species  studied.  After  oral  administration,  excretion  was  slow  in  rat  and  female monkey (26% by 24h), and was mainly via feces in all species studied. Excretion into milk was minor. There were no gender effects on the pharmacokinetics of ranelate. No drug interaction study was performed in animals, which is acceptable. There are no distribution studies  in  pregnant  animals,  for  either  component,  which  is  acceptable,  considering  the  indication applied for · Summary of salient findings It has been demonstrated that strontium is predominately distributed into calcified tissues, with at least 400  x  higher  levels  compared  with  blood.  No  accumulation  was  identified  in  non-calcified  tissues, while there is insufficient data in animals to conclude whether bone strontium levels reach a plateau during long-term treatment or not. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity Single dose toxicity studies in rodent, dog and monkey given oral (up to 2.500 mg/kg) or i.v (up to 152 mg/kg)  doses  revealed  no  treatment-related  toxicity  except  for  some  emesis  in  monkeys.  Thus, strontium ranalate has a low acute toxicity. · Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Bone and tooth toxicity:

In OVX rats ,  no  bone toxicity was generally seen (up to 625 mg/kg/d for 52 weeks). In intact rats, osteomalacia of bones and teeth, subsequent fractures/broken incisors, abnormal bone mineralisation and osteoid tissue accumulation were observed after 41 weeks diet dosing with 1,250 mg/kg/d (M), and  2,500  mg/kg/d  (F).  The  bone  mineralisation  was  normalised  after  16-28  weeks  recovery.  Only females  underwent  specific  bone  safety  evaluation.  No  abnormal  bone  effects  were  found  at  &lt;  2x (plasma AUC) and ~ 3 x (bone) the clinical exposure. A specific study of tooth effects was performed

6/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in rats. No effects were seen after diet dosing with 625 mg/kg/d for 26 weeks, with a tooth content of 3.1  %  Sr/(Sr+Ca).  Tooth  abnormalities  and  absence  of  pigmentation  occurred  at  1,250  and  2,500 mg/kg/d, at tooth levels of 5.4% (MD) and 9-11 % (HD).

In mice, osteomalacia of bones and teeth (including broken incisors), and osteoid tissue accumulation occurred from 5,000 mg/kg/d (52 weeks diet) with corresponding bone strontium content of 7-9%. No mineralisation defect or bone toxicity was seen at 2,500 mg/kg/d (bone levels 4-5%). In the 104 weeks study, incisors  discoloration,  bone  thickening  (1,800  mg/kg/d),  and  long bone  deformation  (females from 600 mg/kg/d, bone strontium content 4.8%) were observed. Histomorphometric examinations of caudal vertebra revealed no mineralisation defects.

No bone toxicity or mineralisation defects were seen in OVX monkeys or in intact monkeys treated with 750 mg/kg/d for 26 weeks, or 2x250 mg/kg/d for 52 weeks. However, 2x 625 mg/kg/d for 52 weeks  in  intact  monkeys  resulted  in  delayed  bone  mineralisation  in  both  sexes.  There  was  no impairment of mechanical properties in any of these studies. At the NOEL, the plasma exposure was in the  clinical  range.  Levels  in  bone  were  dependent  on  type  of  bone  measured.  Iliac  crest  levels,  for which human data are available, were about 2x higher in OVX monkeys without signs of bone defects. In intact monkeys, delayed mineralisation was seen at bone levels &lt;2-3 x (humerus) or 2-3 x (lumbar vertabrae) higher than the clinical iliac crest levels.

In mice, urinary stones (consisting of strontium, oxalate and phosphate), and subsequent inflammatory reactions, bladder wall oedema and /or and hyperplasia of the bladder mucosa occurred from 2,500 mg/kg/d (52 weeks) or 1,800 mg/kg/d (104 weeks), more commonly in males. Similar effects were generally not seen in rats or monkeys (except for 1 rat in one carcinogenicity study). The explanation by the applicant, that mice have higher levels of phosphates and oxalates in urine than other species, leading to the formation of urinary stones is considered plausible, and thus suggests low relevance for human safety.

Mineral  crystallography  analyses  of  bone  from  the  52  weeks  monkey  study  showed  that  strontium uptake  in  bone  was  roughly  dose-dependant  but  heterogeneous,  with  ~  twice  as  high  levels  in cancellous  than  trabecular  bone,  and  in  new  bone vs .  old  bone.  There  were  no  changes  in  the  substoichiometry of apatite, the crystal size and structure, the crystal lattice parameters, the degree of bone mineralisation  of  the  mineral  substance  or  the  dissolution  rate  of  bone  apatite.  After  a  10-week recovery 42- 69% of the bone strontium was eliminated. Clinical signs Tiptoeing', possibly an indicator of poor general health, was noted in rats from 1,250 mg/kg/d in the diet, after 27 weeks. No other indications of possibly CNS related effects have been found in the nonclinical  documentation,  including  data  from  standard  CNS  safety  pharmacology  studies.  Whitish discolouration  of  faeces  due  to  unabsorbed  strontium  ranelate  (from  275  mg/kg/d  in  rats  and  750 mg/kg/d in monkeys), as well as some soft/liquid faeces, episodes of emesis in monkeys were noted. Blood / urine Dose-related  increases  of blood  alkaline  phosphatase (1.9-fold  in  rats  at  750  mg/kg/d,  1.5-fold  in monkeys at 1250 mg/kg/d) were observed, secondary to the effects of strontium on bone. Changes in inorganic phosphorus were  seen  in  rats  only  (25%  increase  in  blood,  75%  decrease  in  urine  at  750 mg/kg/d).  Decreased  blood calcium (up  to  10%),  and  a  slight  increase  of  urinary  calcium  were observed, while the total cation blood concentration (Sr + Ca) was increased (up to 13% in rats, at 2-4 x the clinical exposure). These findings were partially or fully reversible after treatment withdrawal. In addition, marginal effects only were seen on vitamin D, PTH or calcitonin in the long-term studies. Taken  together,  strontium  ranelate  did  not  cause  a  detectable  imbalance  of  Ca  or  phosphorous homeostasis or of hormones regulating these systems in animals. Urinary stones and bladder changes Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Cornea changes

In  the  pivotal  rat  carcinogenicity  study  only,  a  higher  incidence  of  corneal  proliferative  vascular changes in the superficial layers of the corneal stroma was seen for mid dose and high dose. The batch of compound used in this study only had an alkaline pH, while the compound used in the other diet studies had a neutral pH. It appears plausible that these lesions were an external injury due to exposure

7/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

of dust from the diet containing strontium ranelate with an alkaline pH and therefore having a higher irritant  potential  than the normal diet. Similar effects were not seen in the other diet studies, or any other toxicity study. This finding is not considered of clinical relevance.

- Genotoxicity in vitro and in vivo (with toxicokinetics)

Strontium ranelate displayed no genotoxic potential under the study conditions.

- Carcinogenicity (with toxicokinetics)

Studies of 104 weeks duration with dietary dosing were performed in B6C3F1 mice (200, 600, 1,800 mg/kg/d), and Fischer 344 rats (males: 150, 300, 625 mg/kg/d, females 225, 450, 900 mg/kg/ d). The dose  selection  is  acceptable,  as  some  toxicity  was  evident  and  based  on  experience  from  previous studies. In both rats and mice, the systemic exposure to strontium of the HD groups were &lt; 2x higher than the clinical exposure. For ranelate, somewhat larger margins were obtained (AUC in mice 5-6x higher, Cmean in rats 3-5 x higher than human Cmax).

|                                                  | Male   |    |       |     |          |              |       |     |     |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------|----|-------|-----|----------|--------------|-------|-----|-----|
| Dose group                                       | C0     | D0 | D1    | D2  | D3       | Female C0 D0 | D1    | D2  | D3  |
| Dose level (mg/kg)                               | 0      | 0  | 150   | 300 | 625      | 0 0          | 225   | 450 | 900 |
| C-cell hyperplasia                               | 17     | 17 | 17    | 8   | 22       | 29           | 13 23 | 29  | 21  |
| C-cell adenoma                                   | 17     | 27 | 8     | 18  | 18       | 13 14        | 11    | 13  | 19  |
| C-cell carcinoma Medicinal                       | 0      | 1  | 4 # * | 3   | 6 ## * * | 3 3          | 2     | 3   | 2   |
| C-cell adenoma and carcinoma                     | 17     | 27 | 12    | 21  | 22       | 16 16        | 13    | 16  | 21  |
| Total C-cell changes (hyperplasia and neoplasia) | 27     | 35 | 26    | 28  | 35       | 37 24        | 31    | 39  | 33  |

Control plasma samples were not analysed in the two carcinogenicity studies. In the pivotal rat study, bone from controls, contained expected strontium  background levels. In the  'non-pivotal' rat study, analyses at repeated time points revealed no signs of increased strontium levels in control samples. In  the  mouse  carcinogenicity  study,  mortality  was  low  in  all  groups  (6  to  14%  males,  18  to  28% females).  The overall incidence of benign and malignant tumours was the same in control and treated groups. Statistical analyses indicated significant increases in  four  tumour  types;  lymphocytic lymphomas in mid dose females only, hepatocellular adenomas in males only, ovarian adenomas and combined lung bronchiolo-alveolar adenoma and carcinoma in males.  It is not considered that any of these are treatment related. In  the  rat  carcinogenicity  study,  statistical  analyses  of  neoplastic  lesions  showed  a  difference  in  the incidence  of  thyroid  C-cell  carcinomas  in  males  (see  Table  2.6.6.2).  There  was  no  increase  in  the incidences of C-cell hyperplasia and/or adenoma and no difference in the combined incidence of Ccell changes between treated males and controls, or in females. Other non-neoplastic and neoplastic findings were consistent with the expected spectrum of background lesions in ageing Fischer 344 rats. Table:  Rats  with  thyroid  C-cell  proliferative  changes  in  the  main  carcinogenicity  study.  The STP/ARP/AFIP and IARC criteria were used for characterisation of the C-cell tumours Medicinal product no longer authorised

*, ** Fisher test and Peto test: statistically significant versus C0+D0 for p&lt;0.05 (*) or p&lt;0.01 (**)

The finding of C-cell tumours in male rats raised concern; one reason being that it affected an organ of major importance for regulation of bone homeostasis. Calcitonin is secreted by thyroid C-cells if Ca blood levels increase and enhances Ca uptake in bone. PTH, another important part of this regulation, is  secreted  by  the  parathyroid  in  response  to  decreased  blood  Ca,  and  enhances  release  of  Ca  from bone.  One  possible  mechanism  for  the  development  of  C-cell  tumours  would  imply  long-term hypercalcemia,  leading  to  continuously  enhanced  calcitonin  secretion,  C-cell  hypertrophy,  and consequently to C-cell adenoma and carcinoma.

In the long-term rat studies, there was a slight decrease in Ca levels (up to 10%), while total cations Ca+Sr  was  increased  (up  to  13%).  However,  there  were  no  consistent  changes  of  calcitonin,  and

8/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

generally it appears that strontium ranelate did not cause a detectable imbalance of Ca or phosphorous homeostasis or of hormones regulating these systems in animals. Mechanistic data in Fischer 344 rats, indicated that a single challenge with Sr stimulated calcitonin release. However, Sr was 3x less potent than  Ca,  and  the  minimum  Sr  concentration  able  to  induce  a  significantly  increased  calcitonin secretion was 3x or 7 x higher than the mean Sr plasma level in the carcinogenicity study, or at clinical use,  respectively.  Moreover,  male  F344  rats  treated  52  weeks  with  doses  as  in  the  carcinogenicity studies had no increase in thyroid C-cell proliferative lesions or in circulating calcitonin, either at basal conditions or in response to Ca stimulation. In this study, it was shown that the Ca levels remained unchanged with age, but the calcitonin levels increased 8-fold in controls from 6 to 18 months of age, when there was no significant gender difference in calcitonin levels.

Regarding historical controls, the applicant has limited in house data. C-cell carcinoma was found in 4/50 controls in the 'non-pivotal' carcinogenicity and in 6/ 48-control males (18 months old) in the 52 weeks mechanistic study. Published information, although relatively old, shows that the C-cell tumour incidences varied widely in Fischer rats, with incidences up to 12% in males. Thus, the incidence in the LD and HD groups of the pivotal study, which differed significantly from controls, is within that reported in other control groups. In addition, there was no increase of C-cell carcinomas in females or in males in the non-pivotal study.

· Reproductive and developmental studies Since this application concerns treatment of postmenopausal women only, these data are not essential for  the  current  application.  Nevertheless,  studies  were  conducted  in  rats  (covering  all  reproductive phases)  and  rabbits  (segment  II).  There  were  no  effects  on  male  fertility.  Overall,  impaired  bone development was the main finding after exposure in utero and /or via milk. It cannot be excluded that these findings have relevance for humans. Thus, strontium ranelate should not be administered during pregnancy. Strontium is accumulated in rat milk, and F1 pups had 2-fold higher plasma levels after suckling, than treated dams. Thus, breast-feeding women should not use strontium ranelate. · Other toxicity studies Impurities The impurity profile of the drug substance proposed for registration has been adequately qualified in nature and limits Photosafety Strontium  ranelate  was  found  to  absorb  light  in  the  ultraviolet  wavelength  range.  However,  no distribution in eye and skin was demonstrated, and data from an in vitro phototoxicity test showed that strontium ranelate has no phototoxic potential. Immunotoxicity A  specific  study,  made  in  accordance  with  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  Repeated  Dose  Toxicity (CPMP/SWP/1042/99 corr.), supported that strontium ranelate has no immunotoxic potential. Environmental risk Environmental risk has been addressed partly, and studies are ongoing to address the areas outlined in the  current  Note  for  Guidance  on  environmental  risk  assessment.  They  will  be  submitted  when available.  Nevertheless,  the  lack  of  these  studies  does  not  preclude  a  recommendation  of  a  positive opinion. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Summary of salient findings

Single-dose toxicity studies in rodent, dog and monkey given oral or i.v. doses revealed no treatmentrelated toxicity except for some emesis in monkeys. Thus, strontium ranelate has a low acute toxicity.

Information  on  long-term  effects  was  obtained  in  repeat  dose  toxicity  studies  in  rats,  mice  and monkeys.  The  main  findings  were  dose  related  bone  and  tooth  toxicity,  due  to  exaggerated pharmacological effects.

Additional effects included clinical signs, certain changes of plasma /urine parameters, urinary stones in mice, corneal proliferative vascular changes in one rat carcinogenicity study. Strontium ranelate did not cause a detectable imbalance of Ca or phosphorous homeostasis or of hormones regulating these systems in animals.

9/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the mouse carcinogenicity study, there was no indication of a treatment related increased tumour incidence.  In  the  rat  carcinogenicity  study,  statistical  analyses  of  neoplastic  lesions  showed  a difference in the incidence of thyroid C-cell carcinomas in males only.

A complete set of reproductive /developmental toxicity studies have been performed. There were no effects on male fertility. Overall, impaired bone development was the main finding after exposure in utero and /or via milk.

## Discussion on the non-clinical aspects

Pharmacology : In vitro ,  strontium increased bone formation in certain pre-osteoblastic cell systems, and inhibited the bone resorption activity of osteoclasts. Strontium acted as a full agonist at the CaR expressed in non-bone cells, with lower affinity than Ca. In vitro, effects generally occurred at 1 - 20 mM strontium. If these  concentrations  are  relevant  for  the in  vivo situation  is  uncertain.  Moreover, strontium's mechanism of action is not known. In vivo ,  long-term dosing of OVX rats and monkeys with  strontium  ranelate  resulted  in  increased  bone  formation,  but  only  non-significant  trends  of reduced bone resorption. In rats, certain positive effects ( e.g. on bone mass) were seen but increased resistance was only observed at the highest dose tested for 52 weeks in the 'prevention' study design. In OVX monkeys, there were no meaningful effects on bone mass, or bone strength. Moreover, the monkey  data  do  not  provide  consistent  support  for  the  claimed  dual  effects  of  strontium  on  bone remodelling  i.e.  increased  bone  formation  and  inhibition  of  bone  resorption.  Safety  pharmacology studies revealed no major cause for concern. Pharmacokinetics: From a safety point of view, data on distribution and potential tissue accumulation are of importance. It has been demonstrated that strontium is predominately distributed into calcified tissues, with at least 400 x higher levels compared with blood. No accumulation was identified in noncalcified tissues, while there is insufficient data in animals to conclude whether bone strontium levels reach a plateau during long-term treatment or not. With  respect  to toxicology ,  the  main  findings  were  dose  related  bone  and  tooth  toxicity,  due  to exaggerated  pharmacological  effects.  Bone  toxicity  was  seen  only  at  bone  strontium  content  above 5%, which is 2-3 x higher than the claimed exposure of bone at the intended clinical use, or less than 2x higher than the highest bone strontium content seen after 5 years treatment (3.1%). This margin is narrow,  but  if  such  levels  may  be  reached  the  intended  clinical  use  should  be  assessed  based  on clinical data. There is no indication that the risk for bone toxicity increases with treatment duration per se, as long as the BSC is below that causing bone toxicity. However, since the non-clinical studies have not shown that  a  plateau  for  bone  strontium  content  is  reached,  it  is  not  possible  to  estimate  the  risk  for  bone adverse  effects  after  very  extensive  treatment  duration.  This  should  be  further  considered  from  a clinical point of view. The bone strontium content and their association with toxicity are reflected in the SPC (section 5.3). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Carcinogenicity: It cannot be completely excluded that a subtle increase in plasma cation levels may have,  in  some  individuals,  affected  the  progression  of  thyroid  C-cell  hyperplasia  /adenoma  to carcinoma. However, taking the totality of the data into account, there is no clear evidence that the finding of increased incidences of C-cell carcinoma in LD and HD males in the main carcinogenicity study  in  the  rat  are  related  to  strontium  ranelate  treatment.  Moreover,  there  are  some  differences between human and rat with respect to calcitonin regulation, such as the age-related increased increase in calcitonin in rats, whereas the opposite occurs with increasing age in humans, which indicate that the tumour findings are of minor clinical relevance

## 4 Clinical aspects

## Introduction

Osteoporosis  is  a  systemic  skeletal  disorder  characterised  by  low  bone  mass  and  microarchitectural deterioration  of  bone  tissue,  leading  to  enhanced  bone  fragility.  The  clinical  consequences  of osteoporosis are vertebral and peripheral fractures. Postmenopausal osteoporosis affects women after menopause and results from an accelerated rate of bone loss mainly due to estrogen deficiency. Thus, there is an increase in bone turnover, a decrease in bone mass and bone mineral density. The bone loss

10/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

is more accelerated during the first years after menopause, and thereafter continues at a slower rate for the  lifetime.  A  variety  of  different  therapies  are  used  for  the  treatment  and/or  prevention  of  postmenopausal  osteoporosis:  antiresorptive  substances  (calcitonin,  bisphosphonates,  17beta-estradiol, selective oestrogen-receptor modulators) and substances stimulating bone formation (PTH, fluoride).

There  is  considerable  and  recent  European  regulatory  experience  with  the  evaluation  of  medicinal products for the treatment and/or prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis. In these evaluations, the requirements  outlined  in  the  CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  postmenopausal  osteoporosis  in  women (CPMP/EWP/552/95 rev. 1) have been reasonably consistently applied.

Osseor contains strontium ranelate (also referred to as S12911), a molecule comprised of two atoms of stable  strontium  (Sr)  and  one  molecule  of  ranelic  acid  (RA).  Strontium  ranelate  dissociates  at  the gastro-intestinal level. Strontium is a cation chemically and physically closely related to calcium (Ca). Ranelic  acid  is  an  organic,  highly  polar  molecule  without  pharmacological  activity.  Strontium  is  a bone-seeking  element  and  the  mode  of  action  is  claimed  to  be  through  dual  effects  on  bone metabolism, by increased bone formation and decreased bone resorption.

Protolos is indicated for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis to reduce the risk of vertebral and hip fractures. The recommended daily dose is one 2 g sachet once daily by oral administration. Osseor is intended for long-term use. Osseor should be administered at bedtime, preferably at least two hours after eating, since the absorption of strontium ranelate is reduced by food intake. The product can be taken on an empty stomach. No dose adjustment is recommended in relation to age, even in the very elderly. No dose adjustment is recommended in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment, while Osseor should not be used in patients  with  severe  renal  impairment.  No  dose  adjustment  is  required  in  patients  with  hepatic impairment. Efficacy and safety have not been established in children and adolescents and paediatric use is not recommended Pharmacokinetics The  pharmacokinetics  of  strontium  (Sr)  as  well  as  ranelic  acid  (RA)  was  described  in  the  dossier. Studies were performed in healthy young men and post-menopausal women, the target population. Sr is similar to calcium and is available endogenously with plasma levels in the range 0.030-0.050 mg/l. Ranelic  acid  is  an  organic,  highly  polar  molecule.  Sr  concentrations  in  plasma  and  urine  were measured by different methods (AAS, ICP-AES and ICP-OES). Ranelic acid concentrations in plasma and urine were measured by HPLC-UV. Validation results were presented for each study and were satisfactory. · Absorption - Bioavailability The  absorption  of  Sr  is  dose-dependent  and  a  less  than  proportional  increase  in  Cmax  and  AUC  is observed over a dose range of 0.25 to 8 g. Tmax occurs between 3 and 5 hours. Cmax after a 2 g single dose is approximately 6 mg/l. The dose dependency is reasonably caused by the involvement of active, vitamin  D-dependent  processes  in  the  absorption,  as  for  Ca.  The  absolute  oral  bioavailability  of  Sr from  the  2  g  sachet  formulation  for  marketing  is  27%  (CV  22%)  in  healthy  young  males  and  a population  pharmacokinetic analysis combining data from different studies indicted a similar figure (25%) in healthy postmenopausal women. Throughout the product development, different formulations  have  been  used  and  bioequivalence  studies  of  adequate  design  were  performed  to compare formulations. The final formulation for marketing was used in the pivotal Phase III trials and in many pharmacokinetic studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  organic  moiety,  ranelic  acid,  shows  irregular  and  variable  absorption,  probably  due  to  its  high polarity. The absolute oral bioavailability is about 2.5%.

As could be expected, both food rich in Ca and Ca alone decrease the absorption of Sr and the effect was most pronounced with the combination of food and Ca (FRel 29%). The food tested did not have a low Ca content, and therefore the effect of food per se could not be evaluated. The breakfast served did not have a high fat content, which is normally used for assessment of food effects on absorption. The  effect  of  food  and  Ca  has  not  been  studied  with  the  formulation  for  marketing,  but  since bioequivalence has been established between different formulations this is not deemed a problem. It can be concluded that there is a substantial effect of food and Ca. In the clinical studies there was no

11/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

restriction  with respect to dosage in relation to food intake. Since the absorption is optimised when Osseor is administered 2-3 hours after food and or Ca intake, the SPC states that drug administration should preferably be at least two hours after a meal and also clarify that food/Ca should be avoided a time after Osseor intake.

## · Distribution

The volume of distribution  (Vss)  of  Sr  is  64 ± 15  litres  and  the  plasma  protein  binding  is  moderate (25%). Vss for RA is about 13 litres and the plasma protein binding is 27%.

Strontium  is  dose  dependently  deposited  preferentially  into  newly  formed  bone  as  determined  by various  methods  from  biopsies  of  postmenopausal  women  with  established  osteoporosis  following treatment  with  strontium  ranelate  over  a  period  of  2  years  (STRATOS)  and  3  years  (Phase  III population). The strontium concentration in bones increased non-linearly.

· Elimination Sr is an ion partly eliminated by renal excretion (47 ± 6%). Plasma CL was estimated to 12 ml/min and renal  CL  was  about  7 ml/min..  Half  the  dose  is  excreted  in  urine  and  no  metabolism  occurs.  The remainder seems to be eliminated by gastrointestinal secretion and by slow release from bone tissues. The effective half-life appears to be 50-60 hours, based on the time taken to reach steady state. IV  administered  ranelic  acid  is  mainly  eliminated  renaly  (84 ± 16%)  with  total  and  renal  CL  of 78 ml/min and 62 ml/min, respectively. The half-life is approximately 3 hours. Oral administration of radiolabelled  S12911  indicates  poor  absorption  of  ranelic  acid.  From  presented in vitro and in vivo data there are no indications of metabolism, which is expected due its polar and acidic properties. · Dose proportionality and time dependencies There is a dose dependency in the absorption of Sr, with a less than proportional increase in exposure with increasing dose. This is likely to be due to saturation of an active absorption process very similar to that of calcium. An accumulation ratio for Sr of about 9 was observed in postmenopausal females when comparing AUC0-10h  after the first  dose  and  at  steady  state.  The  applicant  made  a  comparison  between  AUC0-∞ after a single dose from one study and AUC0-10h at steady state from another study and the estimates were rather similar. Thus, the pharmacokinetics of Sr appears to be time independent. The estimated terminal half-life of Sr was longer after repeated dosing compared with single dose studies (about 200 hours compared with 60-100 hours). The half-life probably reflects redistribution from bone and an effective half-life of about 60 hours has been suggested. Steady state for Sr seems to be reached within 2-3 weeks and no apparent changes over time have been observed. · Special populations Plasma Sr data were collected in the two pivotal Phase III studies involving post-menopausal women treated for osteoporosis and the influence of co-variates on Sr pharmacokinetics was investigated. Creatinine  clearance  was  found  to  be  the  most  important  source  of  variability  on  Sr  levels.  The creatinine clearance was shown to induce a 30% increase in strontium levels when it varied from 70 to 30 ml/min. A similar effect of renal impairment was observed in a Phase I study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Severe renal impairment has not been studied. In the SPC, it is recommended that Osseor should not be  used  in  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  in  the  absence  of  bone  safety  data.  No  dose adjustment is recommended for mild to moderate renal impairment. This is acceptable, since the mean creatinine clearance in the Phase III trials was about 50 ml/min, and thus, the efficacy and safety of Osseor has been established in a population with mild to moderate renal impairment.

No  study  has  been  conducted  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment,  but  due  to  the  pharmacokinetic properties  of  Sr  an  effect  is  not  expected.  From  the  population  pharmacokinetic  analysis,  age  and weight had no effect on Sr CL.

From the population pharmacokinetic analysis, age and weight had no effect on Sr CL. There was no study  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment.  Postmenopausal  females  tend  to  have  somewhat  higher bioavailability of Sr compared with young, healthy males.

12/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Interaction studies

In  vitro metabolism  studies  were  conducted  to  assess  the  potential  for  Sr  to  inhibit  different cytochrome  P450  isoenzymes.  No  effect  on  any  of  the  studied  CYPs  was  observed,  although  the highest Sr concentrations studied were relatively low compared with steady state in vivo plasma levels.

In  vivo interaction  studies  have  been  performed  with  the  antacid  Maalox ® and  with Vitamin  D supplementation. In addition, interactions with co-administered drugs were investigated in a Phase III population pharmacokinetic analysis. Vitamin D supplementation had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of Sr. Administration of Maalox ® 2  hours after S12911 caused a 14% decrease in AUC (90% CIs within 80-125%), while administration 2 hours before or together with S12911 caused 20-25% decreases. When S12911 and an antacid like Maalox ® are co-prescribed, the preferred dosing regimen would be to administer the antacid 2 hours after S12911 to achieve the highest bioavailability. However, when this dosing regimen is impractical due to the recommended administration of Osseor at bedtime, concomitant intake remains acceptable.

It  can  be  concluded that few interaction studies have been performed with S12911 and other drugs. Since Sr and RA are not metabolised and no in vitro inhibitory potential was observed for Sr on CYP isoenzymes,  interactions  involving  absorption  are  most  likely  to  occur.  Food,  Ca  and  the  antacid Maalox ® reduced the bioavailability of Sr to different extents. No  study  has  been  conducted  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  S12911  on  the  absorption  of  other  drugs. Divalent cations like Ca and Sr can form complexes with e.g. tetracycline and quinolone antibiotics administered orally and thereby reduce their absorption. In the absence of specific interaction data for S12911,  a  restrictive  wording  in  the  SPC  for  Osseor  is  included,  (to  discontinue  Osseor  treatment during the period of antibiotic use). Pharmacodynamics · Mechanism of action The applicant proposes that Sr acts on bone through dual mechanisms of inhibition of resorption by osteoclasts and maintenance or stimulation of bone formation by osteoblasts. · Primary and secondary pharmacology The sum of data from in vitro and in vivo (rat and cynomolgus) preclinical and human (biochemical markers,  BMD,  histomorphometry)  studies  presented  by  the  applicant  provide  evidence  compatible with modest effects of Sr on bone remodelling dynamics in the direction of reduction of bone turnover at  tissue  level  (reduced  activation  frequency  of  remodelling  units)  together  with  maintenance  or, possibly, slight stimulation of bone formative activities at the cellular level. This chain of events presumes a degree of 'de-coupling' of the otherwise tightly linked resorptionformation sequence of adult bone remodelling. The exact mechanisms through which this would take place are not known. It would appear logical to presume a combination of systemic effects through reduced parathyroid hormone secretion secondary to the increased combined calcimimetic activity of extracellular  Ca  plus  Sr  evident  in  treated  patients,  and  direct  effects  on  bone  cells,  respectively. Mediation of effects on bone cells through the Calcium sensing Receptor (CaR) is proposed as one interesting possibility. This can hardly be the whole explanation since Sr has lower affinity than Ca on the CaR and no type of interaction on CaR has been shown other than agonism, qualitatively identical to  that  of  Ca.  Overall,  the  mechanisms  through  which  Sr  may  affect  bone  cells  are  incompletely elucidated at present. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Any effects of Sr on bone take place in the setting of considerable skeletal accretion of the element, which per se is not proposed to contribute to, or detract from the effect on bone mechanical integrity, at levels reached during clinical trial experience so far. Non-clinical and human data are consistent to indicate that accretion occurs mainly through adsorption of Sr to newly formed bone, without effects on hydroxy-apatite crystal structure. Human bone biopsy findings suggest that skeletal accumulation of Sr may reach a plateau after about three years of treatment. The data are sparse, however, and not consistently supported by findings from non-clinical trials. Non-clinical studies demonstrated that high bone concentrations of Sr adversely affect bone mineralisation. This is assumed to be an exaggerated pharmacological effect. The safety margins to clinical exposure are narrow. The MAH has committed to provide further bone-biopsy data from long-term therapy within ongoing studies.

13/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  dynamics  of  Sr  release  from  bone  off-therapy  are  not  well  characterised  and  it  is  not  known whether all Sr will be eventually released. This concern should, however, be viewed in the light of current  acceptance  of  selective  and  (for  practical  purposes)  irreversible  bone  accumulation  of bisphosphonates. Further reassurance could be provided post-marketing and is anticipated from offtherapy bone biopsy data within ongoing extension study.

Skeletal accretion of Sr has an unavoidable effect on bone mineral mass assessment through BMD by DXA,  which  increases  markedly  during  treatment.  The  relative  contributions  to ∆ BMD  of  Sr distribution to bone and the higher X-ray absorption of Sr relative to Ca, and 'true' increase in bone mineral mass, respectively, must be regarded as somewhat uncertain. Currently, the estimate given in the SPC that 50% of ∆ BMD is accounted for by passive presence of Sr in bone appears reasonable based  on  available  data.  Remaining  Sr  in  bone  likewise  affects  assessment  of  BMD  off-therapy. Overall, the value of BMD for monitoring of patients on Sr ranelate is uncertain. The prescriber must be  alerted  that  change  in  BMD  in  these  patients  must  be  interpreted  quite  differently  than  during therapy  with  currently  licensed  anti-resorptive  or  anabolic  agents.  After  revision,  the  SPC  is considered acceptable in this respect.

- Women 70-74 years should have a history of osteoporotic vertebral fracture or at least one additional risk factor for fracture, such as:

Clinical efficacy · Dose response study (ies) Doses  of  Sr  ranelate  (0.5-2  g/d)  tested  were  selected  based  on  preclinical  data  and  on  Phase  I tolerability  studies,  as  well  as  on  what  highest  dose  could  be  considered  compatible  with  long-term compliance. Testing was done in one, double blind, placebo-controlled, 24 month trial in 353 elderly women with established postmenopausal osteoporosis (STRATOS), focusing on change from baseline in lumbar BMD by DXA, expressed as % annual slope. For measured BMD, there was a clear doseresponse  with  all  tested  doses  superior  to  placebo.  BMD  adjusted  for  bone  Sr  content  increased significantly at two years only with the highest dose, Sr ranelate 2g/d. Biochemical markers of bone turnover  indicated  responses  in  the  direction  of  decreased  resorption  and  maintained  or  increased formation, compared with placebo. The decision to bring only the highest tested dose into Phase III is considered acceptable. · Main study (ies) Treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis The indication claimed for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis is based primarily on 36-month data  from  two,  still  ongoing  five-year  trials, SOTI and TROPOS .  Both  are  European  multi-centre studies,  performed  as  dopple  blind  trial  testing  Sr  ranelate  2  g/d vs. placebo  in  elderly  Caucasian women on individually titrated calcium and vitamin D supplementation, which was achieved within a common  run-in  protocol  (FIRST).  Generally,  both  trials  are  well  presented  and  are  considered adequately  designed,  executed  and  analysed.  Within-study  retention  of  patients  was  acceptable considering study duration and the elderly or very elderly population included Altogether 9,196 Caucasian women &gt;50 years old (mean age 74 ± 7 years, no upper age limit), postmenopausal  for  &gt;5  years  (mean  26 ± 9  years)  and  'presenting  severe  osteoporosis'  were  enrolled. More specifically, · Women &lt;70 years should have a history of osteoporotic vertebral fracture Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -personal history of osteoporotic fracture (vertebral or peripheral) post menopause, or
- -resident in retirement homes or
- -frequent falls (more than 4) / year or
- -maternal history of osteoporotic fractures (hip, vertebrae, wrist)
- All women should be ambulant ( i.e. , able to walk alone) and have a life expectancy of more than 4 years.

14/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Exclusion criteria were generally typical of osteoporosis treatment trials and included:

- -Significant liver or kidney disease (S-creatinine &gt;140 µ mol/l), hypercalciuria
- -Other skeletal disease, hyperthyroidism
- -Chronic systemic glucocorticoids, antiepileptics, phosphate binders
- -Recent osteoporosis therapy

SOTI (N  =  1,649,  mean  age  69.7  years)  focused  on  patients  with  prevalent  vertebral  fracture. According to central grading, this was verified in 87.5% of patients at baseline. In 90.1% there was a history of axial or  peripheral osteoporotic fracture.  Baseline lumbar or femoral BMD T-score &lt;-2.5 was present in 87.5% and 64.9%, respectively.

| Placebo                                                                       | OSSEOR      | Relative Risk Reduction vs. placebo (95%CI), p value   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| SOTI N=723 New vertebral 32.8% no                                             | N=719 20.9% | 41% (27-52), p<0.001                                   |
| fracture over 3 years New vertebral fracture over the 1 st year 11.8% product | 6.1%        | 49% (26-64), p<0.001                                   |
| New clinical vertebral fracture over 3 years 17.4%                            | 11.3%       | 38% (17-53), p<0.001                                   |

Pre-specified sensitivity  analyses  supported  the  primary  analysis.  A post  hoc robustness  assessment was  performed,  using  various  assumptions  for  outcome  for  randomised  patients  (n=207)  initially excluded  from  FAS  (nine  untreated  patients  and  198  patients  with  less  than  two  assessable  X-rays between month 0 and month 36). Except for the most conservative maximal bias assumption (100% fractures in active groups, 0% in placebo), this indicated retained significant effects of Sr.

Results The primary efficacy analysis was  the  incidence  over  time  of  patients  with  new  vertebral  fracture until 36 month ITT/FAS (Genant semi-quantitative grading, centralised reading). This is in compliance with  CPMP NfG. Benefit of Sr ranelate vs. placebo  was  noted  from  12  month  onwards.  Thirty-six month data for the primary analysis are summarised in the table below. Incidence over time of patients with at least one new vertebral fracture and relative risk in the FAS (semi-quantitative assessment) Table 1: Incidence of patients with vertebral fracture and relative risk reduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

Outcomes in the population with osteoporotic baseline Bone Mineral Density (BMD) (RR = 0.63) and PP  (RR  =  0.59-0.62)  were  consistent  with  the  primary  analysis,  as  were  results  for  new  clinical vertebral  fracture,  new  or  worsening  vertebral  fracture,  and  new  vertebral  fracture  by  quantitative morphometry.

Consistent with the effect on vertebral fracture, there was significantly less mean loss of height in the Sr ranelate group, compared with placebo (-7+13 mm and -9+14 mm, respectively, p=0.006).

There was no discernible effect on the incidence of patients with new non-axial, osteoporosis-related fracture (RR = 0.91 [0.71; 1.18]).

15/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Lumbar BMD (non-adjusted) increased on average 14.4% on Sr ranelate vs. placebo. Bone Turnover (BTO)  marker  profiles  bone  Alkaline  Phosphatase  and  Type  I  collagen  C-telopeptide  cross  links (bALP  and  serum  CTX)  showed  a  trend  to  increase  over  time  in  both  treatment  groups,  after  a transient dip in mean serum CTX in the Sr ranelate group. Mean levels of bALP were higher and of CTX lower on Sr ranelate, compared with placebo at all time points, however.

TROPOS (N = 5,091, mean age 76.8 years, range 55-100 years, 61.6% ≥ 75 years) focused on patients with femoral osteoporosis. Baseline femoral BMD T-score &lt;-2.5 (Applicant's reference) was verified for 89%. A history of fragility fracture (axial or peripheral) was present in 55%.

The primary  efficacy  analysis was  incidence  over  time  of  patients  with  at  least  one  incident osteoporosis-related peripheral fracture (ITT/FAS), using Kaplan-Meïer method and unadjusted Cox model for inference. The analysis was carried out on available data up to the cut-off date (last patient past  36  month  and  including  retrieved  data  for  dropouts),  and  considering  all  information  about peripheral  fracture  occurrence  up  to  6  months  after  last  treatment  intake.  Vertebral  fractures  were analysed secondarily, using the same criteria as in SOTI

For  vertebral  fractures  TROPOS  provided  corroboration  of  SOTI.  Relative  risks  for  new  vertebral fracture  were  RR  =  0.61  [0.51;  0.73]  (overall),  RR  =  0.68  [0.53;  0.85]  (patients  with  prevalent vertebral fracture) and RR = 0.55 [0.42; 0.72] (patients without prevalent vertebral fracture).

The focus on (all)  peripheral  osteoporosis-related  fractures  reflects  advice  in  1994  FDA  guidelines. CPMP Note  for  Guidance  on  postmenopausal  osteoporosis  in  women  (CPMP/EWP/552/95  rev.  1) does not exclude this primary outcome measure, but also identifies proximal femur as the non-axial fracture site of key importance for a therapeutic claim. Over three years, incident peripheral osteoporosis-related fracture was recorded in 233 patients on Sr ranelate,  compared  with  276  on  placebo  (RR  ITT/FAS  =  0.85  [0.71;1.01]).  Analyses  in  patients exposed for at least six months and in patients compliant according to blood Sr levels were nominally significant, as was analysis for predefined major osteoporosis-related fractures, indicating a pharmacological  effect  of  therapy.  In  response  to  CPMP  LoQ,  the  applicant  presented  the  same analysis at four years, based on 286/341 patients with fracture: RR=0.83 [0.712;0.975] Proximal femur fracture (for which the trial was not dimensioned) occurred during the first three years of therapy in 62 patients on Sr ranelate, compared with 74 on placebo (RR = 0.85 [0.61:1.19], p=0.33). Also  for  this  fracture  site  nominal  significance  was  achieved  in  the  subset  of  patients  compliant according to blood Sr levels (RR = 0.59 [0.37; 0.95]). Efficacy at the non-axial fracture site of primary interest for a therapeutic claim, i.e. upper femur has not been demonstrated in presented analyses. The CPMP asked the applicant to present data also for the subset with established osteoporosis ( i.e. BMD T-score &lt;-2.5 and prevalent fragility fracture). In response  to  the  request  and  based  on a  posteriori analysis,  the  applicant  proposes  a  revised  target population for hip fracture prevention: women ≥ 74 years and with femoral BMD T-score &lt;-3 (&lt;-2.4 NHANES III). The CPMP agreed that there is internal and external support for the relevance of such a population  cut,  which  represented  42%  of  patients  randomised  to  TROPOS  and  that  therapeutic indications have been approved for the bisphosphonates alendronate and risedronate, based on similar subgroup and/or post hoc analyses. In this subset and based on 32 and 51 upper femur fractures in Sr ranelate and placebo groups, respectively, nominally significant efficacy of Sr ranelate was seen: RR = 0.64,  [0.412;0.997].  Additional  analyses  from  four-year  follow-up  in  the  targeted  population  (RR  = 0.69) and from three years in the whole TROPOS subset fulfilling the revised BMD criteria (RR = 0.70) indicate consistency. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Findings for BMD and BTO markers were qualitatively similar to those in SOTI. For BTO markers (bALP  and  U-NTX),  mean  levels  increased  over  time  in  both  treatment  groups,  but  less  with  Sr ranelate compared with placebo.

## · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analyses)

A prespecified Integrated Analysis of Efficacy (IAE) was submitted for three-year data, corresponding to an analysis of pooled individual data of SOTI and TROPOS, i.e. on a total of 6,551 patients (3,295 in the Sr ranelate group, 3,256 in the placebo group). In the IAE, the statistical analyses were  performed  with  similar  methods  as  those  described  for  princeps  analyses  in  the  SOTI  and

16/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TROPOS studies, complemented by an adjustment on a fixed study effect (Cox model and covariance analysis).  Homogeneity  of  treatment  effect  across  studies  was  studied  using  the  treatment-by-study interaction. Meta-analytic methods on summary statistics were used as sensitivity analyses. Additional subsets  of  patients ≥ 80  years  and  patients  with  baseline  osteopenia  were  identified.For  vertebral fractures,  the  IAE,  as  expected,  contributed  mainly  a  slight  improvement  of  the  precision  of  the estimate for RR. The analysis also provided evidence of efficacy of Sr ranelate for patients ≥ 80 years (N  =  Sr/placebo:  443/452),  RR  =  0.68  [0.50;0.92]  and  for  patients  with  baseline  BMD  in  the osteopenic range (N = Sr/placebo: 206/203), RR = 0.38 [021;0.71].

A posteriori analysis of data from patients (N=176) with baseline lumbar spine and/ or femoral neck BMD in the osteopenic range, no prevalent fracture and at least one additional risk factor for fracture was performed. It was shown that OSSEOR reduced the risk of a first vertebral fracture by 72% over 3 years (incidence of vertebral fracture 3.6% with strontium ranelate vs. 12.0% with placebo) in the analysed patients population.

As regards efficacy against non-axial fracture, the TROPOS trial was not fully conclusive in its chosen primary  endpoint  of  incidence  of  patients  over  three  years  with  (any)  new  osteoporosis-related peripheral fracture, but nominally significant effect was indicated in follow-up analysis at four years. A pooled efficacy analysis of SOTI and TROPOS at three years provided borderline significant results that  are  considered  insufficiently  convincing  for  a  one  pivotal  trial  /meta-analysis  situation.  More importantly, CPMP NfG and regulatory consistency would require documentation of benefit for hip fracture prevention for any non-axial treatment claim.

For peripheral osteoporosis-related fractures, the IAE was performed on the FAS peripheral data sets (until endpoint) from SOTI and TROPOS and identified 331 patients with new fracture out of 3,295 in the  Sr  ranelate  group,  compared  with  389/3,256  on  placebo.  This  corresponds  to  RR  =  0.85  [0.74; 0.99], (p = 0.033,study-adjusted Cox  model). A  meta-analytic approach confirmed this result (p = 0.031). The effect appeared somewhat enhanced in the PP compliant according to blood Sr levels (RR  =  0.74  [0.62;  0.89],  study  adjusted  Cox  model:  p  =  0.001).  Neither  clinically  relevant,  nor statistically (p = 0.853) significant treatment*study interaction was detected. · Clinical studies in special populations (see also Pharmacokinetic) The general safety profile of strontium ranelate in patients presenting a creatinine clearance below 30 ml/min was similar to that described in the overall Phase III Safety Set. However, the effects of severe renal impairment are known to be potentially deleterious on bone. As no bone safety data are available in patients with severe renal insufficiency (creatinine clearance below 30 ml/min) treated by strontium ranelate, a statement is included in section 4.4 of the SPC. · Discussion on clinical efficacy Treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis The efficacy claims were based primarily on 36-month analyses on incidences of patients with new fracture from two, large, ongoing, acceptably conducted, placebo-controlled trials in elderly or very elderly postmenopausal patients with adequately characterised osteoporosis or established osteoporosis. For  reduction  of  risk  of  new  vertebral  fracture,  relevant  efficacy  has  been  convincingly  shown  in patients with (SOTI) or without (TROPOS) prevalent vertebral fracture. SOTI provided robust evidence of efficacy of Sr ranelate  2 g/d to reduce the risk  of  new vertebral fracture  in  a  population  characterised  by  established  postmenopausal  osteoporosis,  at  high  risk  of recurrent  vertebral  fracture.  The  magnitude  of  effect  appears  comparable  with  that  achieved  with bisphosphonates in similar populations. Medicinal product no longer authorised

To  this  end,  the  applicant  presented post  hoc subset  analyses  at  three  years  for  a  revised  target population aged ≥ 74 years and with femoral neck BMD T-score ≤ -3 SD ( ≤ -2.4 SD NHANES III), for which efficacy of the same order of magnitude as shown for bisphosphonates is indicated. This has now been further supported by consistent risk reduction estimates from four-year follow-up and from the  whole  TROPOS  population  meeting  the  specified  BMD  criteria.  This  type  of  approach  has regulatory precedent and is considered acceptable to support a therapeutic indication.

17/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  an  a-posteriori  analysis  of  patients  from  the  pooled  SOTI  and  TROPOS  studies  with  baseline lumbar spine and/ or femoral neck BMD in the osteopenic range and without prevalent fracture but with  at  least  one  additional  risk  factor  for  fracture  (N=176),  OSSEOR  reduced  the  risk  of  a  first vertebral fracture by 72% over 3 years (incidence of vertebral fracture 3.6% with strontium ranelate vs. 12.0% with placebo). Even if the findings refer to post hoc analysis and to a small subset of the study population,  additional  analyses  of  different  population  cuts  presented  with  the  applicant's  response support their relevance, and it is considered acceptable to mention these data in the pharmacodynamic section of the SPC.

## Clinical safety

## · Patient exposure

In  all,  4,138  subjects  were  exposed  to  Sr  ranelate  during  the  clinical  development.  Of  these,  3,790 were participants in Phase II and III trials. If duration of exposure is defined as time from date of first intake to date of last intake (or withdrawal), subtracting interruption periods, some 2,600 patients were exposed to Sr ranelate for at least 12 months and 1,400 patients for at least 36 months, respectively. Discussion of safety data focuses on the Phase III data set, which provides long-term information on outcome with the applied / highest tested dose, 2 g/d.  Important subsets from Phase III are patients ≥ 80 years (N = 1,528) and patients with Clcreat &lt;30 ml/min (N = 426), as these involve individuals with higher average exposure to Sr and/or higher anticipated degree of frailty. · Adverse events Overall  incidence  rates  for  adverse  events  with  strontium  ranelate  did  not  differ  from  placebo  and adverse events were usually mild and transient. The most common adverse events consisted of nausea and  diarrhoea,  which  were  generally  reported  at  the  beginning  of  treatment  with  no  noticeable difference between groups afterwards. Discontinuation of therapy was mainly due to nausea (1.3% and 2.2% in the placebo and strontium ranelate groups respectively). Adverse reactions, defined as adverse events considered at least possibly attributable to strontium ranelate treatment in phase III studies are listed below Table Emergent adverse events under treatment considered as possibly in relation with the treatment intake Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                     | EAE   | EAE             | EAE                        | SEVERE EAE   | SEVERE EAE      | EAE IN           | EAE IN   | EAE IN          | RESULTING TRT DISCONTINUATION   | RESULTING TRT DISCONTINUATION   | SERIOUS EAE     | SERIOUS EAE      | TRT-RELATED EAE   | TRT-RELATED EAE   | TRT-RELATED EAE   | TRT-RELATED EAE   |
|---------------------|-------|-----------------|----------------------------|--------------|-----------------|------------------|----------|-----------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| PT                  |       | S12911 (N=3352) | Placebo (N=3317) Medicinal |              | S12911 (N=3352) | Placebo (N=3317) |          | S12911 (N=3352) |                                 | Placebo (N=3317)                | S12911 (N=3352) | Placebo (N=3317) |                   | S12911 (N=3352)   | Placebo (N=3317)  | Placebo (N=3317)  |
|                     | n     | %               | n %                        | n            | %               | n %              | n        | %               | n                               | %                               | n %             | n %              | n                 | %                 | n                 | %                 |
| Nausea              | 222   | 6.6             | 142 4.3                    | 14           | 0.4             | 4 0.1            | 82       | 2.4             | 47                              | 1.4                             | 1 < 0.1         | 2 0.1            | 12 9              | 3.8               | 67                | 2.0               |
| Diarrhoea NOS       | 219   | 6.5             | 154 4.6                    | 25           | 0.7             | 9 0.3            | 61       | 1.8             | 28                              | 0.8                             | 1 < 0.1         | 1 < 0.1          | 98                | 2.9               | 54                | 1.6               |
| Loose stools        | 36    | 1.1             | 6 0.2                      | 3            | 0.1             | - -              | 6        | 0.2             | 2                               | 0.1                             | - -             | - -              | 19                | 0.6               | 3                 | 0.1               |
| Headache NOS        | 101   | 3.0             | 79 2.4                     | 11           | 0.3             | 6 0.2            | 17       | 0.5             | 8                               | 0.2                             | 1 < 0.1         | 1 < 0.1          | 29                | 0.9               | 15                | 0.5               |
| Dermatitis NOS      | 69    | 2.1             | 54 1.6                     | 2            | 0.1             | 2 0.1            | 3        | 0.1             | 3                               | 0.1                             | 2 0.1           | - -              | 6                 | 0.2               | 6                 | 0.2               |
| Eczema NOS          | 50    | 1.5             | 40 1.2                     | 1            | < 0.1           | 1 < 0.1          | 1        | < 0.1           | 1                               | < 0.1                           | - -             | - -              | 6                 | 0.2               | 2                 | 0.1               |
| Dermatitis allergic | 33    | 1.0             | 18 0.5                     | 5            | 0.1             | 2 0.1            | 5        | 0.1             | 2                               | 0.1                             | 1 < 0.1         | 1 < 0.1          | 7                 | 0.2               | 4                 | 0.1               |

PT = Preferred term

EAE = Emergent Adverse Event

TRT = Treatment

N = number of patients

n = number of patients with at lease one EAE under treatment considered as possibly in relation with the treatment intake

%: [ n / N ] x 100

18/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

An analysis of emergent AEs by SOC provided additional information.

AEs  involving  the  following  SOC  were  more  frequently  reported  in  the  Sr  ranelate  group  than  in placebo (between-group difference of at least 0.5%):

- ¾ Gastrointestinal  disorders;  40.4%  of  the  patients  in  the  Sr  ranelate  group  versus  39.2%  in  the placebo group; E (SE) = 1.2 (1.2)% [-1.2; 3.5]
- ¾ Vascular disorders: 26.3% of the patients in the Sr ranelate group versus 24.4% in the placebo group; E (SE) = 1.9 (1.1)% [-0.2; 4.0],
- ¾ Nervous system disorders: 20.9% of the patients in the Sr ranelate group versus 18.9% in the placebo group; E (SE) = 2.0 (1.0)% [0.1; 3.9],

AEs  within  SOC  gastrointestinal  disorders  referred  mainly  to  terms nausea , diarrhoea and loose stools ,  reported  more  frequently  with  Sr  ranelate,  compared  with  placebo.  There  were  no  obvious signals for more serious events the applicant has provided an adequate appraisal, further detailed in the clinical part of the assessment. Overall, it appears well established that treatment with Sr ranelate is associated  with  common  ADRs  of  gastrointestinal  intolerance.  Although  mainly  mild  to  moderate, these types of adverse events caused the majority of premature discontinuations in clinical trials.

· Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events Within  SOC  vascular  disorders,  there  was  a  worrying,  increased  reporting  rate  with  Sr  ranelate specifically  for  terms  related  to  embolism  and  thrombosis.  A  special  search  for  AEs  of  thrombosis revealed a significantly increased reporting rate for patients on Sr ranelate vs. placebo (3.3 vs. 2.2%, difference 1.1% [0.4; 1.9]). A medical review was performed and showed a statistically significant increase in reports of emergent venous thromboembolism (VTE) in patients on Sr ranelate (OR = 1.5 [1.1; 2.1] at three years). The point estimate for OR was unchanged when focusing on patients with VTE emergent under treatment. For  pulmonary  embolism  (PE),  the  excess  risk  was  similar  (OR  =  1.7  [1.0;  3.1]).  Six  pulmonary embolisms (PE) led to death in the Sr ranelate group vs. 3 in the placebo group and 7 led to treatment discontinuation in the Sr ranelate group, vs. 3 in placebo. Among the VTE emergent under treatment, PE was reported as serious adverse event for 25 patients in the Sr ranelate group vs. 14 in placebo. In ≥ 80-year-old patients, 'pulmonary embolism, thrombosis and stenosis' was reported by 12 patients in the Sr ranelate group vs. 3 in placebo. Increased reporting of embolism, thrombosis and stenosis in patients on Sr ranelate was seen also in the  large  subsets  of  patients  treated  concomitantly  with  oral  anticoagulants  or  antiplatelet  agents, respectively. An exploration of predisposing factors failed to disclose any imbalances between groups. In reponse to CPMP LoQ, the applicant presented comprehensive additional in vitro and clinical data aiming  to  elucidate  any  mechanistic  relationship  between  Sr  exposure  and  effects  on  haemostasis. These efforts are acknowledged as relevant, but have not produced any explanation. Four-year data from  the  ongoing  trials  indicate  a  largely  unchanged  increased  risk  for  VTE  in  Sr  ranelate-treated patients. It is noted that the risk increase appears less than that seen with SERM and HRT. The SPC reflects  this  concern  within  section  4.4.  The  applicant  has  submitted  a  relevant  pharmacovigilance plan, detailing how this issue will be addressed within ongoing large-scale extension to pivotal trials and within post-marketing pharmacovigilance activities For AEs within SOC nervous system disorders, the following could be noted: Medicinal product no longer authorised

Headaches all  forms  were  significantly  more  common  with  Sr  ranelate  (3.9% vs. 2.9%,  difference 1.0%  [0.1;  1.9]).  These  were  mostly  mild  to  moderate.  Of  more  concern,  there  were  discrete  but consistent  increases  in  reporting  rates  for  a  number  of  other  symptoms  and  signs  in  patients  on  Sr ranelate, such as disturbances in consciousness , amnesia , memory loss , seizures , ' encephalopathies '. Overall, between-group differences for AEs within SOC nervous system disorders appeared enhanced in patients ≥ 80 years and in patients with Clcreat &lt;30 ml/min.

Response to CPMP LoQ provided additional data up to four years, which were similar to the more short-term findings previously submitted. Other analyses failed to provide specific explanation for the observations,  which  are  presented  in  the  SPC,  section  4.8.  Further  focused  surveillance  will  be conducted  within  ongoing  extension  trial  and  post-marketing.  This  is  acceptably  detailed  in  the submitted pharmacovigilance plan

19/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The Phase III data set did not provide indications of increased risk of mortality in patients treated with Sr ranelate (RR = 0.94 [0.77; 1.19]. It is noted, however, that patients on Sr ranelate were nominally over-represented  among  those  dying  from  disorders  that  could  be  related  to  thrombosis  /  embolism (including PE and fatal cerebrovascular accident, intestinal infarction). There was also an increased death rate among actively treated patients due to cardiac disorders during the first year of study, but not overall.

## · Laboratory findings

## Strontium exposure and effects on phosphocalcic homeostasis

Chronic treatment with Sr ranelate 2 g/d is associated with steady-state blood Sr levels around 120-140 µ mol/l,  which,  as  expected,  are  further  moderately  increased  in  patients  with  significant  renal impairment.  It  has  been  acceptably  shown  that  there  is  no  progressive  increase  over  time  in  these circulating levels. As detailed in the clinical assessment, there are secondary effects on blood calcium and  phosphorus  levels  in  the  direction  of  hypocalcaemia  and  hyperphosphataemia,  respectively, reasonably  secondary  to  calcimimetic  activity  of  Sr  on  parathyroid  gland.  Abnormally  low  serum calcium was noted at some time in 45% of patients on Sr, compared with 15% on placebo. There were no adverse events related to hypocalcaemia.

A relevant selection of biochemistry and haematology parameters were analysed in clinical trials.

No relevant safety concerns were raised for measured levels of calcitonin, 25 (OH) vitamin D or 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D, respectively. Strontium tissue accretion New animal data, provided with the response to CPMP LoQ gave reassurance that chronic ingestion of Sr  may  not  be  associated  with  deposition  in  non-calcified  tissues.  In  humans,  the  only  tissue  data available are those from iliac bone biopsies performed in Phase II and III. The applicant proposed that these  indicate  that  a  plateau  is  reached  after  36  months  on  therapy.  As  detailed  in  the  clinical assessments, the basis for this proposal appears weak and further long-term biopsy data are necessary to provide reassurance that levels similar to associate with mineralisation defects in preclinical models are  not  reached.  Within  the  submitted  pharmacovigilance  plan,  the  applicant  commits  to  continued efforts to provide such biopsies from M72-M96 of ongoing extension trial. Off-therapy data over 12 months for BMD were presented for a subset of patients previously treated for 24 months in Phase II trials. The contributions to loss of BMD off-therapy of release of Sr and loss of 'true' bone mineral, respectively, are uncertain. Bone histomorphometry In similarity with other recent applications in the therapeutic area, the dossier for Osseor provides only sparse long-term histomorphometric data for assessment of pharmacodynamic effects and bone safety. The findings are discussed in detail in the clinical assessment. No safety concerns were raised. ECG and vital signs An effect of Sr on cardiac conduction could be conceived. However, adequate preclinical studies failed to  identify  any  impact  of  Sr  on  repolarisation.  In  Phase  III  studies,  ECGs  were  recorded  and  read centrally  in  a  subset  representing  approximately  10%  of  randomised  patients.  Analyses  focused  on post-baseline data under treatment. The findings do not give rise to specific concern. Laboratory AEs Medicinal product no longer authorised

For  biochemistry  parameters  not  discussed  in  relation  to  phosphocalcic  homeostasis,  the  only noticeable change observed with Sr ranelate concerned serum Creatine Kinase (CK). Mean CK levels increased from baseline to last value under treatment in both treatment groups. This increase was more pronounced  in  the  Sr  ranelate  group  (31.3 ± 80.8  IU/L)  than  in  with  placebo  (13.1 ± 46.6  IU/L). Estimated difference E (SE) between groups was of 18.2 (1.7) [14.8; 21.6] IU/L. In all 789/2680 patients  (29.4%)  in  the  Sr  ranelate  group  and  475/2705  patients  (17.6%)  in  the  placebo group switched at least once from a baseline value within the reference range to a CK value above ULN. Normalisation of elevated CK during treatment with Sr ranelate was assessable in 599 patients. Normalisation under treatment occurred in 86.0% of these patients (n = 515). Phase II data indicated a clear  dose  relationship  for  mean  CK  elevation  during  treatment  with  Sr  ranelate.  All  isoenzyme analyses suggested that CK elevation was explained by elevation of CK MM.

20/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Muscular symptoms, mainly muscle cramps and night cramps were reported by 5-6% of patients with CK elevation, with similar incidence between groups.

No relevant changes were seen for haematology parameters.

The mechanism behind the dose-related effect of Sr on skeletal muscle cell integrity remains unclear. Additional  analyses  provided  in  response  to  LoQ  indicate  that  the  finding  may  be  innocuous.  No additional concerns were raised in patients at increased exposure (the very old and renally impaired), or in patients on concomitant statin or fibrate. Additional data will become available from final phases of  ongoing controlled trials  and  from  long-term  OL extension to these. Mechanistic studies using  a non-ischaemic arm exercise model are ongoing and will be provided according to agreed timelines.

## · Discussion on clinical safety

The safety profile has been well illustrated in a large population of elderly and very elderly patients treated  long-term  with  Sr  ranelate  2  g/d.  Additional,  controlled  safety  data  will  be  provided  from ongoing phases of these trials. At this stage, the following is concluded:

The quality of the product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. There are no unresolved quality issues, which have a negative impact on the Benefit Risk balance of the product.

¾ Treatment with Sr ranelate is associated with an approximately 50% increase in the annual risk for VTE, including PE. This is established during the first year of therapy and appears to remain unchanged thereafter. No explanation has been obtained, despite comprehensive analyses, and no  specific  risk  group  has  been  identified.  This  finding  is  acceptably  described  in  the  SPC. Further targeted surveillance and analysis will take place, as described in the pharmacovigilance plan. ¾ Reports of some nervous system disorders were more frequent with Sr ranelate, compared with placebo. Especially, reports of CNS effects such as mental impairment, disturbed consciousness, memory loss/amnesia  and  seizures  create  some  concern.  No  mechanism  has  been  elucidated. The SPC has been amended and is now considered acceptable in its description of these events. Further targeted surveillance and analysis will take place, as described in the pharmacovigilance plan. ¾ Sr  ranelate  is  associated  with  common  ADRs  of  gastrointestinal  intolerance,  but  there  are  no indications of serious gastrointestinal complications to therapy and these problems  are considered clinically manageable. ¾ There is clear impact of treatment with Sr ranelate on skeletal muscle cell integrity, as expressed by circulating levels of CK. The clinical importance of this may be minor, but surveillance will be needed, as described within the pharmakovigilance plan post-marketing. ¾ There is some remaining concern regarding any long-term consequences of skeletal accretion of Sr. The applicant has committed to continued attempts to provide additional bone biopsy data from long-term extension to pivotal trials. 5 Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

Non-clinical in vitro data indicate that strontium increased bone formation in certain pre-osteoblastic cell systems, and  inhibited the bone  resorption activity of osteoclasts.  However,  strontium's mechanism of action is not known. Available in vivo studies in OVX animals provide weak support only  in  terms  of  efficacy  for  the  intended  clinical  use.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  strontium  is predominately  distributed  into  calcified  tissues.  No  accumulation  was  identified  in  non-calcified tissues,  while  there  is  insufficient  non-clinical  data  to  assess  whether  bone  strontium  levels  reach  a plateau during long-term treatment. The main toxicological finding was bone and tooth toxicity, which occurred  only  at  bone  strontium  content  above  5%.  There  is  no  indication  that  the  risk  for  bone

21/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

toxicity  increases  with  treatment  duration  per  se,  as  long  as  the  BSC  is  below  that  causing  bone toxicity

## Efficacy

The efficacy claims were based primarily on analyses on incidences of patients with new fracture from two, large, ongoing, placebo-controlled trials in elderly or very elderly postmenopausal patients with adequately  characterised  osteoporosis  or  established  osteoporosis.  For  reduction  of  risk  of  new vertebral fracture, relevant efficacy has been convincingly shown in patients with (SOTI) or without (TROPOS) prevalent vertebral fracture.

SOTI provided robust evidence of efficacy of Sr ranelate  2 g/d to reduce the risk  of  new vertebral fracture  in  a  population  characterised  by  established  postmenopausal  osteoporosis,  at  high  risk  of recurrent  vertebral  fracture.  The  magnitude  of  effect  appears  comparable  with  that  achieved  with bisphosphonates in similar populations.

There is clear impact of treatment with Sr ranelate on skeletal muscle cell integrity, as expressed by circulating  levels  of  CK.  The  clinical  importance  of  this  may  be  minor,  but  surveillance  will  be needed, as described within the pharmakovigilance plan post-marketing.

The applicant presented post hoc subset  analyses at  three years for a revised target population aged ≥ 74 years and with femoral neck BMD T-score ≤ -3 SD ( ≤ -2.4 SD NHANES III), for which efficacy of the  same order of  magnitude as shown for bisphosphonates is indicated. This has now been further supported  by  consistent  risk  reduction  estimates  from  four-year  follow-up  and  from  the  whole TROPOS  population  meeting  the  specified  BMD  criteria.  This  type  of  approach  has  regulatory precedent and is considered acceptable to support a therapeutic indication. Subset analysis of pooled data from treatment trials TROPOS and SOTI indicated that Sr ranelate 2 g/d reduces the risk for new vertebral fracture in elderly postmenopausal women with baseline BMD in the osteopenic range both at lumbar spine and femoral neck. Even if the findings refer to post hoc analysis and to a small subset of the study population, additional analyses of different population cuts presented  with  the  applicant  response  support  their  relevance,  and  it  is  considered  acceptable  to mention these data in the pharmacodynamic section of the SPC. Safety The safety profile has been well illustrated in a large population of elderly and very elderly patients treated  long-term  with  Sr  ranelate  2  g/d.  Additional,  controlled  safety  data  will  be  provided  from ongoing phases of these trials. Treatment with Sr ranelate is associated with an approximately 50% increase in the annual risk for VTE, including  PE.  This  finding  is  acceptably  described  in  SPC.  Further  targeted  surveillance  and analysis will take place, as described in the pharmacovigilance plan. Reports  of  some  nervous  system  disorders  were  more  frequent  with  Sr  ranelate,  compared  with placebo.  Especially,  reports  of  CNS  effects  such  as  mental  impairment,  disturbed  consciousness, memory loss/amnesia and seizures create some concern. No mechanism has been elucidated. The SPC has been amended and is now considered acceptable in its description of these events. Further targeted surveillance and analysis will take place, as described in the pharmacovigilance plan. Sr  ranelate  is  associated  with  common  ADRs  of  gastrointestinal  intolerance,  but  there  are  no indications  of  serious  gastrointestinal  complications  to  therapy  and  these  problems  are  considered clinically manageable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There is some concern regarding any long-term consequences of skeletal accretion of Sr. The applicant has committed to continued attempts to provide additional bone biopsy data from long-term extension to pivotal trials.

## Benefit/risk assessment

The comprehensive clinical programme, and especially the contribution of data in the elderly and very elderly  is  acknowledged.  From  the  efficacy  viewpoint,  the  submitted  documentation  is  considered sufficiently robust to support an indication for treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis, to reduce the risk of vertebral and hip fractures, with reference to section 5.1 of the SPC for further information to

22/23

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  prescriber  regarding  the  specifics  of  the  target  population.  For  this  indication,  the  demonstrated effect of Sr ranelate 2 g/d appears comparable with that of bisphosphonates, and the strategy to accept a therapeutic indication partly based on post hoc analysis of a revised target population of particular medical interest has regulatory precedent in the European licensing of bisphosphonates.

The applicant has provided a pharmacovigilance plan according to ICH E2E, which has been reviewed by the PhWP and was found to adequately summarise the identified safety concerns, most importantly increased  risks  for  VTE  and  nervous  system  dysfunction.  These  concerns  are  not  considered incompatible  with  an  acceptable  benefit/risk  ratio.  The  pharmacovigilance  plan  provides  acceptable strategies for further monitoring and analysis of these and other safety issues.

## Recommendation

'Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus  that  the  benefit/risk  ratio  of  Osseor  in  the  treatment  of  postmenopausal  osteoporosis  to reduce the risk of vertebral and hip fractures was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.

<!-- image -->

23/23