---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:17:32
document_pages: 15
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/panretin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: panretin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.9828368
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 04:19:46.601892
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Panretin. This scientific discussion  has  been  updated  until  30  June  2004.  For  information  on  changes  after  this  date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Panretin  gel  contains  a  new  active  substance  (INN  alitretinoin,  0.1%  w/w)  developed  by  Ligand Pharmaceuticals UK Limited. The approved indication for the topical treatment of cutaneous lesions in patients with AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) when: -lesions are not ulcerated or lymphoedematous, and -treatment of visceral KS is not required, and -lesions are not responding to systemic antiretroviral therapy, and -radiotherapy or chemotherapy are not appropriate and is  subject  to  restricted  medical  prescription.  Panretin gel  is  initially  applied  two  times  a  day  to cutaneous Kaposi's sarcoma lesions and the application frequency can be increased stepwise to three or four times a day according to individual lesion tolerance, allowing no less than two weeks between application frequency increases. Similarly, the frequency of application can be reduced if application site toxicity occurs (see SPC section 4.2, Posology and method of administration ). Retinoids The compounds of the vitamin A family of molecules are commonly referred to as retinoids. These include retinol and closely related naturally occurring molecules as well as synthetic analogues. The retinoic acids (RAs) are similar to the retinols except for oxidation of the -OH group. While these molecules  may  not  have  the  effects  of  the  retinols  on  the  eye  and  on  reproduction,  RAs  strongly promote  growth  and  differentiation  of  epithelial  tissues  in  vitamin-A-deficient  animals;  alltrans -retinoic  acid  (ATRA)  has  10  to  100-fold  the  activity  of  retinol  in  this  regard.  Among  the  synthetic analogues, aromatisation of the β -ionone ring gave rise to etretinate, from which acitretin is produced in vivo ; the latter has now replaced etretinate in therapeutic use. RAs influence gene expression by binding to specific nuclear receptors, which have been grouped into two families. ATRA binds preferentially to RAR receptors ( α , β , γ ) with much less affinity for RXR receptors. In contrast, 9cis -RA (alitretinoin) is not only able to bind to RAR but is also an endogenous RXR  ligand.  Among  certain  genes  regulated  by  hormones,  activation  involves  binding  of  the hormone-receptor complex and then dimerisation with an RXR-ligand complex. In this way, retinoids can influence the expression of receptors and influence cell growth. The  ultimate effect of retinoids on epithelia is to inhibit hyperplasia and to promote  cell differentiation. A slowing in chemical or viral-induced progression of pre-malignant to malignant cells has  been  shown  in  animals,  although  effects  on  established  tumours  are  generally  limited.  The mechanisms  by  which  vitamin  A  and  its  derivatives  may  have  an  antitumour  effect  are  still  not entirely  clear.  In  addition  to  the  effects  on  promoting  cell  differentiation,  there  are  effects  on  the immune system (cell-mediated and humoral immunity). Vitamin A deficiency has also been associated with increased susceptibility to bacterial, parasitic and viral infections. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Kaposi's sarcoma

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) was first described as an indolent tumour seen in equatorial Africa and, to a much lesser extent,  in  Mediterranean  countries.  With  the  advent  of  AIDS,  KS  was  noted  to  be  the commonest neoplasm seen in HIV-infected patients and was found to be particularly common among homosexual patients, with 20-30% affected at some time. Moreover, KS appeared to be much more aggressive in these individuals. The appearance of cutaneous and/or visceral lesions is sometimes the first  clue  to  HIV  infection  and  KS  may  present  even  when  the  CD4  count  is  preserved,  although exacerbations  are  seen  in  association  with  drops  in  lymphocyte  counts  and  during  intercurrent

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

opportunistic infections. KS lesions may be very noticeable especially when there is also associated blocking of regional lymphatics; visceral KS involvement can be rapidly fatal.

The suspicion that KS is the manifestation of a viral infection was supported by the cloning of novel herpes-like  sequences  from  biopsies  and  the  identification  of  the  genome  of  a γ -herpes  virus,  now called  HHV-8 (or KSHV), in both AIDS-related and non-AIDS-related KS. A correlation has been shown  between  the  HHV-8  DNA  load  in  KS  lesions  and  the  severity  and  staging  of  the  disease. HHV-8  also  appears  to  be  latent  in  body-cavity-based  lymphomas  in  AIDS  patients,  where  it  is detected alone or in association with other γ -herpes viruses such as Epstein-Barr virus.

Management  of  KS  depends  on  the  extent  of  cutaneous/visceral  involvement  and  the  level  of immunosuppression;  curbing  the  HIV  viral  load  and  increasing  the  CD4  count  may  provide  some amelioration or even halt progression of KS. Local lesions, when few in number, may be excised or treated with cryotherapy or radiotherapy; intra-lesional injection of vinblastine may also be effective. Interferonα is  used  for  patients  with  non-life-threatening  KS  when  the  CD 4   count is  &gt;200  and the viral load is low. Once there is evidence of widespread cutaneous and/or systemic disease, systemic chemotherapy is needed. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Panretin gel contains the new active substance, alitretinoin, which is 9cis -RA. The finished medicinal product is presented as a topical gel, based on formulations, which have been used for other retinoids, with strength of 0.1% w/w. The excipients used are standard ingredients for a topical product of this type. The product (60 g) is contained in an epoxy-lined collapsible aluminium tube with a white highdensity polyethylene cap. Active substance Alitretinoin is 9cis -RA or (2 E , 4 E , 6 Z , 8 E )-3,7-dimethyl-9- (2,6,6-trimethyl-l-cyclohexenyl)-2,4,6,8nonatetraenoic acid according to IUPAC nomenclature. Alitretinoin contains no chiral centres but a variety of geometrical isomers are possible. Satisfactory proof of structure has been demonstrated by a number of spectroscopic techniques, particularly NMR. Alitretinoin  is  manufactured  using  a  synthetic  process,  which  is  stereospecific  for  the  geometry  at positions 4, 6 and 8 and stereoselective for position 2. The data submitted indicate that alitretinoin is manufactured  by  a  method,  which  can  provide  reproducibly  pure  batches  of  active  substance, especially  with  regard  to  isomeric  composition.  Details  are  provided  of  the  use  of  batches  in toxicological,  clinical  and  other  studies.  Clinical  trial  material  has  been  produced  at  two  sites  of manufacture using slightly different routes of synthesis. Data have been presented to demonstrate that material produced using either route of synthesis is chemically equivalent: the only likely additional impurity arising from the commercial process has not been detected in batches of active substance. A validated  HPLC  method  is  used  for  both  the  assay  and  control  of  related  substances.  The  assay limits are adequate. Toxicological data confirm that the proposed related substance specifications for alitretinoin are reasonable. Details  are  provided  from  various  sites  relating  to  four  laboratory  scale  batches  and  10  large  scale batches and were in compliance with the existing specifications. The data for the full-scale batches show that the manufacture of the active substance is reproducible and that the material is acceptably pure. Solvents have been present only at low levels, usually below the quantitation limit of the method employed. Heavy metals have been present at less than 20 ppm in all batches of alitretinoin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Stress stability studies were conducted on the active substance stored at 60ºC as suspensions in water and aqueous 0.1N HCl and in solution in ethanol and aqueous 0.1N NaOH. Additional samples were stored with oxygen in the headspace of the container. The ethanolic solutions were also exposed to fluorescent and UV light, at 10,100 lux and 1.7 W/m 2 respectively. Decomposition was extensive in the presence of oxygen, as expected, giving rise to a large number of impurities.

The proposed re-test period of 12 months, after storage in the dark at -76ºC in amber glass bottles with argon filled head-space, is justified by the long-term and accelerated stability data provided.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A photostability  study  was  conducted  on  one  batch  at  ambient  temperature  in  accordance  with  the current ICH guideline (total illumination 1.2M lux hours) and showed that degradation of alitretinoin was accelerated by exposure to light, hence the need to protect the active substance from light.

## Other ingredients

In  addition  to  the  active  substance,  the  gel  contains  dehydrated  alcohol  (ethanol)  as  the  principal vehicle  (solvent)  with  polyethylene  glycol  400  and  hydroxypropyl  cellulose  providing  cosmetic acceptability and thickening of the alcoholic solution. Butylhydroxytoluene (BHT) at 0.05% w/w is the  chosen  antioxidant.  The  excipients  meet  the  requirements  of  their  appropriate  monographs  (Ph. Eur.  for  BHT,  polyethylene  glycol  400  and  hydroxypropylcellulose).  Dehydrated  alcohol  is  of  BP quality  and  the  nitrogen  gas  used  to  fill  the  headspace,  complies  with  Ph.  Eur.  monographs. Satisfactory certificates of analysis are presented. Assurance has been provided that the alcohol used in the finished product will comply with the Ph. Eur. monograph, which came into force in January 1999, in particular with the limit of 2 ppm for benzene. The quality specifications and tests relating to the packaging material (aluminium tubes, epoxy-lined) are satisfactory.

Product development and finished product Manufacturing process The product is a topical gel based on formulations that have been used for other retinoids. The active substance  is  dissolved  in  alcohol  and  the  gel  is  thickened  with  hydroxypropylcellulose.  Butylated hydroxytoluene is added as an antioxidant.  The  gel is  self-preserving  and  is  packed  in  epoxy-lined collapsible aluminium tubes. Specifications Concerning the test specification of the product, assay limits were in compliance with EU Directives. The method to control viscosity and the viscosity limits chosen to reflect batch analysis data at release and end of shelf life are considered justified. GMP Durham Pharmacal, a subsidiary of Stiefel, manufactures the product in the USA. The product is being manufactured in a facility that holds the necessary Manufacturing Authorisation (see Annex II of the Opinion). Stability of the product The  stability  data  support  the  proposed  shelf  life  of  24  months.  In-use  stability  studies  have  been conducted which justify the proposed shelf life after opening of 90 days. In addition, the content of ethanol in the gel is considered to provide adequate microbial protection. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The  information  in  the  dossier  is  well  presented  with  full  explanations  of  the  development  of  the active substance and finished product together with detailed histories of the analytical development. The  data  submitted  indicate  that  pure,  large-scale  batches  of  alitretinoin  can  be  manufactured reproducibly. The degradation of RAs is complicated and may give rise to a large number of potential impurities. Satisfactory evidence, however, has been provided to show that the quality of the active substance  is  maintained  by  the  proposed  storage  conditions.  The  limits  for  related  substances  and residual  solvents  in  the  active  substance  specification  are  acceptable.  The  formulation  of  the  gel  is based on alcohol thickened with hydroxypropylcellulose and its manufacture is reproducible. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  proposed  in-use  shelf  life  of  90  days  is  supported  by  the  stability  data  and  limits  for  assay, degradation products and viscosity are satisfactory to ensure the reproducible clinical performance of the product.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Introduction

The  Applicant  has  mostly  focused  on  ascertaining  the  activity  of  Panretin in  vitro and  safety  in animals in order to proceed to the clinical stage of development. Preclinical studies were conducted to GLP  guidelines.  Many  of  the  pharmacokinetic  and  toxicity  studies  using  oral  administration  with subsequent  systemic  exposure  are  not  of  primary  relevance  due  to  the  observation  that  systemic exposure  following  topical  administration  in  clinical  use  does  not  occur  (see  also  Part  IV,  Clinical Aspects).

<!-- image -->

Pharmacodynamics The  effect  of  alitretinoin  on  KS  cells in  vitro seemed  to  be  predominantly  anti-proliferative.  In experiments conducted both in vitro and in vivo it was shown that alitretinoin binds to and activates all intracellular  retinoid  receptor  subtypes  (RAR  and  RXR).  Alitretinoin  is  likely  to  have  a  different mechanism of action from 13-cis-RA and ATRA although there are no data regarding the possible molecular mechanisms of alitretinoin's anti-proliferative action in KS cells. There is bibliographical evidence for the involvement of both RAR and RXR-dependent signalling pathways in the induction of tissue transglutaminase and apoptosis in a human myeloma cell line. However, alitretinoin did not appear to be cytotoxic or apoptogenic on KS cells in vitro .  A study of the effects of alitretinoin and ATRA on thymidine uptake by cultured KS cells did not provide insight into any properties specific to alitretinoin. At the time of development, adequate animal models of KS in which to test 9-cis-RA were lacking. With respect to inhibition of DNA synthesis, the value of simultaneous activation of RXR and RAR by alitretinoin compared to simple activation of RAR remains to be determined. Interaction with cisplatin resulting in enhanced antitumour efficacy was shown. Safety pharmacology did not demonstrate any effects of clinical significance on the CNS and cardiovascular system. Effects on the respiratory system were not investigated. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic studies following administration by the dermal, oral and i.v. routes were conducted in  rats,  dogs  and/or  rabbits.  Safety  margins  that  were  1-3  orders  of  magnitude  greater  than  human plasma  concentrations  were  established.  The  highest  tissue  concentrations  after  oral  administration were found in liver, adrenal glands, fat, kidneys, mesenteric lymph node, lung, skin and ovaries. After oral  administration  there  was  no  evidence  of  accumulation  and  the  primary  route  of  excretion  was faecal. Systemic  exposure  to  alitretinoin  was  measurable  in  both  male  and  female  rats  following  topical application of a 0.5% alcoholic gel at a volume of 0.25 ml ( i.e. , 1.25 mg alitretinoin) to shave dorsal skin.  Alitretinoin  was  slowly  and  irregularly  absorbed,  as  indicated  by  the  t max ,  which  on  day  1 averaged  24  h  in  females  (n=2)  but  ranged  from  6  to  24  h  in  males  (n=6).  Mean  plasma concentrations, in terms of Cmax and AUC, were higher in males than females, but the reason remains unclear.  Both  sexes  showed  time-dependent  accumulation  of  alitretinoin  and  its  9,13-di -cis isomer over  the  five-day  test  period.  Consistent  with  this  accumulation,  faecal  and  urinary  excretion  of radioactivity increased throughout the study. According  to  bibliographical  data  CYP1A1,  CYP1A2,  CYP2C9  and  CYP3A4  are  likely  to  be involved in oxidative metabolism of alitretinoin. Toxicology Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

General toxicity studies of up to 3 months oral dosing were conducted in rats and dogs. Dogs were less sensitive to alitretinoin with only liver and kidney identified as target organs as well as canalicular bile stasis and lymphoid depletion. In rats liver, mesenteric lymph nodes, stomach, spleen, heart, bone and adrenals were target organs.

A 28-day dermal toxicity study in the rat exposed to an alcoholic gel formulation of alitretinoin with the  same  excipients  as  alitretinoin  gel,  ascorbic  acid  and  butylated  hydroxyanisole  was  performed. Alitretinoin was administered to rats at more than 80 and 40 times the total daily clinical application rate  (0.5  ml/day  and  0.25  ml/day  of  the  0.5%  formulation)  and  about  8  times  with  the  0.05% formulation. The range of doses was wider than is usually applied in dermal toxicity studies (1 to 10

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

times  the  therapeutic  application).  The  histopathological  findings  were  confined  to  the  skin  of  the application site.

In view of the negligible systemic exposure following clinical application of Panretin, fertility studies were  not  conducted  and  the  reproduction  toxicity  programme  consisted  only  of  oral  teratogenicity studies  in  rats  and  rabbits.  In  anticipation  that  these  would  only  confirm  the  well-established teratogenicity  of  a  retinoid,  these  were  conducted  with  substantially  fewer  animals  than  normal. Alitretinoin was confirmed to be a teratogen, both in the rabbit and in the rat (see SPC, section 4.3 Contraindications and  5.3 Preclinical  safety  data ).  Abnormalities  included  craniofacial  and  limb malformations.

A  full  package  of  genotoxicity  studies  was  conducted  comprising  Ames  test,  mammalian  cell mutation, clastogenicity and micronucleus test. Suitably high doses were used in all studies. There was no indication of genotoxicity. Carcinogenicity and local tolerance studies with the intended clinical formulation were not conducted except for a dermal irritancy study in guinea pigs, which however provides scant detail and was not performed to GLP standards.  The lack of oncogenicity studies seems justified in view of the lack of evidence of mutagenic potential, the natural history of AIDS-KS and the fact that systemic exposure for Panretin gel is expected to be negligible. Similarly, the lack of local tolerance studies is justified in view  of  the  existing  clinical  trial  experience  and  the  fact  that  local  tolerance  study  in  animals  are unlikely to provide useful additional information. Four separate assays of phototoxicity were undertaken. These comprised photohaemolysis/haemoglobin oxidation, photocytotoxicity, photoirritation and photobinding to human serum albumen. Suitable positive controls were included. Alitretinoin was found to absorb UV light  in  the  range  300-380nm  ( λ max=340nm) and in general to be phototoxic, albeit at high doses. Patients  are  advised  to  avoid  direct  sunlight  (see  SPC  section  4.4, Special  warnings  and  special precautions for use ). The limits of potential impurities (see Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects), were justified on the basis of data from dermal toxicity studies. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects The effect of alitretinoin  on  KS cells in  vitro seemed to be predominantly anti-proliferative. At the time that alitretinoin was in preclinical development, no adequate animal models for KS in which the action of alitretinoin could be tested were available. A better investigation of the mechanism of action of alitretinoin in KS cells would have been desirable. However, the Applicant has mainly focused on ascertaining  the  safety  in  animals,  and  the  activity in  vitro and in  vivo in  order  to  proceed  to  the clinical stage of development. Some of the pre-clinical studies presented are derived from generalising data obtained with 13 -cisRA and ATRA in different tumours types. Such generalisations need to be interpreted with caution in view of the ability of alitretinoin to interact with the RXR as opposed to 13 -cisRA and ATRA. One  toxicity  aspect  that  is  of  potential  clinical  relevance  is  the  well-established  teratogenicity  of retinoids  as  confirmed  by  the  data  presented.  Therefore,  the  use  of  Panretin  is  contraindicated  in pregnancy and lactation and this is reflected in the SPC (see SPC section 4.3 Contraindications and 5.3 Preclinical safety data ). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The phototoxicity potential of alitretinoin was assessed based on its chemical properties and data from a battery of in vitro tests.  The results suggest that alitretinoin absorbs light in the UV range, is subject to photodegradation to other isomers (predominantly ATRA) and was shown to have a weak potential to  be  a  photo-irritant.  Patients  are  advised  to  avoid  direct  sunlight  (see  SPC  section  4.4 , Special warnings and special precautions for use ).

## 4. Clinical aspects

Topical alitretinoin in  AIDS-KS was evaluated in nine Phase I/II studies and two double blind and vehicle-controlled Phase III studies with open-label extension phases (Table 1). The total number of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients on Panretin evaluable for efficacy and safety is 469. No patient was younger than 18 years; only two patients were older than 60 years of age.

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

Given  the  relatively  recent  pharmacological  characterisation  of  9 -cis RA,  clinical  data  in  the oncological setting were not available. Thus the pharmacodynamic rationale underlying the topical use of alitretinoin in the treatment of superficial KS lesions is based on assumptions and extrapolations from other retinoids in several tumour types which should be interpreted with caution.

ATRA, 9 -cis -RA and 13 -cisRA have pleiotropic  biological  and  pharmacological  action.  The  three retinoids  have  anti-proliferative,  apoptogenic  and  cyto-differentiating  properties.  In  various in  vitro cellular  models  of  leukaemia  and  carcinoma,  ATRA  and  9 -cisRA  cause  growth  arrest,  cytodifferentiation and cytotoxicity, often due to activation of apoptosis. The cyto-differentiating action of ATRA  is  believed  to  be  responsible  for  the  clinical  remission  observed  in  virtually  all  patients suffering  from  acute  promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), a rare form of acute myelogenous leukaemia which shows a typical rearrangement of the gene coding for the nuclear RA receptor RARGLYPH&lt;31&gt;. In this disease,  ATRA causes granulocytic maturation of the leukaemia promyelocyte, which subsequently undergoes terminal differentiation and apoptosis. 9 -cisRA has proved superior to ATRA in causing apoptosis  of  APL  and  other  myeloid  leukaemia  cells.    ATRA  and  13 -cisRA,  in  conjunction  with interferons, have shown promising clinical activity in the treatment of head and neck cancer and in the chemoprevention  of  the  recurrence  of  pre-neoplastic  lesions  like  oral  leukoplakia.  Relevant  to  the present application, KS patients have been reported to benefit from systemic treatment with ATRA. At present it is not known whether the clinical action of retinoids on head and neck cancer, leukoplakia and KS is predominantly due to the anti-proliferative, apoptogenic or cyto-differentiating action. Pharmacokinetics Six  of  the  nine  Phase  I/II  trials  in  HIV  positive  patients  with  KS  provided  data  on  the  systemic availability of alitretinoin after topical application of 0.05% and 0.1% gels. The assay methodologies involved  HPLC  separation  of  metabolites  and  quantitation  either  by  UV  absorption  or  by  mass spectrometry (MS). The UV-detection methods had lower limit of quantitation (LLQ) 2.5 ng/ml for 9cis -RA  and  for  an  oxidative  metabolite  4-oxo-9cis -RA,  and  LLQ  10  ng/ml  for  ATRA.  The  MSdetection method allowed for a LLQ of alitretinoin at 0.25 ng/ml and of 4-oxo-9cis -RA at 0.80 ng/ml. Percutaneous absorption During Phase I/II  studies,  which  involved  both  escalations  from  0.05  to  0.1%  gels  and  from  twice daily (BID) to four times daily (QID), single timepoint samples (483) were obtained every 2-4 weeks. The mean number of lesions treated was 6.6 (median 4/patient). The median number of lesions treated in  study  L1057T-22, which provided 153 samples from 22 patients using the MS detection method was 11.5 (range 4-64); 15 of these patients treated ≥ 10 lesions. The UV methods failed to detect alitretinoin, ATRA, or 4-oxo-9cis -RA in plasma samples from 72/94 male patients. The MS method detected quantifiable alitretinoin, but not 4-oxo-9cis -RA, in 26/153 samples (17%) and in 10/22 patients at some timepoint. Six of the 15 who treated at least 10 lesions had quantifiable plasma alitretinoin (in 15 samples) with a maximum concentration of 0.638 ng/ml, i.e. , similar to those reported to represent endogenous exposure in human plasma. There was no clear relationship between detectable alitretinoin or actual plasma levels and either the number of lesions treated, the strength of the gel used or time since last application. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In Phase I/II trials, 13/115 (11%) of patients took concomitant vitamin A-containing supplements up to RDA. Pharmacokinetic data are limited to the less sensitive assay and to 44 samples from 11/13 patients.  Alitretinoin  was  not  detectable  in  plasma  by  this  assay,  suggesting  that  supplementation within RDA has no marked effect on plasma alitretinoin.

## Absorption from oral administration

Samples from patients with advanced cancer treated with 5-230 mg/m 2 /day alitretinoin by mouth gave quantifiable  (UV-detection)  plasma  concentrations  of  alitretinoin  at  all  dose  levels  (mainly  in  the range  10 2 ng/ml),  but  with  considerable  inter-patient  variability.  Multiple  dose  pharmacokinetics

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

suggested  that  there  was  some  induction  of  clearance  at  the  higher  dose  levels  ( ≥ 140  mg/m 2 /day); there  was  little  or  no  accumulation.  Among  samples  from  psoriatic  patients  treated  with  0.15-1.5 mg/kg/day, alitretinoin was detected in plasma (at &gt; 0.25 ng/ml) in 13/45 (29%) pre-dose samples on day 0 (max 0.67 ng/ml). Pre-dose concentrations on days 28 and 56 increased with increasing dose, reaching a mean maximum of 4.6 ng/ml while 2 h post-dose samples showed dose-related increases in alitretinoin and 4-oxo-9cis -RA.

## Metabolism

Oral dosing studies showed that concentrations of ATRA were &lt; 10% those of alitretinoin, suggesting that minimal isomerisation of alitretinoin to ATRA occurs in vivo . Also, 0 and 6 h ATRA levels were almost all below the LLQ, which indicated that there was rapid clearance. These studies also showed that there was minimal isomerisation of alitretinoin to other potential isomers. Application of the MS analytical method to psoriatic patient samples demonstrated that in-vivo conversion of alitretinoin to 4-oxo-9cis -RA  occurred  and  that  the  latter  reached  concentrations  which  were  about  50%  of alitretinoin levels.

Alitretinoin appears to have some capacity to autoinduce its own metabolism when high oral doses are given. However, since only background levels of alitretinoin are found in plasma, it does not appear likely that Panretin therapy could result in induction of metabolism of other drugs that are substrates for CYP450.

Alitretinoin metabolism appears to occur via oxidation to the 4-hydroxy and 4-oxo metabolites, with some isomerisation and some glucuronidation of parent and certain metabolites. CYP 1A1, 1A2, 2C9 and 3A4 are involved in these oxidative metabolic processes. Pharmacokinetic data from 71 patients co-treated  with  inhibitors  of  cytochrome  P450  isoenzymes  in  Phase  I/II  showed  that  plasma alitretinoin remained below 2.5 ng/ml. In patients who had received concomitant inhibitors of CYP isoenzymes, the highest plasma concentration was similar to background levels. It was concluded that the  pharmacokinetics  of  alitretinoin  would  not  be  significantly  affected  by  other  therapies  because plasma levels after topical administration are similar to endogenous concentrations. Excretion In a published study of healthy volunteers treated orally with 20 mg/day alitretinoin or 13cis -RA for 28 days which used HPLC and in-vitro microsomal assays, a glucuronide of alitretinoin was present in most  day  14  and  day  28  urines  (at  up  to  19  ng/ml)  and  was  produced  by  in-vitro  incubation  of alitretinoin with β -glucuronidase. At least three other glucuronidated metabolites, including 9cis -4oxo-RA glucuronide, were present and at higher concentrations than alitretinoin glucuronide. Discussion on clinical pharmacology The data obtained from Phase I/II patients who applied topical alitretinoin supported a conclusion that systemic  exposure  during  gel  treatment  to  KS  lesions  is  not  different  from  background  exposure, regardless of whether patients took concomitant vitamin A supplements within the RDA. Thus, despite the mode of metabolism of alitretinoin, there appeared to be minimal potential for drug interactions to occur in those with normal or abnormal hepatic function. Any  potential  for  other  drugs  to  increase  the  plasma  levels  of  alitretinoin  seen  in  association  with topical Panretin would not be expected to be of any clinical importance. It is possible that drugs that induce  CYP  isoenzymes  might  reduce  circulating  levels  of  alitretinoin;  this  would  have  theoretical implications  for  efficacy  but  not  safety.  Any  attempt  at  an  analysis  of  efficacy  according  to concomitant medications that induce cytochrome P450 activity would not be likely to be useful due to small numbers. Given the possibility that  vitamin  A  may favourably affect efficacy, the theoretical possibility  of  a  negative  effect  on  efficacy  in  case  of  co-administration  with  inducers  has  been mentioned in the SPC (see SPC section 4.5, Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction ). Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical efficacy

Topical  alitretinoin  in  HIV-positive  patients  with  KS  was  evaluated  in  Phase  I/II  studies  (these consisted  of  a  similar  protocols  implemented  at  nine  different  US  sites)  and  two  double  blind  and vehicle-controlled  Phase  III  studies  (L1057T-31  and  ALRT1057-503)  with  open-label  extension phases (Table 1). These pivotal studies were performed to GCP standards.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  primary  efficacy  measure  recorded  was  response  according  to  modified  AIDS  Clinical  Trials Group (ACTG) criteria for local therapy (Table 2). All responses had to be maintained for at least four weeks.  The  area  of  a  lesion  was  defined  as  the  product  of  the  longest  diameter  and  the  longest diameter perpendicular to this diameter.  The lesion height was classified according to a three-point scale: macular (flat), plaque  (&lt; 2 mm height), nodular (&gt; 2 mm height). The duration of response was taken from the date of first documented response to the date of documented disease relapse or the date of last follow up for patients still in response.

Table 1. Panretin gel clinical trials in KS

<!-- image -->

| Study No.          | Ref. Intended Doses of Panretin Gel   | Duration of Panretin Gel Treatment                                        | No. of Patients Receiving Panretin Gel                                | Study Design                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|--------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Phase I-II studies | 0.05, 0.1% gel BID to QID             | Median 14 weeks range 0.7-96.3 weeks                                      | 115                                                                   | Randomisation of patients to alitretinoin gel 0.05 versus 0.1%. Untreated lesions within each patient used as a reference. authorised                                                                                                     |
| L1057T-31          | 0.1% TID to QID                       | Blinded 12 weeks Blinded and open median 112 days range 1-497 days longer | 134 100 (cross-over from vehicle to gel)                              | Phase III multicentre, double blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel group, 12-week initial blinded phase then open follow-up. Possibility of blind cross- over for patients with disease progression during the 12 week period. |
| ALRT1057- 503      | 0.1% BID                              | Blinded 12 weeks no                                                       | 62                                                                    | Phase III, multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled parallel group. Possibility of entering patients into study ALRT1057-504 if disease progression during the 12- week period.                                          |
| ALRT1057- 504      | 0.1% BID                              | 36 weeks open follow-up product                                           | 58 (previously on vehicle gel) and 41/62 of Panretin-treated patients | Open, non-controlled, follow-up of above study                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Abbreviations: BID, twice daily; TID, three times a day; QID, four times daily. Dose-response studies These open, randomised studies in nine US study sites used a protocol which was substantially similar. Patients of at least 18 years with biopsy-proven KS and antibody to HIV confirmed by ELISA were eligible.  Systemic  therapy  with  vitamin  A  or  other  retinoid  was  not  allowed  within  3  weeks  of enrolment or during the study, and vitamin A supplements were limited to 15,000 IU/day. In the same period, no systemic therapy for KS was allowed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

For each patient, a number of cutaneous lesions (3-4 matched pairs) were designated as treated (index) lesions and as untreated (control) lesions; these had not received any local/topical therapies within 4 weeks of enrolment. Patients were initially randomised to 0.05% or 0.1% gel BID with escalation to QID application from 2 weeks onwards. Further escalation from 0.05% to 0.1% gel was then allowed from week 4 to the maximum 0.1% QID regimen, according to local or systemic toxicity. Efficacy focussed on patient response using modified ACTG definitions as used in study L1057T-31 (Table 2).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Of  the  115  males  treated,  100  (87%)  completed  4  weeks  treatment;  the  median  duration  of  gel application to treated lesions was 98 days (range 5-674 days). The mean number of lesions monitored was 2.3 untreated (range 2-4, median 2) and 6.6 treated (range 1-64; median 4) lesions per patient.

Response rates were 31/115 (27%) for treated lesions (complete, CR 3 and partial, PR 28) and 13/115 (11%) PR among untreated lesions. In total, 144/758 (19%) treated and 25/264 (10%) control lesions showed a CR or PR. The patient-level response rates in patients who did and did not have at least one quantifiable alitretinoin plasma level showed no significant differences, but numbers are very small. For treated lesions, responders were 2/13 (15%) versus 29/102 (28%) for patients taking or not taking vitamin A supplements, respectively.

The choice of 0.1% gel from Phase I/II trial results is based on studies that were primarily designed to evaluate  0.1  and  0.05%  gels.  These  studies  did  not  reveal  any  advantage  in  terms  of  safety  for  the lower gel concentrations tested. However, due to the open, short duration design and within-patient comparison of treated/untreated lesions the results of these studies are of limited value in supporting the choice of 0.1% gel over other strengths for Phase III trials in terms of efficacy. The choice of 0.1% gel relies mostly on general principles that the therapeutic agents used in the treatment of neoplastic disorders should be applied at the highest possible safe dose in order to  maximise the potential for lesions  to  respond.  Concerning  the  frequency  of  application,  in  the  case  of  topical  therapies, appropriate consideration needs to be given to the regimen applied on a per-lesion basis in order to take into account the variability between lesions. L1057T-31 provides provisional evidence that BID may not be optimal for efficacy; nevertheless the safety data from the two trials point out that TID or QID application is associated with higher rates of local intolerance. Therefore, patients should initially apply Panretin gel twice a day and the application can be increased stepwise to three or four times a day according to individual lesion tolerance, allowing no less than two weeks between frequency of application  increases.  Similarly,  appropriate  frequency  of  application  reduction  criteria  has  been provided if application site toxicity occurs (see SPC  section 4.2, Posology  and  method  of administration ). Main studies Patients and lesions Patients of ≥ 18 years and Karnofsky score ≥ 60, with biopsy-proven KS and ELISA-confirmed HIV antibody were eligible. In L1057T-31, six accessible lesions of ≥ 30 days or ≥ 10 mm, which had not been treated with local or topical therapies within 60 days or with systemic treatment within 30 days, including three raised lesions, were chosen as index lesions. ALRT1057-503 specified 3-8 indicator lesions of ≥ 10 × 2 mm which had received no local treatment at any time. Patients who switched from vehicle  to  active  gel  or  who  entered  the  open-label  phase  having  previously  withdrawn  due  to progressive  disease  (PD)  had  new  baseline  measurements  established  for  index  lesions  which  were then used for the determination of responses. Treatment Patients in L1057T-31 were randomised to 12 weeks initial treatment with 0.1% gel or vehicle applied TID, increasing to QID after 2 weeks but reducing in the event of local intolerance. Patients with PD before week 12 were crossed-over to the other group without unblinding. Patients in ALRT1057-503 were randomised to 12 weeks initial treatment with 0.1% gel or vehicle applied BID, reducing to once daily if toxicity became apparent. Patients with PD before week 12 and all others at week 12 were offered open-label active therapy for up to 36 weeks. There was no blinded cross-over in this study. In both trials, all patients who completed the blinded phase were eligible for open-label active therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Patients in both trials continued to apply gel to lesions regardless of the response except in the rare circumstances of complete disappearance of a lesion. Also, patients were allowed to apply gel to any other  lesions,  designated  as non-index ,  as  they  wished,  for  which  responses  were  not  specifically monitored.

Only moisturisers and mineral oils were allowed as topical applications during the study. Within 30 days or during the study, no concurrent topical or systemic retinoid therapies (including β -carotene), were  allowed  and  vitamin  A  intake  was  limited  to  15,000  IU/day;  L1057-503  specified  no  prior

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treatment  (at  any  time)  with  vitamin  A  &gt;  15,000  IU/day  or  retinoids.  There  were  no  dietary restrictions.

## Objectives and analysis

The primary efficacy endpoint was best overall response during the initial blinded phase of the study. A responder was defined by ≥ 50% decrease in aggregate area, or complete flattening of ≥ 50% of raised baseline lesions or flattening of ≥ 75% of nodular lesions (Table 2).

An interim analysis was planned for the initial blinded phase in both studies. In L1057T-31, this was when 100 patients had reached week 12. It consisted of an analysis of the response rate in the vehicle group only and was performed by an outside contractor. The analysis prompted for the study sample size to be increased. In ALRT1057-503, an interim efficacy analysis done on 82 patients documented an extreme difference in favour of the active gel. Accrual was then halted, by which time 134 patients had been enrolled.

| Best overall response evaluation   | Best overall response evaluation                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| CR                                 | All index lesions registered as either CR or CCR                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| CCR                                | All lesions registered as CCR                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| PR                                 | One of the following compared to baseline measurements: a ≥ 50% decrease in the aggregate area of all the index lesions; a ≥ 50% decrease in the number of raised lesions; a ≥ 75% decrease in the number of nodular lesions to either macules or plaques. |
| SD                                 | None of the criteria for either response or progressive disease                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| PD                                 | One of the following compared to baseline measurements: a ≥ 25% increase in the aggregate area of all the index lesions; a ≥ 25% increase in the number of raised nodular or plaque-like lesions compared to baseline. longer                              |
| Index lesion response evaluation   | Index lesion response evaluation                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| CR                                 | Decrease in the lesion area to zero and no evidence of KS (biopsy).                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| CCR                                | Decrease in the lesion area to zero (not biopsy confirmed).                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| PR                                 | A decrease in the lesion area by 50% or more from baseline without concurrent increase in lesion height or complete flattening of a lesion raised at baseline without a concurrent increase in area by ≥ 25% from baseline. no                             |
| SD                                 | Any classification not meeting CR, CCR, PR or PD.                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| PD                                 | Increase in lesion area by 25% or more from baseline value or an increase in height of a lesion.                                                                                                                                                           |

Table 2. Best overall and index lesion response evaluation Best overall response evaluation CR All index lesions registered as either CR or CCR CCR All lesions registered as CCR PR One of the following compared to baseline measurements: a ≥ 50% decrease in the aggregate area of all the index lesions; a ≥ 50% decrease in the number of raised lesions; a ≥ 75% decrease in the number of nodular lesions to either macules or plaques. SD None of the criteria for either response or progressive disease PD One of the following compared to baseline measurements: a ≥ 25% increase in the aggregate area of all the index lesions; a ≥ 25% increase in the number of raised nodular or plaque-like lesions compared to baseline. Index lesion response evaluation CR Decrease in the lesion area to zero and no evidence of KS (biopsy). CCR Decrease in the lesion area to zero (not biopsy confirmed). PR A decrease in the lesion area by 50% or more from baseline without concurrent increase in lesion height or complete flattening of a lesion raised at baseline without a concurrent increase in area by ≥ 25% from baseline. SD Any classification not meeting CR, CCR, PR or PD. PD Increase in lesion area by 25% or more from baseline value or an increase in height of a lesion. Abbreviations: CR, complete response; CCR, clinical complete response; PR, partial  response;  SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease. Results of L1057T-31 Of the 134 patients randomised to each group, 96 active and 102 vehicle group patients completed 12 weeks of blinded therapy. The median total number of lesions ( i.e. , index and non-index) treated with Panretin  by  the  117/134  patients  with  available  data  was  10  (range  6-88).  Only  one  patient  (active group) showed a CR by week 12 but PR were seen in 46/134 (34%) for active and 24/134 (18%) for vehicle group patients with median time to first response of 34 and 33 days respectively. For the primary efficacy endpoint of best overall response according to modified ACTG criteria, the difference favouring alitretinoin gel was statistically significant ( p -value for Fisher's exact test = 0.002). This treatment comparison remained statistically significant after adjustment for baseline CD4 and raised lesion counts. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Individual lesions response rates (PR + CR) up to week 12 were 227/803 (28%) for active and 100/803 (13%) for vehicle gels; 74/134 (55%) patients on active gel compared to 31% vehicle group patients had at least one lesion show a PR while 9% and 3%, respectively, had at least one lesional CR. The Physicians  Global  Assessments  showed  CCR+PR  response  rates  (complete  clearance  except  for residual hemosiderin pigmentation or disease remaining with an approximately 50-90% improvement) of 20% for active versus 4% for vehicle group patients; the majority of patients had stable disease (105 active and 110 vehicle). Quality of life scores showed superiority for active versus vehicle treatment for patients who completed the blinded phase.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Disease  progression  in  the  blinded  phase  was  documented  in  20/134  (15%)  active  gel  and  31/134 (23%) vehicle group patients, with median times to progression of 64 days and 47 days, respectively. Also, 3/47 and 1/24 of week 12 responders subsequently relapsed with median duration of response (taken from the date of first documented response to the date of documented disease relapse or last assessment for patients still in response) of 55 days in the active group and 57 days for vehicle group responders and median duration of disease control of 91 and 99 days, respectively.

For 13% per group taking vitamin A-containing supplements, 9/17 (53%) active gel and 5/17 (29%) vehicle patients responded whereas 38/117 (33%) active gel and 19/117 (16%) not taking supplements were  considered  responders.  Similarly,  37%  of  lesions  in  active  gel  group  patients  who  took supplements  and  27%  in  other  patients  responded;  rates  in  the  vehicle  group  were  19%  and  12%, respectively. Of the 128 patients (balanced across groups) who took antiviral agents ( i.e., other than antiretrovirals), most received acyclovir and had slightly higher response rates compared to those in either treatment group who did not receive acyclovir (40% compared to 32% in the Panretin group and 22% compared to 16% in the vehicle group).

The median time to onset of first response was 29 days for the active group and 40 days for the vehicle group responders. There were 9/62 (15%) active group and 3% vehicle group patients who had at least one index lesion completely resolve while 37% compared to 26% had at least one lesion show a PR. Individual lesion responses (CR+PR) were 91/271 (34%) for active group versus 34/303 (11%) for vehicle.  Progression  rates  were  19%  for  active  gel  and  35%  for  vehicle;  progression  occurred  at medians of 68 days and 57 days, respectively. Duration of disease control was 89 days for active and 99 days for vehicle group responders.

Ultimately, 184 (91 active and 93 vehicle) patients entered the open treatment phase. There were 37 non-responders to Panretin in the blinded phase who did not enter the open-label phase, of whom four had  experienced  a  drug-related  adverse  events  and  six  had  progression  of  treated  and/or  untreated lesions. Among the 28/37 with a post-baseline assessment, seven had seen a reduction in raised index lesions  but  19  showed  no  change  and  two  an  increase.  In  contrast,  among  50  non-responders  to Panretin who entered the open-label phase, 30 (60%) had experienced a reduction in the number of raised lesions, 16 had no change and only 4/50 had seen an increase in raised lesions. Among the 184, six CRs occurred (3%) during long-term treatment and 103/184 (56%) showed a PR. Response rate according to the last recorded application frequency was 5/25 (20%) at BID, 9/129 (7%) at TID and 31/94 (33%) at QID. During the entire trial, 67/234 (29%) had a CR to Panretin in at least one  index  lesion  and  9%  had  four  or  more  lesions  which  showed  a  CR  to  Panretin;  also,  141/234 (60%) of patients had a PR in at least one lesion at any stage of the trials and 36% had a PR in four or more lesions. Among 110 patients who had a response to Panretin at  any  stage,  the  Kaplan-Meier  projection  for median time to response was 14 weeks, by which time 83/110 (75%) had met response criteria, with 99/110 (90%) responding by week 20. For the 558 responding lesions, the projected median time to lesion response was 18 weeks; 502/558 (90%) had actually responded by day 155 (week 22). Overall, 23/142  (16%)  of  PR  index  lesions  that  eventually  converted  to  CR  had  done  so  by  week  12;  the remaining 119 converted with a median duration of therapy of 24 weeks. Among 29/110 responders assessed after discontinuation, four relapsed at 1, 1.5, 3 and 14 months. With a 121/172 (70%) bylesion response rate prior to discontinuation, 94/121 (78%) remained in response and 27 (22%) either showed a 25% or greater increase in area from the re-set baseline or changed from flat to raised. Results of ALRT1057-503/4 There were 134 male patients enrolled at 22 non-US and US centres (accrual per site range: 1-38), of whom 62 were initially randomly assigned to active and 72 to vehicle gel. For the primary efficacy endpoint, the overall response rate was 23/62 (37%, 1 CCR and 22 PR) in the active group which was statistically significantly superior to the response rate of 5/72 (7%, 5 PR) for vehicle group patients. The study was terminated early after a pre-planned interim analysis on efficacy had been performed on the  first  82  patients.  The  extreme p -value  observed  in  the  interim  analysis  was  very  close  to  that appropriate for rejecting the hypothesis of no difference at an overall 5% significance level. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There were 32% Panretin and 49% vehicle group patients who received at least one anti-viral agent; the  majority  received  acyclovir  among  whom  the  response  rates  were  slightly  higher  compared  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

those in either treatment group who did not receive acyclovir (54% versus 33% in the active group and 12% compared to 4% in the vehicle group).

There were 99 patients, 41 (66%) initially assigned to active and 58 (81%) to vehicle, who entered the open-label study, of whom 3 and 10, respectively, had previously withdrawn from the blinded phase. There were 17 non-responders to Panretin who did not continue (2 withdrew because of a drug-related adverse events and 3 had progressive disease of treated and/or untreated lesions; only 2 had seen a moderate or marked response, 10 showed no change and one a reduction in raised lesions). Also, 4/23 responders  did  not  continue  (2  had  a  PR,  1  had  progressive  disease  in  untreated  lesions  and  1  had severe  dermatitis  and  required  systemic  therapy  for  KS).  However,  22  non-responders  chose  to continue into the open-label phase, of which 13 had no change in raised lesions, six had a reduction and three an increase.

For cumulative responses, 30% of all patients had a CR to Panretin in at least one lesion (&lt; 10% had CRs in four or  more  lesions)  while  60%  had  at  least  one  PR  (23-36%  per  trial  had  four  or  more). These data must be reviewed in the light of patient status at week 12, which suggested that those who had already seen a reduction in raised lesions were most likely to continue to respond with continued use.

Among the patients who opted to receive open-label active gel, 44/99 (44%) achieved a best response of CR (4) or PR (40). Overall, 36/120 (30%) of patients had a CR to Panretin in at least one index lesion and 6% had four or more lesions that showed a CR to Panretin. Also, 73/120 (61%) had at least one lesion show PR at any stage of the trials and 23% had a PR in four or more lesions. Discussion on clinical efficacy Study design Despite the double-blind design of the two pivotal trials the adverse events associated with the active treatment made investigators' awareness of assigned treatment more probable than unawareness. This may have conditioned the assessment of the 'soft' subjective variables chosen as clinical endpoints of the studies. Lesions It  is  difficult  to  establish  to  what  extent  the  results  obtained  on  treated  index  lesions  can  be extrapolated  to  non-treated  lesions  although  index  lesions  at  different  anatomical  sites  were  chosen and the protocols explicitly specified that representative lesions were to be selected. However, even if the effect observed in index lesions cannot be extrapolated to all lesions, this does not preclude that the effect observed in individual lesions may result in improved cosmetic outcome, which is of clinical relevance in this patient population. CRs and PRs by patient Results  from  both  Phase  III  trials  showed  that  active  gel  was  superior  to  vehicle  for  the  primary efficacy variable (by 17% and 30% in the two trials) and that rates of progression were lower (by 8 and  13%  in  the  two  studies)  with  active  treatment  but  almost  all  responses  were  partial.  One-third (36/110)  responders  relapsed,  all  but  four  still  being  on  active  treatment.  Trials  did  not  allow  for assessment of responses versus vehicle  beyond 12 weeks, which makes it impossible to discern the contribution  which  better  systemic  management  of  HIV  disease  might  have  had  on  the  cutaneous severity of KS over the two year period of clinical trial conduct. However, 75% of patients were on at least  three  antiviral  regimens  during  the  studies.  The  trials  did  evaluate  the  CR  and  PR  rates  with Panretin in comparison with other local treatments. CRs and PRs by lesion Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Dose regimens

The  optimal  concentration  of  alitretinoin  in  gel  for  the  treatment  of  KS  lesions  and  the  optimal frequency  of  application  have  been  chosen  based  on  general  principles.  Frequency  of  treatment application should be determined by lesion. Patients should initially apply Panretin twice daily and, in the absence of application site toxicity for a lesion, a stepwise increase to TID or QID allowing no less than 2 weeks between application frequency escalations is recommended. Criteria for modifying the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

frequency  of  application  based  on  application  site  toxicity  have  been  provided.  Treatment  duration should also be determined by the response of individual lesions. If no response for a lesion has been observed within 12 weeks of the first application, then treatment for that lesion should be discontinued (see SPC section 4.2, Posology and method of administration ).

## Clinical safety

## Patient exposure

The safety  database  (first  cut-off  at  6/7/98  was  later  updated  to  7/99)  included  information  on  469 patients with AIDS-related KS who were exposed to Panretin gel, of whom 439 received the 0.1% strength at some time. There were 208 patients assigned to vehicle gel in the trials, of which 143 went on to receive active treatment in the open extension phase, and 15 switched during the double-blind phase; two patients switched from active to vehicle. Only two females were treated; this reflects the gender distribution of KS. The age range was 25-71 years (median 38 years).

Adverse events In Phase I/II, in which patients served as their own controls, the incidence of drug-related rash was 83%;  severity  was  mild  or  moderate  in  79/95  cases.  Other  local  affects  such  as  pain  (22%),  skin disorder (18%), dry skin (10%), ulcerated skin (9%), itching (6%) was also observed. Skin oedema, skin discoloration or haemorrhage were observed in &lt; 5% of patients. The incidences of the different types of toxicity were similar for 0.1% compared to 0.05% gel. Also, the frequency of application of 0.1% gel did not show to be related to the incidence of local AEs. In the blinded phases of the two Phase III trials, the incidences of rash (75% active versus 18% and 45% active versus 17% in the two studies), pruritus, skin disorder, paraesthesia, pain and exfoliative dermatitis were notably higher in the active groups in both studies. Combining Phase III trials, those AEs  considered  to  be  drug-related  also  showed  marked  differences  between  groups  for  patients reporting rash (66% versus 11%), pain (24 versus 8%), skin disorder (12 versus 0%), pruritus (12% versus 5%), exfoliative dermatitis (as above), and other skin problems. During  long-term  treatment  (&gt;16  weeks)  of  254  patients,  rash  was  by  far  the  commonest  event (180/254, 71%). Rashes were mild in 124 (49%) patients, moderate in 80 (31%) and severe in 23 (9%) of patients. Additional analyses showed that the total incidence of rash was higher among those treated for  &gt;16  weeks  (82%  compared  to  57%),  with  a  higher  incidence  of  moderately  severe  rash  (43% compared to 29%) but the same incidence of severe rash (10%). Whereas the first onset of rash was predominantly before week 16, severity tended to progress from mild to moderate with time. From narratives on those 22 patients who experienced severe rash in L1057T-31 and the 11 similar patients in  503/504,  30%  reached  severe  grade  during  QID  applications,  24%  during  TID  and  36%  during BID;  most  (27/33)  patients  were  managed  by  at  least  one  dose  suspension  but  it  is  difficult  to  be precise about management due to changes in frequencies of application over time in many patients. There was documentation of resolution in 74% of cases, with a median time to resolution of 64 days (range 2-761 days). Skin disorder was reported in 15%, pain in 14%, pruritus in 12% and exfoliative dermatitis in 9%. For pain and pruritus, total incidences were higher in patients treated &gt; 16 weeks but the difference was most marked for pruritus (24% compared to 8%) and for both combined (19% compared to 7%). First onset of pain and/or pruritus was more likely to be within the first 16 weeks but the data still indicate some progression of severity with time. It seems that 38/53 events were documented to have resolved and not to have reappeared on restarting applications; 11 AEs recurred, including erythema, pruritus, irritation, dryness and exfoliation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The duration of most common application site AEs has been assessed for one of the Phase III studies (L1057T-31). In this study, 74% of the adverse events of rash were known to have resolved with a median  time  to  resolution  of  64  days  (range  2  to  761  days)  without  regard  to  whether  any  dose modifications were initiated during the event. Over the same period, 84% of the adverse events of pain were known to have resolved with a median time to resolution of 29 days (range 1 to 381 days).

Drug interaction studies are missing but the applicant presented AE data for subsets of patients who applied alitretinoin while taking several triazoles, macrolides, or indinavir. The numbers were small

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

but  the  data  suggested  that  the  AE  reporting  rates  were  not  affected  by  concomitant  systemic administration of these agents.

In  Phases  I/II  and  III,  there  were  no  treatment-emergent  trends  in  any  laboratory  tests  over  time. Individual  abnormalities  were  considered  to  be  consistent  with  the  underlying  disease  and  its complications.

## Withdrawals due to adverse events

In the Phase I/II trials, 9% of patients withdrew due to an AE; all these events were application site problems. In Phase III, 37/469 (8%) of patients withdrew while on active gel, of whom 23 withdrew because  of  rash  and  seven  due  to  pain.  No  other  event  precipitated  withdrawal  of  more  than  two patients. Although 18 patients initially assigned vehicle withdrew (9%), only four patients withdrew while on vehicle gel (2%) - two for lymphoma-like reaction, one for pain and one for asthenia.

At the time of development, adequate animal models of KS in which to test 9-cis-RA were lacking. Alitretinoin did not appear to be cytotoxic or apoptogenic on KS cells in vitro . Most of the pre-clinical studies presented are derived from generalising data obtained in different tumours to the KS setting and need to be interpreted with caution.

Serious adverse events and deaths No SAEs reported in Phase I/II trials were considered possibly or probably related to therapy. In Phase III  trials,  a  wide  variety  of  SAEs  was  reported  as  might  be  expected  in  this  study  population; commonest  events  in  both  groups  were  infections  and  progression  of  KS.  In  addition,  few  SAEs precipitated withdrawal from study. There were three deaths in Phase I/II trials, and 19 deaths in Phase III trials. The commonest causes of death were sepsis or progressive AIDS. No deaths appeared to be drug-related. Discussion on clinical safety The true exposure to alitretinoin was difficult to assess because although the total number of lesions treated (index and non-index) was recorded in one trial, durations were not recorded for all lesions. For a medication, which would be expected to improve cosmetic outcome as a result of amelioration of skin lesions, the high incidences of rash (most often accompanied by pain and pruritus) and skin disorders  were  of  some  concern.  In  addition,  an  excess  incidence  of  paraesthesia  was  observed. However, the duration of these adverse events needs to be compared to the duration of response, and most events were mild to moderate in intensity. Association between local adverse reactions and body site, particularly for intertriginous areas and for the face, were not available and this again supports the need for by lesion adjustments in frequency of application.  Similarly,  there  are  no  data  regarding  tolerance  of  non-lesional  (surrounding)  skin  to Panretin because toxicity was recorded as a composite assessment of the overall degree of irritation observed.  Dose  reduction  instructions,  which  take  into  account  variations  the  tolerance  of  the  skin surrounding individual lesions should it come into contact with the gel in the course of treatment, have been included (see SPC section 4.2, Posology and method of administration ). 5. Overall conclusion and benefit/risk assessment Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Medicinal product no longer authorised

One  toxicity  aspect  that  is  of  potential  clinical  relevance  is  the  well-established  teratogenicity  of retinoids  as  confirmed  by  the  data  presented.  Therefore,  the  use  of  Panretin  is  contraindicated  in pregnancy  and  lactation  and  this  reflected  in  the  SPC  (see  section  4.3 Contraindications and  5.3 Preclinical safety data ).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  cell-based in vitro assays,  alitretinoin  showed  weak  phototoxic  potential.  Patients  are  advised  to avoid direct sunlight (see SPC 4.4 , Special warnings and special precautions for use )

## Efficacy

Both Phase III trials suggested that active gel was superior to vehicle for the primary efficacy variable (by 17% and 30% in the two trials) and that rates of progression were lower (by 8 and 13% in the two studies) with active treatment. However, almost all responses were partial.

It  is  difficult  to  establish  to  what  extent  the  results  obtained  on  treated  index  lesions  can  be extrapolated to the rest of the lesions. Even if such an extrapolation cannot be generally assumed, in the absence of any other treatment options, the demonstrated efficacy of Panretin may still result in improved cosmetic outcome that is of clinical relevance in this patient population.

The trials did not allow for evaluating the CR and PR rates with Panretin in comparison with other local  treatments,  particularly  radiotherapy.  Therefore,  the  use  of  Panretin  is  only  indicated  in  those patients in whom radiotherapy is no longer an appropriate treatment option. Frequency  of  treatment  application  should  be  determined  separately  for  each  individual  by  lesion. Patients should initially apply BID applications and, in the absence of application site toxicity for a lesion,  a  stepwise  increase  to  TID  or  QID  allowing  no  less  than  2  weeks  between  application frequency  escalations,  is  recommended.  Dose  modifications  to  ameliorate  application  site  toxicity have  been  provided.  Treatment  duration  should  also  be  determined  on  a  by  lesion  fashion.  If  no response for a lesion has been observed within 12 weeks of the first application, then treatment for that lesion should be discontinued (see SPC section 4.2, Posology and method of administration ). Safety There  were  some  concerns  regarding  the  degree  of  local  intolerance  of  Panretin  and  that  the  data suggested  an  increasing  incidence  of  rashes  of  moderate  severity  with  longer-term  treatment. However, in this treatment population and in the absence of other established treatment modalities, the severity  and  duration  of  local  intolerance  to  Panretin  compare  favourably  with  the  duration  of response and the expected benefits in terms of cosmetic outcome. Frequency of application reduction criteria due to toxicity as well as treatment duration need to be determined separately for individual lesions (see SPC section 4.2, Posology and method of administration ). Benefit/risk assessment Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Panretin  gel  was  favourable  in  the  treatment  of  cutaneous  lesions  in patients with AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) when: -lesions are not ulcerated or lymphoedematous, and -treatment of visceral KS is not required, and -lesions are not responding to systemic antiretroviral therapy, and -radiotherapy or chemotherapy are not appropriate. Medicinal product no longer authorised