---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:22:56
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/photobarr-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: photobarr-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.9047392
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-27 19:28:42.47682
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of PhotoBarr. For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Barrett's  Oesophagus  (BO)  is  a  metaplastic  disorder  in  which  normal  squamous  epithelium  of  the oesophagus is replaced by a specialised columnar epithelium. It is an acquired condition, secondary to chronic, severe, and long-standing gastroesophageal reflux and the subsequent damage of the mucosa.

It is estimated that BO is found (depending on the inclusion of so-called 'short segment' Barrett) in approximately 6-12% of patients undergoing endoscopy for symptoms of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and in 1% or less of unselected patient populations.

Studies  performed  during  the  90s  have  revealed  that  carcinoma  is  detected  at  oesophagectomy  in approximately 40% of the patients with (preoperative) high-grade dysplasia, with a range of 0-73%. Also, studies investigating surveillance without surgery in patients with HGD found discrepant results in the rate of cancer incidence from 'only' 20% of patients developing cancer after 7 years up to 60% within 5 years.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  diagnosis  of  BO  is  established  if  the  squamocolumnar  junction  is  displaced  proximal  to  the gastroesophageal junction, and intestinal metaplasia is histologically detected after the performance of biopsies. BO is associated with an increased incidence of oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus has been recognised as one of the malignancies with the fastest increasing numbers since the  70s  in  the  Western  world.  However,  the  absolute  incidence  of  this  cancer  still  remains  low  (in comparison with the incidence rates of e.g. colorectal or lung cancer). Whereas the dysplasia-carcinoma sequence in BO is widely uncontroversial, the issue of the precise incidence of adenocarcinoma in patients with BO in general is uncertain. Recent findings revealed that the actual cancer risk has been overestimated in the previous years and will amount, in the general BO population, to 0.5% or less annually. Screening and surveillance programs have been developed for BO based on the poor 5-years survival rate of 11% for oesophageal cancer. Goal of surveillance in patients with BO is to detect cancer at an early  stage.  Therapy  at  an  early  stage  of  cancer  can  dramatically  improve  5-years  survival  rates. However,  no  clinical  trials  have  been  performed  to  link  the  performance  of  rigorous  surveillance programs with increased survival. Surveillance is primarily directed to the detection of dysplasia which itself is classified according to a 5-grades system ranging from negative for dysplasia, indefinite dysplasia, low-grade dysplasia, highgrade dysplasia (HGD) to carcinoma. Recommendations for surveillance intervals range according to these stages for those without dysplasia from 2-3 (even 5) years to intervals for those with HGD of 3 months. These intervals and programs have been recommended although the actual incidence of adenocarcinoma in HGD has been a matter of dispute:

Currently, therapy of BO and HGD in BO consists of a basic therapy of acid suppression with highdose proton pump inhibitors. This therapy, however, results either in no or in modest regression of the Barrett's segment at best. Proton pump inhibitors typically increase squamous islands in the Barrett's mucosa with intestinal metaplasia persisting underneath. As observation times have been short and the clinical  significance  of  the  modest  regression  of  BO  observed  is  uncertain,  the  value  of  acid suppressive therapy in BO and in HGD in BO remains uncertain. The same problems apply to antireflux surgery which can be performed as an alternative to pharmacological acid suppression.

Therefore,  many  clinicians  recommend  the  performance  of  oesophagectomy  once  the  diagnosis  of HGD has been established. However, morbidity and even mortality after surgical resection is high, ranging from 18%-48% for morbidity and a 3-5% mortality rate at experienced centres and up to 10%

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in  less  experienced centres. These results have also to be seen in the light of the fact that a certain proportion of these patients would never have developed invasive cancer.

Thus,  the  need  for  alternative,  less  invasive  and  less  dangerous  methods  specifically  for  HGD  is obvious.

The search for alternatives is reflected in the reports of a growing number of ablative methods used in HGD in BO. These range from the use of photodynamic therapy (PDT) with substances other than porfimer sodium (most widely used 5-aminolevulinic acid), different laser thermal coagulation/ablation techniques, thermal ablation including argon plasma coagulation, to endoscopic mucosal resection. None of these forms of therapy can be regarded as an established treatment and for none of these techniques convincing documentation is available that goes beyond the performance of mostly small, short-term and uncontrolled, pilot studies.

## About the product

Medicinal product no longer authorised PDT  with  porfimer  sodium  in  general  is  an  established  procedure  and  the  product  Photofrin  has marketing  authorisations  in  most  member  states  for  longer  than  a  decade,  albeit  for  different therapeutic indications. The general principle of PDT with porfimer sodium is the specific enrichment, or  better  delayed  clearance,  of  haematoporfimer  derivates  in,  or  from,  dysplastic,  metaplastic  or malignant transformed epithelia compared to surrounding not transformed epithelia. It is assumed that differences in vascularisation of transformed and non transformed epithelium play the major role in the  specific  enrichment  in,  or  delayed  clearance  from,  transformed  epithelia  of  photodynamic substances although the exact mechanism is not fully understood. Accordingly, administration of laser light (in the case of porfimer sodium light of the wave length of 630 nm) is performed with a delay after administration of the photodynamic active substance. Both the dose of 2 mg/kg porfimer sodium and the time interval of 40 to 50 h between porfimer and laser light administration have been found more  or  less  empirically  (most  of  the  work  was  done  with  Photofrin  in  obstructive  lung  and oesophageal cancer). It is assumed  that after the time interval of 40 to 50 hours and the administration of  2  mg/kg  body  weight  the  ratio  of  the  concentration  of  photodynamic  active  substances  in transformed vs. the surrounding not transformed epithelium is optimal. This means also that the peak concentration  in  the  transformed  lesions  may  just  have  passed  at  the  time  point  of  the  PDT.  The photodynamic  reaction  caused  by  the  illumination  with  the  light  of  the  wavelength  of  630  nm  is thought to be due to the formation of singlet oxygen (requiring the presence of oxygen) being toxic for cells  and  thus  causing  cell  death  and  (specific)  eradication  of  illuminated  (malignant)  transformed epithelia.  For  a  better  understanding  it  should  be  noted  that  PDT  uses,  in  comparison  to  thermal ablation with e.g. a Neodym/YAG laser, light of low energy. The photodynamic effect is not directly seen during the endoscopic procedure but requires time (typically 1 to 3 days). A clear advantage of ablation of a transformed epithelium using the photodynamic effect vs. ablation based more on direct thermal or even mechanical effects on the lesion is a priori not evident. However, none of the ablative alternatives have the range of being standard therapy of HGD of BO. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition

PhotoBarr is formulated as a powder for solution for injection containing 15 mg or 75 mg of porfimer sodium, as active substance. It is to be reconstituted with a 5% dextrose solution (final concentration 2.5 mg/ml).

The other ingredients include nitrogen contained in the headspace of the vial, sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid.

PhotoBarr is supplied in type I clear glass vials, which are closed with a butyl rubber stopper and an aluminium seal.

## Active substance

Porfimer sodium is not a new chemical entity and is already registered in Europe. It is not a single chemical entity but a complex mixture of oligomers of porphyrin units joined by either ether or ester

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

linkage, ranging from dimers to octomers, and four related monomeric impurities. These latter do not contribute to the phototherapeutic effect of the product.

The  active  substance  is  a  dark  red  to  reddish  brown  cake  or  crystalline  powder,  sensitive  to  high temperatures and light. It is soluble in water and like other large organic anions it exhibits dynamic aggregation/desegregation  equilibrium  in  aqueous  solution.  Porfimer  sodium  is  prepared  through  a two-step  synthesis  from  commercially  available  hematoporphyrin  dihydrochloride  derived  from porcine hemin. Acceptable specifications and associated methods have been provided for the starting materials, key intermediate, reagents and solvents.

Two synthesis processes (process I and IR) were used during development phase, before  commercial process  II  was  established.  Changes  introduced  in  the  second  step  have  permitted  to  obtain  lower monomer content, higher oligomer content and to improve the stability of the bulk concentrate.Satisfactorty  viral  safety  data  have  been  provided  in  support  of  hematoporphyrin dihydrochloride starting material derived from porcine hemin.

Regarding the TSE risk, PhotoBarr includes no component of ruminant origin . The conventional viral safety risk has been satisfactorily addressed (see active substance).

Medicinal product no longer authorised Specification The active substance specification include test for description, identification (UV/Vis - HPLC), assay (HPLC),  impurities,  concentration,  pH  (PhEur),  bacterial  endotoxins  (PhEur)  and  microbial  limits (PhEur).Porfirmer sodium being chemically complex, it has not been feasible to fully characterise it. No single oligomeric or individual component of porfimer sodium (other than the related monomers) has been isolated and identified so far by standard physical/analytical methods. As a consequence, the active  substance  is  identified  by  comparison  to  a  reference  standard,  which  has  been  satisfactorily characterised. The HPLC method used for the assay and purity tests is capable of separating the active substance  from  its  process-related  impurities  and  degradation  products.  All  the  specification  limits have been adequately justified by analytical, stability and toxicity data. Batch analysis data have been provided for 83 batches (51 produced using the commercial synthetic process II) synthesised by the 3 processes and confirm satisfactory compliance and uniformity with the proposed specification. Stability Stability data are available for three full-scale batches produced by the commercial synthetic process II and stored under long-term conditions. Under accelerated conditions 1-month data is available. A photostability study has been performed and indicates that the active substance is light sensitive, as expected. These  data  support  the  proposed  retest  period  of  3-month  at  -20ºC  and  of  8  days  at  2-8ºC  in polycarbonate bottles with polypropylene closure protected from light. The active substance is tested prior to use to ensure conformity to specification. Other ingredients The other ingredients that may theorically be present i.e. sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid are of PhEur quality. Nitrogen is present in the headspace of the vials (see Product development).

The type I glass vials and the butyl rubber cap used as primary packaging material for the finished product meet the general Ph Eur requirements. Compatibility of the finished product with the primary packaging material has been addressed.

## Product development and finished product

For stability reasons and ease of use, a freeze-dried formulation has been chosen over the frozen liquid formulation  initially  developed  (final  concentration  of  porfimer  sodium  for  both  formulations:  2.5 mg/ml).  Due  to  incompatibilities  of  the  active  substance  with  common  lyophilisation  excipients, porfimer sodium is formulated without excipients apart from sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid used to adjust the pH before lyophilisation. The presence of nitrogen in the composition of the finished product is due to its use at the end of the lyophilisation step to release the vacuum and is not used for

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

stability reasons. The choice of a 5% dextrose solution for reconstitution has been adequately justified by compatibility studies.

The  instability  of  porfimer  sodium  at  high  temperatures  precluded  a  terminal  sterilisation  of  the finished product. Therefore, a sterilising filtration followed by an aseptic process is performed.

The filling overages prior to freeze-drying and the recommended volume of 5% dextrose solution to be used for reconstitution are suitable to allow withdrawal and administration of the labeled content.

The  method  of  manufacture  involves  the  following  operations:  weighing  and  mixing  of  different batches of refrigerated or frozen bulk concentrate of porfimer sodium, pH adjustment, calculation of the target vial fill, sterile filtration, filling into vials and freeze-drying under aseptic conditions, sealing of  the  stoppered  vials  with  an  aluminium  seal  and  packaging.  Satisfactory  in-process  controls  have been established. The entire manufacturing process, including all the critical steps i.e. sterile filtration, aseptic filling and lyophilisation process, has been satisfactorily validated at commercial scale.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Specification The  product  specification  include  tests  for  appearance,  identity  (UV/VIS,  HPLC),  assay  (HPLC), impurities (HPLC), ester content (HPLC), reconstituted solution (reconstitution time, appearance and degree  of  coloration,  pH  (PhEur),  particulate  matter  (PhEur)),  water  content  (PhEur),  uniformity  of content (PhEur), bacterial endotoxins (PhEur), sterility (PhEur), biological assay, oligomer characterisation, osmolarity of the reconstituted solution. Batch analysis data provided for production-scale batches comply with the specifications and indicate consistent and reproducible manufacture. Stability of the product Stability of the Product before reconstitution 36-month data are available under long-term conditions in packaging intended for commercialisation. Up to 6-month data under accelerated conditions are available. The results presented support the proposed shelf life and storage conditions defined in the SPC. In-use stability of the reconstituted solution In use stability of the reconstituted solution was tested either directly after reconstitution with dextrose 5% or after storage at 3ºC or 25ºC for 24h. The results presented support the proposed shelf life and storage conditions defined in the SPC Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The  active  substance  is  well  characterised  and  documented.  The  pharmaceutical  form  selected  is adequate taken  into  account  the  properties  and  stability  of  the  active  substance.  The  excipients  are commonly  used  in  this  kind  of  formulation  and  the  packaging  material  is  well  documented.  The manufacturing  process  enhances  to  obtain  reproducible  finished  product  batches.  Stability  tests indicate that the product is stable for the proposed shelf life.

## 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

The efficacy of Photofrin as an anti-tumour agent is dependent upon light activation at an appropriate wavelength. A number of laser light sources may be used for PDT with Photofrin, all of which can be coupled to optical fibres that are easily positioned for maximal effect and can also be used with an endoscope. The recommended laser light dosimetry is based on the most efficient delivery system for producing  necrosis  at  appropriate  tissue  depths  for  tumour  destruction  while  sparing  surrounding normal tissue.

Most evidence for the efficacy of HPD and Photofrin with light activation as anticancer agents has come from clinical trials in patients. However, preclincal studies using different species (mouse, rat,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

dog, cat) and tumour models (either spontaneous or transplanted) including myosarcoma, mammary, bladder,  lung,  ocular,  glioma  and  kidney,  have  been  carried  out  under  a  number  of  experimental conditions. In general, beneficial responses have been reported.

It is well established that the efficacy of PDT is dependent on oxygen levels, and that singlet oxygen and/or free radicals are likely to be the major toxic products of the photodynamic action both in vivo and in vitro. Studies conducted in mice with transplanted Lewis lung carcinoma and a study conducted in  dogs  with  transplanted  squamous  cell  carcinoma  have  shown  that  PDT  with  HPD  effectively produced tumour necrosis and regression in animal models of lung cancer during short-term followup.  Local  efficacious  PDT  doses  to  a  tumour  that  develops  reproducible  lung  metastases  did  not enhance  distal  tumour  dissemination  and  in  fact  resulted  in  comparable  or  lower  numbers  of pulmonary  metastases  than  those  seen  following  surgery  alone  (studies  conducted  in  mice  with transplanted Lewis lung carcinoma). Other models showing positive responses include bladder cancers in  mice,  rats  and  dogs, melanomas  in  mice,  rhabdomyosarcoma  in  rats,  and  solid  head  and  neck cancers in dogs. Depending upon the precise conditions used, tumour regression and necrosis are often preceded by shutdown of the tumour microvasculature.

Mitomycin  C,  which  blocks  cells  at  G2/M,  enhances  the  effects  of  PDT.  In  a  human  colon adenocarcinoma cell line mitomycin C treated cells were shown to take up significantly higher levels of Photofrin than untreated controls.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Within the cell, the major sites of Photofrin binding have been noted as the membranes, particularly the cellular and mitochondrial membranes.  Recent experiments with Photofrin using  human embryonic epithelium cells provide evidence that the monomeric components of Photofrin are rapidly taken up by cells whereas oligomeric components have a slower uptake and release. Furthermore, the oligomeric elements of the mixture binds more strongly than monomeric to cellular and subcellular membrane structures owing to their greater lipophilicity. A variety of morphologic changes have been noted in cells exposed to photodynamic treatment with Photofrin.  Mitochondrial  and  cellular  swelling  preceding  cell  lysis  thought  to  be  associated  with alterations in membrane permeability. Cross-linking of membrane proteins was observed prior to the onset of photoactivated protoporphyrin IX induced haemolysis. In  prostate  tumour  tissues  treated  with  PDT ex  vivo ,  cell  damage  was  widespread  and  included mitochondrial and endoplasmic swelling as well as nuclear and cellular disintegration Many changes at the  molecular  level  have  been  associated  with  Photofrin  PDT.  Diminution  of  the activity  of  a  number  of  enzymes  involved  in  membrane  biosynthesis,  particularly  acyltransferases. Mitochondria  are  a  significant  intracellular  target  for  Photofrin,  and  inhibition  of  the  associated respiratory processes produces cell death. Human bladder transitional cell carcinoma cells, following sublethal PDT treatment, were found to release arachidonic acid metabolites, mainly thromboxane B2 and  prostaglandin  E2  in  a  biphasic  manner.  Photocytotoxicity  can  be  partially  mitigated  by  agents such  as  indomethacin  which  block  the  action  of  PGE,  suggesting  a  relationship  between  PGE  and photodynamic cell damage. PDT treatment of macrophages in vitro stimulates the production of TNF (tumour necrosis factor), a cytokine known to induce haemorrhagic necrosis of tumours. The urine of bladder  cancer  patients  following  Photofrin  PDT  has  been  shown  to  contain  elevated  levels  of  the cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-2 (IL-2) and TNF. It is not known whether this is a direct or indirect effect of PDT.

PDT with Photofrin or HPD is dependent on oxygen for efficacy, and the generation of active oxygen species, namely singlet oxygen or free radicals, is responsible for the photodynamic effects seen on cells. Quenching of these species under experimental conditions has been shown to mitigate the effects of  PDT .  Treatment  of  TA-3  mouse  mammary  carcinoma  cells  with  diphenylisobenzofuran  (DPF) protected  cells  from  the  effects  of  Photofrin  followed  by  light  exposure.  Similarly,  DPF  prevented cytotoxicity induced by PDT with HPD in human gastric cells. HPD-induced cell lysis was moderately inhibited  by  dimethylsulfoxide,  ethanol,  formate,  and  mannitol,  all  of  which  react  with  hvdroxyl radicals,  indicating  a  possible  role  for  free  hydroxyl  radicals  in  the  photodynamic  effect  on  cells. Etanidazole,  rnisonidazole  and  trifluoro-misonidazole  were  all  found  to  be  photoprotective  against Photofrin when cells were incubated for 24 hours with Photofrin under aerobic and lirnited oxygen (0.3%) conditions.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Secondary pharmacodynamics

General pharmacology studies were performed in mice, rats, guinea pigs and dogs under conditions of weak light  for  12  hours  a  day.  For  general  conditions  in  mice  no  effect  was  observed  in  25  or  50 mg/kg porfimer sodium administered intravenously. At 100 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg there were some disorders in general condition and at 200 mg/kg all animals died at least within 3 days which is not surprising because this is within the range of the LD50. With regard to the central nervous system, porfimer  sodium  administered  intravenously  at  doses  of  50  mg/kg  and  above  resulted  in  decreased movement, lengthened thiopental-induced sleep, and inhibition of strychnine-induced convulsions.

A transient lowering of body temperature at 50 mg/kg in rats was observed which returned to normal three  hours  later.  Movement  of  isolated  guinea  pig  ileum  was  inhibited  by  porfimer  sodium  at  10 µg/ml,  a  plasma  level  which  may  be  equivalent  to  5  mg/kg  administered  intravenously  to  mice.  In heart and circulatory system there was no effect on blood pressure, pulse rate and electrocardiogram when tested in dogs up to the highest dose of 16 mg/kg. There was no influence on lung function. For liver function the effect on elimination of sulphobromophtalein sodium was tested in rats. At doses of 6.3  mg/kg  and  above  administered  intravenously  there  was  a  delayed  elimination  of  BSP  from  the plasma in a dose-dependent manner.

Intravenous or intraperitoneal single dose (5 mg/kg) pharmacokinetics in mice indicated a long halflife  for  plasma elimination of residual [ 14 C]-radioactivity associated with the porphyrins in porfimer sodium or with metabolites : triexpontentially decrease with elimination half-lives of about 0.75 ( α ), 10 ( β ) and 220 ( γ ) hours, following i.v dosing, and biexponentially after i.p. with elimination half-lives of 4 and 220 hours.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Safety pharmacology Safety pharmacology studies were only performed without illumination and with Photofrin® used at the human therapeutic dose of 2 mg/kg for cardiovascular system investigation. No significant effects were observed on the CNS, pulmonary function, cardiovascular system including renal vascular blood flow,  gastric  acid  secretion,  and  ethanol-induced  gastric  lesions.  Photofrin®  also  did  not  have histamine-like effects on blood pressure in anaesthetized cats. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions The effects of PDT with porfimer sodium combined with thiotepa, adriamycin, mitomycin or BCG on tumor growth were studied with subcutaneously injected  MTB 2 murine transitional cell carcinoma in mice.  All  drugs  except  BCG  were  given  intraperitoneally  48  hours  before  light  application.  The efficacy  of  PDT  was  markedly  increased  by  adriamycin,  mitomycin  and  BCG  but  not  by  thiotepa. Important  was  the  sequence  of  the  combination  because  no  potentiation  was  noted  when  the cytostatics were administered after PDT (28). On the  contrary,  glucocorticoids  combined  with  PDT  with  hematoporphyrin  derivate  show  only  an increasing effect on tumor growth in a transplantable mouse tumor model when given after PDT (29). Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics of porfimer sodium have been studied in male and female Sprague Dawley rats and in male beagle dogs. In rats, dogs, and humans the results of the pharmacokinetic investigations are basically very similar and are always the same for both genders. · Absorption- Bioavailability

## · Distribution

In mice and rats, the results showed that, although most of an i.v. dose was removed from circulation by  the  liver,  spleen  and  kidney,  potentially  useful  concentrations  were  retained  for  long  periods  in other tissues, including implanted human tumours.

The protein binding in rat, dog and human was comparable within the species between 80 and 90 % and was not dependent on the concentration of porfimer sodium.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

It  could  be  shown  that  porfimer  sodium  has  a  strong  affinity  to  lipoprotein,  especially  to  LDL.  In plasma, lipoproteins may be porphyrin carriers to the tumor tissue and its corresponding receptors .

## · Metabolism

Biotransformation is difficult to interpret with complex mixtures such as Photofrin, and metabolism studies per se were not conducted with Photofrin. However in a biliary excretion study in the rat, the amount of  haematoporphyrin  (HP  monomer)  excreted  in  the  bile  within  48  hours  after  dosing  was twice  the  amount  of  HP  injected  in  the  dosing  preparation.  This  indicates  that  some  of  ester/ether linkages in the PHE dimer/oligomer fraction were hydrolysed in vivo .

## · Excretion

There is only one investigation for the elimination profile of the 14 C porfimer. Urine and feces of rats were  collected  each  24  hours  for  7  days.  The  major  route  (42  %)  of  elimination  of 14 C  porfimer sodium was via the feces, whereas only 4% of the dose was excreted in the urine.

Medicinal product no longer authorised It is suggested that the fecal route is mainly via bile excretion because 23 % of porfimer were excreted into bile within 48 hours in rats. Also this is in accordance with human data where excretion data have shown that the major route of elimination is fecal suggesting biliary excretion of 28 % of the i.v. dose over 72 hours. · Other pharmacokinetic studies In an animal model (hamster) bearing a pancreatic-tumor it could be shown that porfimer has a high affinity to tumor tissue and was retained for a long time in this tumor tissue. In other similar studies in mice it was shown that the amount of labelled hematoporphyrin derivate in tumor tissue was in fact higher than in muscle and skin but lower than in liver, spleen and kidney which were the favoured organs for distribution. The placental transfer of Photofrin® was studied in pregnant rats (N=5) following a single 20 mg/kg i.v.  dose  of  Photofrin®    given  on  Day  18  of  gestation.  No  porphyrin  derivatives  were  detected  in amniotic fluid or foetuses at times when placenta concentration of PIE ranged from 48 - 62 mg/g. The transfer of porfimer sodium into breast milk was studied in lactating rats (n=5) following a single 20 mg/kg  i.v.  dose  on  Day  9  after  delivery.  Trace  concentrations  of  PHE  were  found  in  breast  milk between 6 and 48 hours after dosing with a maximum concentration of 7.4 µg/ml at 24 hours postdose. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity Studies were performed in the absence and in the presence of light activation. Without  light  activation,  at  lethal  doses  in  rodents,  signs  of  intravascular  haemolysis,  lymphoid depletion, necrosis of the lymph nodes, spleen and thymus are reported. Signs of partial recovery are noted in rats that survived (haemosiderin pigment increase, extramedullary erythropoiesis). At lethal doses in dogs, increase in white blood cell counts (WBC) and decrease in red blood cell counts (RBC), bilirubin and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) increases are reported.

With  light  activation,  animals  were  exposed  to  two  hours  of  fluorescent  light  irradiation  (160 footcandles for rats in study 0586/48 and 120 footcandles for mice) and then maintained in ambient lighting conditions (&lt; 20 footcandles within the cages for 12 hours on / 12 hours off) for the remainder of  the  14-day  observation  period.  Signs  of  toxicity  are  represented  by  phototoxicity  processed  to necrosis  and  scab  formation  at  various  sites  (ears,  head,  feet,  eyelids,  nose…).  The  no-effect illuminance level after 60 mg/kg of Photofrin was greater than ambient animal room but less than 30 footcandles  (study  0686/50).  The  duration  of  the  photosensitivity  in  rats  after  a  single  dose  of Photofrin is comprised between 12 and 16 weeks (study 0586/49).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Repeat dose toxicity

Repeated-dose  toxicity  studies  have  been  studied  in  rats  (a  6  weeks  study  under  normal  light conditions of &lt;20 footcandles, and a 13-week toxicity study Sprague Dawley rats at &lt; 14 footcandles) and in dogs (a 13 weeks study at &lt; 30 footcandles, and a 13 weeks study at &lt; 12 footcandles).  The main  findings  were  similar  in  both  species.  The  repeated  injection  with  porfimer  sodium  was associated with a brown pigment originated by porfimer sodium which is deposited in macrophages in the  reticuloendothelial  system.  The  clearance  of  the  pigment  from  the  macrophages  appeared  to  be very  slow  as  also  seen  in  the  pharmacokinetics  but  the  deposition  is  suggested  to  be  reversible. Changes in hematological parameters lead to the suggestion that there might still be a slight hemolytic effect which was fatal in previous tests with very high doses in rodents.

## · Genotoxicity

Medicinal product no longer authorised The assessment of the genotoxic potential of porfimer is based on findings of a standard battery of genotoxicity tests and a considerable number of published data from a wide variety of genotoxicity assays. Although the studies of the standard testing battery gave negative results both in the presence and  absence  of  ambient  light  there  is  sufficient  evidence  from  literature  data  demonstrating  that porfimer in the presence of light has the potential to damage the DNA. Such effects are considered to be directly related to the pharmacodynamic mode of action of porfimer, i.e. the generation of cytotoxic and  potentially  mutagenic  singlet  oxygen  or  other  free  radicals  after  irradiation  with  light  of appropriate wavelength. The available data suggest that in most cell types cytotoxicity exceeds DNA damage (preventing detection of photogenotoxic effects in several experiments) but the latter cannot be entirely excluded and should therefore be carefully considered in the safety assessment. Possible genotoxic  effects  associated  with  the  intended  clinical  use  of  porfimer  are  not  confined  to  the deliberately  irradiated  tumors  but  due  to  the  systemic  distribution  and  the  very  slow  clearance  of porfimer  from  the  body  the  surface  tissues  would  be  also  at  risk  if  exposed  to  light.  Increased photosensitivity  of  patients  was  found  to  remain  for  up  to  90  days  and  more,  also  suggesting  a sustained  photomutagenic  hazard.  The  exposure  of  patients  to  direct  sunlight  or  bright  indoor  light should therefore be avoided for an appropriate duration of time after treatment · Carcinogenicity No conventional, rodent life-time, assays for increased tumour incidence have been conducted with porfimer sodium. No carcinogenicity study of any porphyrin-containing product is known. · Reproductive and developmental studies Studies using conventional protocols for detecting effects on male and female fertility, embryo/fetal development,  parturition,  rearing,  postnatal  and  behavioral  development,  and  second  generation reproductive performance were conducted. No effects on male and female fertility were detected at doses up to 4 mg/kg/d in rats. Embryo/fetal development was not affected at doses up to 2 mg/kg/d in rats and rabbits. In rats no effects on parturition and lactation were seen in F0-dams at doses up to 4 mg/kg/d.  Effects  on  the  F1-generation  were  observed  at  the  high  dose  (4mg/kg/day)  which  also exhibited toxic properties for the dams.

## · Local tolerance (if applicable)

Relevant  examinations  have  been  conducted  for  local  tolerance.  There  were  no  abnormal  changes when  porfimer  sodium  was  administered  strictly  intravenously.  No  test  regarding  the  paravenous tissue has been performed. In a study with 1.5 ml porfimer sodium administered to rabbits in a single intramuscular  injection  under  subdued  lighting  conditions,  degenerative  and  necrotic  changes  with inflammatory cellular infiltration and hemorrhage could be observed after 2 days. Similar changes but with a beginning regeneration and fibrosis could be seen seven days after the injection.

## · Other toxicity studies

Studies in sensitised mice, and rats, showed no passive cutaneous anaphylaxis reactions derived from Photofrin,  indicating  no  antigenicity  under  the  reported  experimental  conditions.  There  was  no antibody  production  in  mice  to  Photofrin    alone,  suggesting  that  Photofrin  did  not  raise  antibody production in mice under the reported experimental conditions.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects

## Clinical pharmacology

## Pharmacodynamics

Three pharmacokinetic studies were provided . The most comprehensive and recent kinetic study was PHO  PK  001  in  which  a  single  i.v.  dose  of  2  mg/kg  porfimer  sodium  was  given  to  24  healthy volunteers (12 females, 12 males). The serum decay was bi-exponential, with a slow distribution phase and a very long elimination phase that started approximately 24 hours after injection. The t½ was a mean of 415 hours (range of 45 to 646 hours). Cmax was determined to be 40 mcg/ml and the area under the curve to infinity (AUC(inf)) was 2400 mcg ⋅ hour/mL. Peak porfimer sodium concentration after drug administration was attained at a later time in women (1.5 hours) compared with men (0.17 hours). This difference was statistically significant, but judged as not clinically relevant to therapeutic porfimer  sodium  PDT  since  light  administration  occurs  much  later  in  the  elimination  phase  (40-50 hours) when the profiles of men and women are similar.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The description of the distribution of the \"haematophorphyine derivates\" showed that the monomers distribute in plasma primarily to albumin while di- and oligomers are transported by the HDL fraction of the lipoproteins. Distribution to tissue, and in particular relative distribution into e.g. healthy skin vs.  healthy  oesophageal  mucosa  vs.  mucosa  of  BO,  has  not  been  investigated.  The  extremely  long elimination half times in the range of 2 to 3 weeks clearly indicates that deeper compartments, from which elimination is slow, exist for oligomers. Such a \"deep compartment\" appears to be skin as trial PHO PK 001 reveals a long lasting accumulation of photosensitizer (or photosensitivity respectively) in the skin. Metabolism of the mono-, di- and oligomeric mixture product PhotoBarr takes place (also just in the product itself in particular after reconstitution) in the sense of dimerisation, hydrolysis, transformation of ether- into ester bonds, and so forth. Further sources of metabolism can be the sun exposed skin of patients, the Barrett's oesophagus of the patient treated with PDT, and the liver. The  pathways  of  elimination  have,  however,  not  been  further  characterised.  The  most  plausible elimination way appears to be hepatic/biliary metabolism and excretion. Two  old  kinetic  studies  provided  consistent  data.  A  pharmacokinetic  study  was  conducted  in  12 endobronchial cancer patients given 2 mg/kg of porfimer sodium intravenously. Samples of plasma were obtained out to 50 days post injection and total monomeric porphyrins determined. The average peak plasma concentration (Cmax) immediately following injection was 79.6 µg/mL (C.V.61%, range 39-222); the mean elimination half-life (t½) was 515 hours, i.e. 21.5 days (C.V. 26%, range 264-672). Thus,  porfimer  sodium  is  slowly  cleared  from  the  body,  with  a  mean  clearance  (CL)  of  0.0143 mL/min/kg  (C.V.  53%).  Another  pharmacokinetic  study  was  performed  at  the  same  dose  in  four patients with bladder cancer. Total hematoporphyrin equivalents were measured, but plasma samples were  only  collected  over  48  hours  and  thus  the  sampling  schedule  was  insufficient  to  allow determination of the terminal elimination phase. Initial plasma levels of approximately 15 µg/mL were maintained for at least 1 hour, after which the rate of disappearance was consistent with an initial halflife of 22 hours, which would represent the distribution phase of the drug within the whole body.

## · Interaction studies

No  formal  interaction  studies  have  been  performed  with  PhotoBarr  investigating  pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions, although in amendment 4 and 5 of trial D73 P503 and in trial PHO PK 001 almost all patients have received concomitant drug therapy.

## · Special populations

Trial PHO PK 001 was planned to investigate effect of gender, and major gender effects on PK can be excluded although a trend to a higher AUC in females exists which does, however, not translate into a higher but a lower photosensitivity rate in female patients. No data on PK in children, elderly patients and patients with renal or hepatic impairment are available.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

The dose of PhotoBarr used in all clinical studies (2 mg/kg body weight via the intravenous route), and timing of the light in relation to (single) dose administered, were determined empirically, taking into account the recommended dose of the product Photofrin.

In trial TCSC 93-07 the effect of a range of light doses from 175 up to 300 J/cm was evaluated. The small number of patients in each light dose level and the overlap of doses make the interpretation of the study results difficult. However, it seems that efficacy/safety results with the lowest dose of 175 J/cm were similar to that of higher doses of 250 and 300 J/cm. Based on these data, the applicant has finally recommended a light dose of 130 J/cm.

A white light reflector investigational product ('TOTAL BLOCK SPF 75'), as well as prophylactic corticosteroids  were  used  in  pharmacodynamic  drug-drug  interactions  studies  to  investigate  the potential reduction of side effects. These drug-drug interactions studies showed that the experimental product TOTAL BLOCK SPF 75 protected against skin toxicity but prophylactic corticosteroids have no or even detrimental effects on overall outcome.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Discussion on clinical pharmacology The  results of the 3 pharmacokinetic studies are consistent and adequately reflected in the SPC. The most significant PK property of PhotoBarr is the very slow elimination, with t1/2 in the range of 2 to 3 weeks.  Further  investigations  are  necessary  to  clarify  if  hepatic  impairment  has  an  effect  on elimination half life and exposure. The applicant has committed to investigate the PK in patients with hepatic insufficiency as a post-marketing commitment. Tumour and dysplastic tissue selectivity in treatment may occur partly through selective retention of PhotoBarr  but  mainly  through  a  selective  delivery  of  light.  Further  investigations  are  necessary  to clarify what is the optimal dose of photoBarr, of light, and what is the optimal timing of the light for the treatment of  HGD in BO. The applicant committed to a post-marketing study to investigate this aspect. In an open label pharmacokinetic study with healthy subjects, all subjects experienced photosensitivity reactions, which were characteristically represented by erythematous rash and oedema and were mild to  moderate  in  intensity  (data  not  shown).  The  photosensitivity  reactions  occurred  primarily  on  the face, hands, and neck regions, which are the areas of the skin that are most susceptible to accidental sunlight exposure. Other less common skin manifestations were reported in areas where photosensitivity  reactions  had  occurred,  such  as  increased  hair  growth,  skin  discolouration,  skin nodules, skin wrinkling and skin fragility. These manifestations may  be  attributable to a pseudoporphyria state (temporary drug-induced cutaneous porphyria).  The frequency and nature of the photosensitivity reactions experienced in this study are unlike the documented incidence seen in previous  clinical  studies  in  cancer  patients  (approx.  20%)  or  the  spontaneously  reported  incidence from  commercial  use  of  PhotoBarr  (&lt;  20%).  It  is  possible  that  prolonged  exposure  to  light  at  the clinical research unit or accidental sunlight exposure after discharge may be responsible for the high frequency of photosensitivity reactions. The more active lifestyle of the healthy and relatively younger subjects compared with cancer patients may have been a contributing factor to these photosensitivity reactions. This experience is adequately described in the SPC.

Concerning  TOTAL  BLOCK  SPF  75  to  prevent  skin  toxicity,  its  use  cannot  be  recommended currently,  as  this  experimental  product  is  not  available  on  the  market.  An  appropriate  warning  for prophylctic  use  of  corticosteroids  has  been  introduced  into  the  SPC.  No  evidence  for  further interactions between PhotoBarr and other medicinal products was detected in the clinical programme, although the number of patients was small.

Potential  interaction,  or  additive  photosensitising  respectively,  can  be  expected  to  occur  with  the concomitant use of other medications known to produce photosensitivity or cutaneous phototoxicity. It is  possible  that concomitant use of other photosensitising agents (e.g., tetracyclines, sulphonamides, phenothiazines, sulphonylurea hypoglycaemic agents, thiazide diuretics, griseofulvin and fluoroquinolones)  could  increase  the  photosensitivity  reaction.  These  potential  pharmacodynamic interactions are adequately reflected in the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical efficacy

## Dose-response studies and main clinical studies

The clinical programme in support of the PhotoBarr indication in BO with HGD consists of one main, multicentre, randomised, controlled and partially blinded study (PHO BAR 01) and two supportive, single centre, uncontrolled studies (TCSC 93-07 and TCSC 96-01). The supportive studies recruited patients with adenocarcinoma, HGD and low grade dysplasia (LGD). Only the sub-group with HGD are  analysed  in  this  application.  208  patients  were  randomised  in  PHO  BAR  01  and  the  minimum follow up was 2 years. The HGD subpopulations in TCSC 93-07 and TCSC 96-01 were 44 and 42 patients respectively, with a majority of patients followed up to 12 months. In TCSC 93-07, laser light intensity  varied  to  determine  the  optimum  light  dose.  The  effect  of  prednisone  on  the  incidence  of oesophageal stricture was evaluated in TCSC 96-01.

Main study PHO BAR 01

<!-- image -->

Two  hundred  patients  with  BE  and  HGD  on  biopsy  were  to  be  included  in  this  trial.  The  main inclusion  criteria  were  biopsy-proven  HGD  in  BO,  as  assessed  by  the  central  reference  pathology laboratory;  four  quadrant  jumbo  biopsies  at  every  2  cm  of  the  entire  Barrett's  mucosa  had  to  be obtained  within  4  weeks  of  randomisation  (biopsy  sampling  was  to  start  at  the  upper  limit  of  the gastric  folds);  absence  of  invasive  cancer  confirmed  by  endoscopic  ultrasonography  and  thorax computed tomography (CT); age &gt; 18 years.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Methods Overall Study Design and Plan PHO  BAR  01  was  a  multicentre,  partially  blinded,  randomised  study  in  patient  with  high-grade dysplasia  (HGD)  in  Barrett's  oesophagus  (BO).  Eligible  patients  were  randomised  to  receive PHOTOBARR PDT plus OM therapy or OM Only therapy. Patients and study physicians were aware of  the  treatment  each  patient  received;  however,  the  pathologists  who  read  the  biopsies  from  each oesophageal endoscopy were blinded to the patients' treatment. Patients were centrally randomised in a 2:1 design to receive PhotoBarr PDT plus omeprazole therapy or  omeprazole  therapy  alone.  All  histological  assessments  were  carried  out  at  a  central  reference laboratory  (Dr  R.  Haggitt,  University  of  Washington,  Seattle).  A  study  to  assess  the  inter-rater agreement on histological diagnoses assigned to sets of endoscopic biopsy samples was completed by this  reference  laboratory  prior  to  the  start  of  the  pivotal  trial.  The  results  indicated  a  high  rater agreement on the histological diagnoses between readers of 88% (95%-CI: 78%-94%) for HGD and 96% for adenocarcinoma. The study planned the enrolment of at least 200 patients with HGD in BO at 30 clinical trial sites mostly in North-America. All patients were followed every three months until four consecutive quarterly follow-up endoscopic biopsy  results  were  negative  for  HGD,  and  then  biannually  until  the  last  enrolled  patient  had completed  a  minimum  of  24  months  of  follow-up  evaluations  after  randomisation.  Endoscopic surveillance was no longer required after treatment failure unless the patient received PhotoBarr PDT at  the  time  of  the  treatment  failure.  Patients  were  assessed  for  efficacy  (histological  assessment  of biopsies)  and  safety  (adverse  experiences,  laboratory  results  and  physical  exams).  An  evaluation committee (DSMC) reviewed safety data every six months. There was no interim analysis planned in the study. Study Participants

## Treatments

PhotoBarr was to be administered at a dose of 2.0 mg/kg with light application 48 hours following injection.  The  light  dose  administered  was  130  J/cm  of  diffuser  length  using  the  centering  balloon. Applications  of  laser  light  could  be  repeated  96-120  hours  post  PhotoBarr  injection  for  residual lesions. In such case, a 2.5 cm fiber optic diffuser at the light dose of 50 J/cm of the diffuser length was to be used. A maximum of 7 cm of BO was treated during one course of PDT; one course of PDT consisted of an intravenous injection of PhotoBarr followed by one or two laser light applications. The second light application could be given two days after the first light application, and was only given to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

one under-treated ('skip') area that occurred during the first light application. If a patient had more than 7 cm of Barrett's mucosa, a second course of PDT was needed to treat the segment not treated in the  previous  course. It  was  required  that  the  entire  length  of  Barrett's  mucosa  be  treated  with  PDT therefore, up to three PDT courses could be given. Course of PDT had to be separated by at least three months. If a previous course of treatment resulted in residual areas of dysplasia, Barrett metaplasia, or any remaining 'skip' areas, an additional course of PDT was to be given. Patients in both treatment groups received omeprazole therapy (20 mg BID) to reduce reflux oesophagitis.

## Objectives

The primary objective was to assess the efficacy of PDT with PhotoBarr for injection plus omeprazole [PDT + PhotoBarr + OM] compared to omeprazole alone [OM Only] in the complete ablation of HGD in  patients  with  BO,  in  conjunction  with  a  strict  endoscopic  surveillance  and  biopsy  protocol. Secondary  objectives  included  to  assess  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  PDT  +  PhotoBarr  +  OM  and systematic  endoscopic  surveillance  compared  to  OM  Only  therapy  plus  systematic  endoscopic surveillance  in  terms  of  quality  of  complete  response,  duration  of  complete  response,  delaying progression to cancer (time to progression to cancer), delaying the need for esophagectomy or other intervening therapy (time to treatment failure) and survival time.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Outcomes/endpoints The primary efficacy variable was complete response (complete ablation of HGD at any endoscopic assessment) which was evaluated using a biopsy protocol and defined by the occurrence of any of the following three categories: · complete response 1 (CR1): complete replacement of all Barrett's metaplasia and dysplasia with normal squamous cell epithelium. · complete response 2 (CR2): ablation of all histological grades of dysplasia, including patients with indefinite grade of dysplasia, but some areas of Barrett's metaplastic epithelium still remain, or · complete response 3 (CR3): ablation of all areas of HGD but some areas of LGD with or without areas, which are definite for dysplasia or areas of Barrett's metaplastic epithelium sill remain. Secondary efficacy endpoints  were  quality  of  complete  response  (  CR1;  CR1  or  CR2);  duration  of complete response; time to progression to adenocarcinoma; time to treatment failure; survival time. Sample size The sample size of 200 patients was chosen based on power considerations for the primary efficacy parameter of CR and the secondary efficacy parameter of time to progression to cancer(TTP). It was estimated that the rate of complete ablation of HGD would be no more than 27% in the control arm and at least 60% in the PHOTOFRIN PDT arm at the time of the planned primary analysis (minimum of 6 months with an approximate median follow-up of 17 months). These estimates for the control arm and PHOTOFRIN PDT arm were based on results in the literature reported after a median follow-up of 26 and 19 months, respectively. Based on these estimates, 117 patients, 78 in the study treatment arm and 39 in the control arm, would provide 90% power to detect a difference between rates of 60% versus 27% in a two-sided test of proportions at a significant level of 5% .

For time to progression to cancer, a sample size of 191 patients was required to provide at least 80% power to  detect  an  increase  in  time  to  progression  to  cancer  of  24  months  in  a  two-sided  test  at  a significance level of 5%, assuming a median time to progression of 24 months in the control arm. It was assumed that the enrolment period would not be 15 months and the minimum follow-up period would be 24 months. The sample size was increased to 200 patients to account for up to 5% ineligible or untreated patients.

Patients  were  randomised  in  a  2.1  ratio  to  receive  either  PhotoBarr  PDT  +  OM  or  OM  Only, respectively.  The  patient  randomisation  was  stratified  with  respect  to  study  centre.  No  other stratification of patients took place.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Randomisation

Biopsies  taken  at  screening  were  sent  to  the  central  reference  pathology  laboratory  for  histological confirmation of the diagnosis of HGD. Random assignment in a 2.1 design to PhotoBarr PDT plus OM or OM only treatment was performed through a central randomisation office. Randomisation was stratified by centre only.

## Statistical methods

No  interim  analyses  were  planned.  The  planned  overall  study  duration  was  24  months.  Statistical analyses were planned at two different time points:

- a.  The  primary  analysis  of  complete  response  was  based  on  data  collected  up  to  a  minimum  of  6 months of follow-up after the last patient was enrolled in the study, and
- b. A final response analysis was planned after the last patient enrolled in the study has completed 24 months of follow-up to confirm the durability of effect and to provide long-term safety results. The final analyses was to be performed using the same data sets and methods as defined for the primary analyses.  The  primary  analysis  of  the  secondary  time  to  event  variables  was  to  be  based  on  24 months of data.

The duration of CR1 or CR2 or CR3 response was defined as the period in days from the day of first documentation of a CR3 or better response until the day of first documentation of either recurrence of HGD or progression to cancer. The duration of CR1 or CR2 response was defined as the period in days  from  the  day  of  first  documentation  of  a  CR2  or  better  response  until  the  day  of  first documentation of either recurrence of dysplasia (indefinite, LGD, or HGD) or progression to cancer. The duration of CR1 response was defined as the period in days from the day of first documentation of a CR1 response until the day of first documentation of metaplasia, any dysplasia (indefinite, LGD, or HGD) or progression to cancer. The duration of CR was to be censored at last follow-up or on the day that the intervening therapy began (oesophagectomy or an alternative method of endoscopic ablation) whichever  first.  Time  to  progression  to  cancer  was  defined  as  the  period  in  days  from  the  date  of randomisation until the date of the first documented progression to cancer or censoring at last followup or intervening therapy began, whichever first. Time to treatment failure was defined as the time in days from the date of randomisation until the date of the first documentation of progression of HGD to

Medicinal product no longer authorised With the exception of additional analyses, all efficacy variables were to be analysed for the intent-totreat  (ITT)  and  evaluable  populations.  Additional  analyses  of  the  primary  efficacy  variable  were considered exploratory and performed only on the ITT data set. The ITT population consisted of all randomised  patients.  The  evaluable  population  was  defined  as  those  patients  with  confirmed histological diagnosis, exclusion of oesophageal cancer at baseline, and that have received at least one complete course of PhotoBarr PDT (2.0 mg/kg injection of PhotoBarr followed by one or two laser light  sessions  applied  to  the  oesophageal  segment)  or  omeprazole for  at  least  one  week.  Additional reasons  for  excluding  patients  from  the  Evaluable  population  analyses  were  to  be  identified  and documented prior to the database close. The safety population was defined as all randomized patients who received either an injection of PhotoBarr or a single dose of omeprazole, according to treatment received. Statistical analysis For  the  primary  analysis,  the  proportion  of  responders  between  the  two  arms  was  to  be  compared using  a  Fisher's  exact  test.  A  patient  was  to  be  classified  as  a  responder  if  the  patient  achieved complete ablation of HGD defined as any response of CR1, CR2 or CR3 at any one of the evaluations prior to the date of data cut-off (minimum of 6 months of follow up after the last patient was enrolled in the study) for the analysis. For each patient who received intervening therapy, the assessment for primary efficacy was to be considered as treatment failure from the day that the intervening therapy began. The CR rates and the 95% CIs using a normal approximation to the binomial distribution were to be calculated. The difference between treatment arms in CR rates was to be provided with 95% CIs. In addition, the CR rates (CR1, CR2 or CR3) at follow-up visits Month 6, Month 12, Month 18 and Month 24 were to be calculated for each treatment arm. The  analysis  of  duration  of  CR  was  to  be  restricted  to  complete  responders.  For  all  time  to  event endpoints,  the  primary  analysis  of  the  secondary  efficacy  variables  was  to  be  considered  as  a preliminary analysis. The final analysis was to be based on the 24-month data.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

cancer or the start of any intervening therapy for HGD other than the randomised study treatment or censoring at the last efficacy assessment. Survival was defined as the period in days beginning on the date of randomisation to the date of death or censoring at the last date that the patient was known to be alive. The Kaplan-Meier method was used for estimating the distribution of time-to-event endpoints, and the log rank test was to be used to compare the distribution of events between treatment arms.

Additional analyses were performed to evaluate the effect of various baseline and demographic factors on the primary efficacy variable,(complete response.) using a logistic regression analysis.

## Results

## Patient disposition

A total of 486 patients were screened for inclusion. Of those, 278 patients were excluded during screening, mostly because HGD was not confirmed by the central reference pathology laboratory. Of the 486 patients screened, a total of 208 patients were enrolled in the study. According to a 2.1 ratio, 138 patients were randomised to receive PhotoBarr PDT + OM (treatment arm) and 70 patients were randomised to receive OM Only (control arm). A summary of patient disposition is provided in Table 1.

|                                           | Study treatment groups   | Study treatment groups   | Study treatment groups   | Study treatment groups   |
|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|                                           | PhotofrinPDT+OM          | PhotofrinPDT+OM          | OMOnly                   | OMOnly                   |
|                                           | 6 months                 | 24 months                | 6 months                 | 24 months                |
| No. of pat. Randomized (%)                | 138                      |                          | 70                       |                          |
| No. of pat. Receiving study therapy (%)   | 132                      |                          | 69                       |                          |
| No. of patients included in the           |                          |                          |                          |                          |
| ITT population 2                          | 138 (100)                |                          | 70 (100%)                |                          |
| Safety population 2                       | 133 (96.4)               |                          | 69 (98.6%)               |                          |
| Evaluable population 2                    | 130 (94.2)               | longer                   | 69 (98.6%)               |                          |
| No. of patients completing follow-up 1    | no 124 (93.9)            | 78 (56.5)                | 55 (79.7)                | 26 (37.1)                |
| No. of patients discontinued from study 2 | 36 (26.0)                | 57 (41.3)                | 28 (40.0)                | 49 (70.0)                |
| AE                                        | 3 (2.2)                  | 4 (2.8)                  | 0 (-)                    | 1 (1.4)                  |
| Progression of disease                    | product 14 (10.1)        | 18 (13.0)                | 14 (20.0)                | 22 (31.4)                |
| Death                                     | 2 (1.4)                  | 2 (1.4)                  | 1 (1.4)                  | 1 (1.4)                  |
| Other                                     | 9 (6.5)                  | 22 (15.8)                | 13 (18.6)                | 19 (27.2)                |
| Administrative reasons                    | 8 (5.8)                  | 11 (7.9)                 | 1 (1.4)                  | 6 (8.6)                  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Table 1. Summary of patient disposition (6 month follow-up and the 24 months follow-up) 1 Percentages are based on the number of patients who received study therapy in each group 2 Percentages are based on the number of patients randomized in each group. Recruitment The first patients were enrolled in January 1998 The study was completed 07 November 2001. At the time of submission of the application a report displaying an analysis on a minimum follow-up of 6 months with a cut-off date of August 2000 for the data sets was presented. At that time the study was still  in  progress.  A  final  analysis  with  the  24  month  follow-up  data  sets,  signed  January  2003,  was presented by March 2003.

## Conduct of the study

Study  PHO  BAR  01  was  performed  in  compliance  with  GCP.  Protocol  amendments  and  patient informed consent  were  reviewed  by  IRBs. An  independent  Data  and  Safety  Monitoring  Board  was appointed to oversee the conduct of the study.

## Baseline data

Demographic of age, gender, height, race and smoking history were well balanced between the two groups.

The mean age of the patients enrolled in the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group was 66.1 (SD=10.7) years with the age ranging from 38.4 to 88.5 years. The mean age of the patients enrolled in the OM Only group  was  67.3  (SD=11.1)  years  with  the  age  ranging  from  36.1  to  87.6  years.  The  total  study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

population was predominantly male (85%), Caucasian (99%), and former smokers (64%). There was no statistical difference between the two treatment groups.

At baseline, 63% of the patients in the Photobarr PDT + OM group had a history of BO for over a year as compared to 59% of the patients in the OM Only group (p=0.6498), for the ITT population. The median    duration  of  BE  was  20.27  months  (ranging  from  1.3  to  216.7  months)  and  19.22  months (ranging  from  0.9  to  141.7  months)  in  the  PhotoBarr  PDT  +  OM  group  and  OM  Only  group, respectively.  The  duration  of  HGD  was  6  months  or  less  in  71%  and  73%  of  the  patients  in  the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group and OM Only group, respectively -(p=0.8689), for the ITT population. The median duration of HGD was 3.55 months (ranging from 0.1 to 40.7 months) and 4.11 months (ranging  from  0.4  to  72.4  months)  in  the  PhotoBarr  PDT  +  OM  group  and  OM  Only  group, respectively. There was no statistical difference between the two arms (p=0.9280).

Medicinal product no longer authorised The length of BO as determined by endoscopy was categorized as &lt; 6 cm and &gt; 6 cm. Patients in the OM Only group were evenly distributed between the two categories while the proportion of patients in the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group was slightly higher in the &gt; 6 cm category. There was no statistical difference between the two arms (p=0.5605). The length of BO as determined by histology was also categorized  as  &lt;  6  cm  and  &gt;  6  cm.  Results  showed  a  higher  proportion  of  patients  in  the  &lt;  6  cm category in both groups: 54% of the patients in the PhotoBarr PDT + OM versus 60% of the patients in  the  OM  Only  group  (p=0.4603).  In  most  patients,  HGD  extended  over  multiple  levels:  63%  of patients in the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group as compared to 61% of patients in the OM Only group (p=0.7639). Extent of HGD did not differ between the two groups and between the ITT and Evaluable population. In the ITT group, 134 of the 138 patients who received PhotoBarr PDT + OM reported prior therapy for BO. Most patients (97%) reported prior medical therapy, 4% of patients reported prior surgery, and 4% of patients reported other types of therapy. Sixty-six of the 70 patients who received OM Only reported prior therapy for BO: 94% of patients reported other types of therapy. Other types of therapy consisted  of  oesophageal  dilations  and  blood  transfusion.  Endocopic  ablation  was  not  reported  in either group. Although there was no statistical difference between the two groups with regards to prior therapy for BO, a higher proportion of patients randomised to the OM Only arm had prior surgery as compared to the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group (p=0.0767 for the ITT population and p=0.0657 for the Evaluable population). Outcomes and estimation A summary of efficacy result for primary and secondary endpoints is shown in Tables 2 and 3. For time-related secondary efficacy endpoints the data were not mature to estimate median time to event. In particular, median duration of response could not be calculated, and median time to progression to cancer, could not be estimated. However, in an exploratory analysis with 24 months minimum followup, 18 (13%) patients with progression to cancer were observed in the PDT group, compared to 20 (29%) in the Ome only group (P=0.006). At the end of follow up 39 patients (28%) in the PDT group had failed treatment, compared to 44 patients (63%) in the Ome only group (P&lt;0.001). Table 2. Efficacy results (primary endpoints) ITT-population (138/70)

|                           | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   |
|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|                           | PDT                       | PDT                       | Ome only                  | Ome only                  | PDT                             | PDT                             | Ome only                        | Ome only                        |
|                           | 6 mo.                     | 24 mo.                    | 6 mo.                     | 24 mo.                    | 6 mo.                           | 24 mo.                          | 6 mo.                           | 24 mo.                          |
| CR 1 or 2 or 3 (=no HGD)  | 71.7%                     | 76.8% (0.70-0.84)         | 31.4%                     | 38.6% (0.27-0.50)         | 76.2%                           | 81.5%                           | 31.9%                           | 39.1%                           |
|                           | P<0.0001*                 | P<0.0001*                 | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        |
| CR 1 (normal epithelium)  | 41.3%                     | 52.2% (0.44-0.61)         | 4.3%                      | 7.1% (0.01-0.13)          | 43.8%                           | 55.4%                           | 4.3%                            | 7.2%                            |
|                           | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        |
| CR 1 or 2 (=no dysplasia) | 48.6%                     | 58.7% (0.51-0.67)         | 5.7%                      | 14.3% (0.06-0.23)         | 51.1%                           | 62.3%                           | 5.8%                            | 14.5%                           |
|                           | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                  | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        | P<0.0001                        |

*p-values in the white columns are comparing the 6 months data, whereas grey columns represent comparisons of the 24 months data.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3. Efficacy (secondary endpoints)

|                       | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | ITT-population (138/70)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   | Evaluable population (130/69)   |
|-----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|                       | PDT                       | PDT                       | Ome only                  | Ome only                  | PDT                             | PDT                             | Ome only                        | Ome only                        |
| Rates of              | 6 months                  | 24 months                 | 6 months                  | 24 months                 | 6 months                        | 24 months                       | 6 months                        | 24 months                       |
| Progression to cancer | 14 (10.1%)                | 18 (13.0%)                | 13 (18.5%)                | 20 (28.6%)                | 12 (9.2%)                       | 16 (12.3%)                      | 13 (18.8%)                      | 20 (29.0%)                      |
|                       | P=0.0875*                 | P=0.0875*                 | P=0.0062                  | P=0.0062                  | P=0.0516                        | P=0.0516                        | P=0.0036                        | P=0.0036                        |
| Treatmen t failure    | 23 (16.7%)                | 39 (28.3%)                | 26 (37.1%)                | 44 (62.8%)                | 21 (16.2%)                      | 36 (20.0%)                      | 26 (37.7%)                      | 43 (62.3%)                      |
|                       | P=0.001                   | P=0.001                   | P<0.001                   | P<0.001                   | P<0.001                         | P<0.001                         | P<0.001                         | P<0.001                         |

*p-values in the white columns are comparing the 6 months data, whereas grey columns represent comparisons of the 24 months data.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Ancillary analyses Additional analyses showed that treatment (PhotoBarr PDT + OM v . OM Only, p&lt;0.0001), HGD foci (single v . multiple, p&lt;0.0001) prior omeprazole intake of at least three months (yes v . no, p=0.0005), and age (&lt;65 years old v . &gt; 65 years old, p=0.0219) were covariates influencing the CR rate (CR1 or CR2 or CR3). HGD duration, BO length, nodular conditions, gender, smoking history, and centre's size did not influence the CR rate. A significant treatment × age interaction (p=0.0047) was observed. The logistic regression analysis showed that the PhotoBarr PDT + OM treatment was more likely to provide CR (OR=9.7094, 95% Cl=4.129, 22.829). Complete response was more likely to be observed in patients with single foci HGD (OR=11.8416, 95% Cl=4.431, 31.643) and in patients having taken omeprazole for more than three months prior to study entry (OR=4.0072, 95% Cl=1.835, 8.749). In addition, age was identified as being an important influential factor. Patients of less than 65 years old were more likely to achieve CR than older patients regardless of the treatment received (OR=2.4664, 95%, 1.140, 5.337). In the &lt;65 years old and &gt; 65 years old categories, patients on PhotoBarr PDT + OM treatment were more likely to achieve CR than patients on OM Only treatment (OR=40.6260, 95% Cl=9.706, 170.042 and OR=4.2053, 95% Cl=1.586, 11.150, respectively). Clinician's experience with PDT did not influence study outcome (p=0.6895). Progression to cancer was associated with the number of PDT courses administered. Patients who received one course of PDT had a greater risk of progression to cancer than patients who received two or three courses of PDT (50% vs. 39% and 11% respectively). Discussion on clinical efficacy PhotoBarr  effectiveness  in  the  ablation  of  HGD  in  patients  with  BO  has  been  shown  in  a  single controlled study Pho Bar 01. A central randomisation scheme was used. Patient characteristics were well balanced in the two groups indicating an appropriate randomisation. The method for acquisition of biopsies was compliant with the accepted standards. The definition of complete response used as primary efficacy end-points is clinically relevant.

The  most  impressive  and  obviously  most  relevant  (single)  result  concerning  this  (combined)/these primary endpoint(s) is the high proportion of patients in the PDT+Ome showing complete replacement of all Barrett's metaplasia, including dysplasia. The data were generally not mature for estimation of time-related secondary efficacy endpoints.

PHO  BAR  01  is  the  largest  and  the  only  randomised  trial  performed  so  far  in  this  setting.  The development  program  did  not  comprise  a  comparison  with  oesophagectomy.  As  this  surgical technique, and alternative conservative ablative treatment options, cannot be considered as standard treatment options in HGD of BO as of today, the development program is adequate, although not fully devoid from deficits.

The  main  criticisms  to  PHO  BAR  01  relate  to  questions  on  the  validity  of  the  primary  endpoint complete response rate as a surrogate endpoint for progression to cancer. Despite this weakness, PHO BAR 01 shows that PDT with PhotoBarr is feasible in HGD of BO, and that this method can achieve a clinically  relevant  number  of  complete  ablation  of  HGD,  complete  re-epithelialisation  of  BO  by normal squamous epithelium. In addition, the frequency of progression to cancer was significantly in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

favour of PDT compared to Ome alone, and a significantly lower proportion of treatment failure was observed in the PDT group compared to the Ome only group. Thus, one can assume that the observed effect in terms of complete response translates to a clinically relevant effect in terms of progression to cancer as well.

## Supportive studies

Study  93-07  was  a  single  centre,  uncontrolled  Phase  II  study.  The  objectives  of  the  study  were  to evaluate  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  PhotoBarr  PDT  in  patients  being  treated  for  dysplasia  or  early adenocarcinoma in BO and to determine the required light dose to produce effective results.  A total of 99 patients were enrolled in the study, 44 with a diagnosis of HGD. The other non-pivotal Study 96-01 was a single centre, partially blinded, randomised, Phase II parallel-group study. The study objective was to compare the incidence and severity of oesophageal strictures between patients with BO who received  steroid  therapy  after  PhotoBarr  PDT  and  patients  who  received  steroid-free  PDT  for treatment of dysplasia and/or early adenocarcinoma of the oesophagus.  A total of 87 patients were enrolled in the study, 42 with a diagnosis of HGD.  Both  studies included patients with adenocarcinoma, HGD and low-grade dysplasia (LGD).  They were retrospectively analysed with only the  HGD  subgroup  to  ensure  consistency  with  the  main  study.    The  patient  populations  of  HGD treated were different than those in the pivotal study since they enrolled only patients who refused, or were ineligible for surgery. While study information included 12-month data, 6-month data formed the primary analysis and  the 12-month data was the basis of secondary efficacy parameters. The overall clinical response in these non-pivotal studies was consistent with that seen in the main study.

A  total  of  three  patients  died  during  the  study,  two  patients  of  the  PDT  (metastatic  breast  cancer, cardiac  arrest  following  complications  after  bypass-graft  surgery)  group  and  one  in  the  omeprazole (massive  stroke  attack)  only  group.  All  three  deaths  were  not  considered  to  be  associated  with treatment. A total of 118 serious AEs occurred in 40 patients in the PDT group and 36 serious AEs in 12 patients in the omeprazole only group.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Clinical safety Patient exposure The Integrated Summary of Safety puts together the safety information derived from study PHO BAR 01 and from the two non-pivotal studies TCSC 93-07 and TCSC 96-01. The report comprises the 138 patients from PHO BAR 01 and 42 plus 44 patients from the non-pivotal studies who have received PDT in HGD of BO, 70 patients of the OME only group in the pivotal study and 99 patients who received PDT for other indications. This sums up to a total of 324 patients receiving PDT of which 224 had the indication under evaluation. The duration on study amounted to a median duration 15.8 months in total, of which the patients with HGD in BO receiving PDT had a median study time of 19.3 months (of which the group from study PHO BAR 01 had a median of 26 months), the OME only group  of  21.2.  months,  and  the  other  PDT  patients  of  13.0  months.Of  the  total  of  219  patients receiving PDT for HGD in BO,  115 received two courses of PDT, and 45 received three courses. In the other indications, of the 99 patients only 10 received two courses and 3 received three courses. All patients who received at least one dose of porfimer sodium or omeprazole are included in the safety analysis. Baseline characteristics of the different groups were comparable. Adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths

Of the serious adverse events (SAEs) in the PhotoBarr PDT + OM group, 44 (23.1%) were considered associated with the treatment.  The most commonly  reported  treatment associated  SAE  was dehydration  (4%)  experienced  by  5  patients.  The  majority  of  the  SAEs  experienced  by  11  patients were gastrointestinal disorders (8%), specifically nausea (3% - 4 patients), vomiting (3% - 4 patients) and  upper  abdominal  pain  (2%)  experienced  by  two  patients.  No  cases  of  anaphylaxis  have  been reported although occasionally rashes have been observed.

Three serious adverse events led to patient withdrawal from the study which all occurred in the PDT group.  One  patient  produced  an  anxiety  crisis  before  the  first  laser  light  application,  one  was diagnosed  with  lung  cancer  (which  undermined  the  eligibility  of  the  patient),  and  the  third  patient

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

underwent  esophagectomy  after  a  perforation  of  the  esophagus  related  to  a  dilation  procedure following a PDT associated stricture formation.

## Laboratory findings

Laboratory data were collected at baseline and at month 3 after each PDT course in the PDT group and  at  baseline  and  month  3  in  the  omeprazole  only  group.  There  was  only  one  grade  4  toxicity (neutrophil cell counts in the PDT group), only one grade 3 toxicity (white blood cell counts in the PDT group), 2 grade 2 toxicities (total bilirubin and ALT, both in the PDT group), and 32 grade 1 toxicities (9 (13%)  in the omeprazole only group and 23 (17%) in the PDT group).

## Safety in special populations

Additional analyses of safety were performed for patients of old age (&gt;75 years) as opposed to the younger  patients  as  well  as  for  patients  with  a  history  of  or  with  a  current  cardiac  or  pulmonary disease/condition.  These  analyses  revealed  additional  increased  risks  for  certain  adverse  events (cardiac and pulmonary events as well as dehydration) that warrant the inclusion as warnings in the SPC.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Benefit/risk assessment Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of PhotoBarr was favourable in the treatment of 'Ablation of high-grade dysplasia (HGD) in patients with Barrett's Oesophagus'.