---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:02:34
document_pages: 32
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/prevenar-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: prevenar-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 9.3371786
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-23 05:25:32.009295
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Prevenar. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2004. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

<!-- image -->

1. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The active ingredients of Prevenar  are the capsular saccharides of serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14 18C, 19F and 23F, coupled by reductive amination to the carrier protein CRM197. Each 0.5 ml dose of pneumococcal saccharide conjugated vaccine, adsorbed contains: Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 4* 2 microgrammes Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 6B* 4 microgrammes Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 9V* 2 microgrammes Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 14* 2 microgrammes Pneumococcal oligosaccharide Serotype 18C* 2 microgrammes Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 19F* 2 microgrammes Pneumococcal polysaccharide Serotype 23F* 2 microgrammes *Conjugated to the CRM197 carrier protein and adsorbed on aluminium phosphate (0.5 mg) Excipients Sodium Chloride Water For Injections The  vaccine  is  formulated  on  the  basis  of  the  saccharide  content  and  the  amount  of  protein  is dependent on the polysaccharide: protein ratio. There is no  preservative present in the formulation. The pneumococcal conjugates are adsorbed onto aluminium phosphate adjuvant. Prevenar is a suspension for injection and is presented in two alternative single dose vials and in prefilled syringes. The primary container is a sterile depyrogenated 2 ml vial composed of clear flint (Ph Eur Type I) tubing glass. The alternative container is a sterile depyrogenated 2 ml vial composed of clear flint (Ph Eur Type I) moulded glass. The primary closure is a sterile grey butyl 13 mm stopper and the alternate closure is a sterile grey butyl rubber 13 mm Purcoat stopper. Both have an aluminium seal with flip-off cap. Both closures are in compliance with Ph Eur. The  syringe  is  a  sterile  depyrogenated  1  ml  clear  flint  glass  (Ph  Eur  Type  I)  pre-filled  with  an appropriate adapter and cap. The closure for the syringe is a sterile grey butyl 13 mm stopper and tip cap. The plunger rod is constituted of polypropylene. Active substance The seven pneumococcal polysaccharide strains 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F and 23F were chosen based on  epidemiological  data.  CRM197  has  been  chosen  as  the  carrier  protein  in  the  vaccine  based  on previous  experience  with  CRM197  in  the Haemophilus  infuenzae type  b  saccharide  vaccine  and  on extensive pre-clinical studies with pneumococcal conjugates vaccines. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The seven-pneumococcal polysaccharides are produced at the WLV plant in Pearl River, New York and  transported  to  the  WLV  plant  in  Sanford,  North  Carolina.  The  CRM197  carrier  protein  and  the seven  monovalent  bulk  pneumococcal  saccharide  conjugates  are  produced  at  the  WLV  plant  in Sanford  and  transported  in  stainless  steel  vessels  under  controlled  conditions  to  Pearl  River  for formulation  and  filling.  Formulation  of  the  finished  product  involves  dilution,  mixing  and  sterile filtration.  Final  labelling  and  packaging  operations  for  Europe  will  be  carried  out  at  Wyeth

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Manufacturing, Havant, UK. WLV's Pearl River site in the United States is presented as an alternative site for final labelling and packaging.

## · Production and control of starting materials

## (1) Pneumococcal saccharides

## Cell bank system

The master and working cell banks for the seven-pneumococcal polysaccharides have been derived from  the  current  cell  banks  for  Pnu-Imune  23.  These  lyophilised  seeds  were  reconstituted  in  soy peptone seed medium and new master and working seed banks were produced. All seed stages were characterized at each stage and were qualified for culture purity and identity. (a) Fermentation and harvesting The  pneumococcal  saccharides  are  routinely  produced  by  fermentation.  One  vial  of  the  desired serotype is used to start a fermentation batch. Bottles are inoculated with different amounts of seed and incubated until the medium turns yellow. Tests for optical density (OD) and pH are carried out and one of the bottles is selected for inoculation of the seed fermenter. The culture is incubated in the seed fermenter and then in the intermediate fermenter, until the OD has reached an optimum level. The culture is inoculated into the production fermenter and allowed to grow to an endpoint. During fermentation, the following IPCs are carried out; Gram stain, purity check, OD, pH and Quellung test. The  culture  is  inactivated  by  addition  of  cell  lysis  reagent.  The  culture  is  mixed  and  checked  for inactivation.  The  culture  is  incubated  overnight  and  checked  again  for  inactivation.  The  content  is transferred to the clarification hold tank. The content is centrifuged and the supernatant re-circulated through a  depth  filter  assembly  until  an  OD  of  optimum  level  is  achieved.  The  supernatant  is  then passed through the depth filter assembly and through a membrane filter to the filter hold tank and then transferred to the purification area. During  the  fermentation  of  the S.  pneumoniae serotypes  purity  and  identity  testing,  pH,  growth  by optical density and confirmation of inactivation are the in-process controls. The description of the fermentation process of the pneumococcal polysaccharides and the corresponding  in  process  and  release  testing  is  adequate.  Satisfactory  results  from  IPCs  for  3 production batches have been presented. Purification The  pneumococcal polysaccharides  are  purified  by  concentration/diafiltration,  precipitation  with appropriate reagents. They are then further purified by a series of concentration, diafiltration, filtration and  column  chromatography  before  being  finally  sterile  filtered  using  a  0.22µm  filter  into  bulk containers. Because of the consistent chemical content of the purified polysaccharides, the company proposes to release  the  polysaccharides  based  upon  dry  weight,  residual  protein  and  nucleic  acid  content, immunological specificity and identity, molecular weight by SEC-MALLS, endotoxin quantification and sterility. Functional  group  contents  (hexosamine,  methyl  pentose,  and  O-acetyl)  have  been  evaluated  by traditional  chemical  assays  during  development  to  monitor  the  consistency  of  manufacture  and  to characterise each serotype. These traditional methods, which are the basis of the Ph. Eur. monograph for pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines for side chain content, were compared to the newer NMR technology.  The  NMR  test  will  be  maintained  as  a  routine  test  to  document  identity,  purity  and structure of the individual polysaccharide batches Medicinal product no longer authorised

The description of the purification process for the pneumococcal polysaccharides and the corresponding in-process controls and release tests is adequate.

Satisfactory results from IPCs for 3 production batches are presented.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Impurities

The main impurities arising from the fermentation and purification of S. pneumoniae are nucleic acid and  protein.  Tests  for  nucleic  acid  and  protein  are  included  in  the  specification  for  pneumococcal saccharide.  Low  molecular  constituents  of  fermentation  medium  are  removed  by  the  numerous ultrafiltrations.

Characterisation The  chemical  structure  of  the  seven-pneumococcal  serotype-specific  saccharides  before  and  after activation is described. Wet chemical analyses show the presence of hexose and protein. The proton NMR spectra match that of the respective polysaccharide. Amino acid analyses show a modification of a number of lysine residues in CRM197, dependent on serotype. Batch analysis Batch analysis data are demonstrative of a consistent production process and are compatible with the specifications for the pneumococcal polysaccharides. Diphtheria CRM197 carrier protein (CRM 197 ) Cell bank system CRM197 is produced by C.  diphtheriae; strain  C7  ( β 197),  which  has  a  single-point  mutation  in  the toxin gene. A seed bank free of ruminant derived components was created. For each seed generation, ampoules are tested for purity and identity. In general, the description of the cell-bank systems, the control tests and specifications of the CRM 197 are adequate. The absence of either identity testing specific for CRM 197 at the stage of seed or harvest and  the  absence  of  routine  animal  toxicity  testing  warranted  the  introduction  of  CRM 197 specific identity  testing  at  the  stage  of  the  pre-starting  material.  The  company  confirms  that  each  batch  of purified CRM 197 will be tested for potential residual enzymatic activity. Fermentation and harvesting Three  frozen  stock  vials  of  the  working  seed  are  typically  used  to  start  a  fermentation  batch.  The content  is  transferred  to  soy  peptone  agar  slants,  which  are  inoculated.  The  purity  and  identity  is checked  at  the  end  of  cultivation.  The  contents  of  each  slant  are  transferred  to  CY  medium  and incubated until the OD590nm reaches an optimum value. Again purity and identity is checked at the end of the culture. The culture is aseptically inoculated in fermenters filled with sterile CY medium. The fermenter is operated and samples are taken at approximately 2 hours intervals for determination of OD590 nm. The culture is then used to inoculate another fermenter containing CY medium. The culture is tested for purity (colony morphology,  growth  on enriched media)  and identity (Gram  stain, latex agglutination test). The  fermentation  broth  is  transferred  to  a  harvest  tank  and  cooled.  From  the  tank,  the  cells  are separated from the broth by filtration. The permeate is further filtered through a 0.22 µ m filter, which is tested for integrity after use. The cell waste is heat sterilized and disposed of. The fermentation of Corynebacterium diphtheriae C7 (ß197) and the corresponding in-process testing is adequate. (b) Purification Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  filtered  culture  broth  is  diafiltered  against  phosphate  buffer.  The  protein  is  then  precipitated through the addition of an appropriate reagent. The precipitated protein is captured on a depth filter and  stored  at  5°C.  The  protein  is  eluted  from  the  filter  using  phosphate  buffer  and  then  again diafiltered. The protein is then further purified by column chromatography.

The CRM197 fraction is concentrated by ultrafiltration and the protein content and purity is tested. A cryoprotectant  is  added  to  the  CRM197  solution  and  agitated.  The  solution  is  membrane  filtered

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

through a 0.22 µ m filter and stored in polypropylene bottles at -65 °C. The solution is tested according to  the  specifications.  CRM197  solution  is  also  lyophilized  in  preparation  for  production  of  certain serotype conjugates. Lyophilized CRM197 is also stored at -65 ° C.

The purification process of CRM 197 and the corresponding in process and release testing is adequate.

<!-- image -->

(c) Impurities No specific study for the diphtheria CRM197 carrier protein has been submitted, but the company refers to the batch-wise testing of the carrier protein. As can be seen earlier in the report, the DNA content is measured  batch  wise.  Endotoxins  are  also  controlled.  The  batch  wise  testing  also  includes  a  SECHPLC test for purity. All batches are tested for absence of toxicity reversion. Characterisation The physico-chemical characteristics of CRM197 have been investigated using SDS-PAGE, MALDITOF  MS,  isoelectric  focusing  and  amino  acid  analysis.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  SDS-PAGE demonstrated a single major band and that the IEF showed equivalent migration pattern of the major as well as the minor bands for each of the samples. Biological  characterisation  includes  a  comparison  of  enzymatic  activity  in  CRM197  and  native diphtheria toxin. The remaining enzymatic activity in a number of CRM197 batches was shown to be negligible. (d) Batch analysis Batch analysis data are demonstrative of a consistent production process and are compatible with the specifications for CRM197. (e) Pneumococcal saccharide-CRM197 conjugates Activation/conjugation process The saccharides are activated and then conjugated by reductive amination. Each serotype is processed individually. Two different conjugation reaction solvents are used depending on the serotype. In general, the description of the production process for the activated pneumococcal polysaccharides and  the  conjugation  and  the  corresponding  in-process  controls  and  release  tests  is  adequate.  The results from the analysis (of free saccharide and protein) of a number of manufacturing scale batches and stability results suggest that these limits may be revised with further manufacturing experience. The control tests and specifications of the conjugates are adequate. The main impurities from the activation of the saccharides and the conjugation with the carrier are adequately monitored in the batch control. Activation reaction residuals are effectively removed in the ultrafiltration steps. No control of this potential impurity is deemed necessary. (g) Batch analysis Batch analysis data are demonstrative of a consistent production process and are provisionally compatible with the specifications for all the activated pneumococcal polysaccharides. Certain specifications may be revised after further manufacturing experience Other ingredients The sodium chloride solution is membrane filtered (0.22 µ m) and tested for sterility prior to use. As the finished product cannot be sterilised, the procedures in place and approved by the inspectors are considered to be satisfactory to ensure that the microbial quality of all ingredients is optimal . Medicinal product no longer authorised

During  the  development  of  the  product,  the  adjuvant  was  changed  from  a  commercial  aluminium phosphate to an in-house produced aluminium phosphate. Use of the in-house aluminium phosphate gave  an  improvement  in  the  batch-to-batch  consistency.  The  in-house  adjuvant  is  sterilized  by  a validated steam-in-place method.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Product development and finished product

The final bulk is prepared by mixing the calculated amount of each conjugate with saline. Formulation of the finished product involves dilution, mixing and sterile filtration. Sterile pyrogen-free aluminium phosphate gel is then added aseptically

The vaccine is then aseptically filled into sterile vials or syringes before final labelling and packaging. The stoppers are sterilised at 122°C for 30 minutes and vials are sterilised in a laminar flow tunnel at 360°C for 30 minutes. The syringes are also pre-sterilised. Validation  of  the  formulation  and  filling  processes  has  been  performed  with  three  full-scale consistency  batches  to  ensure  that  the  process  is  capable  of  consistently  producing  product  of acceptable  quality.  The  data  include  correct  addition  of  components,  binding  of  adjuvant  with conjugates for different mixing and holding times, homogeneity of final bulk and holding times prior to filtration. The aseptic processing has been appropriately validated. A validation report for the sterile filtration is submitted. The validation of the sterilisation of the stoppers and vials is satisfactory. The filling procedure for the vials  has  been  appropriately  validated  with  regard  to  aseptic  conditions  and  the  capability  of consistently producing product of acceptable quality, including filling volumes. The  syringe presentation  will  be  available  on  the  EU  market  after  the  appropriate  validation  studies  have  been submitted and approved. · Validation of analytical methods Validation of assays used for the routine control of the protein carrier, pneumococcal polysaccharides, activated saccharides, and the manufacturer has carried out conjugates and the validation reports are included in the appendices to the documentation. Endotoxin testing has been carried out according to the  European  Pharmacopoeia  method  and  sterility  testing  has  been  conducted  according  to  21CFR 610.12. Extensive process validation reports for diphtheria CRM197 carrier protein, pneumococcal saccharide, activated saccharide and pneumococcal polysaccharide-CRM197 conjugate are presented. · Viral safety Prevenar  conjugate  vaccine  is  composed  of  components  derived  from  bacterial  fermentation  only. There is no living mammalian cell substrate involved in the process and therefore no potential for the propagation of viruses related to human disease. · Animal-derived materials Reagents of animal origin are used during preparation. The company sources these materials in accordance with the appropriate guidelines (FDA and CPMP) designed to minimize the risks associated with these materials. With regard to the European guideline on BSE, these materials are from Category IV tissues. Certificates of analysis and/or correspondence from the applicant's suppliers show that the donor animals come from countries where no cases of BSE have been reported. Information  has  been  provided  in  the  dossier  demonstrating  that  the  medicinal  product  is  made  in compliance  with  the  CPMP  Note  for  Guidance  on  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting  animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via medicinal products. Medicinal product no longer authorised

One can agree  with  the  company's  claim  that  risk  of  transmission  of  viruses  or  TSE  presented  by Prevenar is negligible mainly due to the selection of the source materials. A number of non-validated production steps probably contribute to minimising the risk of transmitting viral/TSE-agents.

- Control tests on the finished product

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Formulated bulk

The following control tests on the formulated bulk are considered to be adequate:

- -identity testing of CRM197 and individual saccharides
- -sterility (Ph. Eur.)
- -aluminium content by Direct Current Plasma Emission Spectroscopy

| Test attribute                             | Test method               |
|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Appearance                                 | Visual inspection         |
| CRM 197 and individual saccharide identity | Slot Blot (GM B582)       |
| Sterility test                             | Ph Eur 2.6.1 (GM B207-01) |
| Endotoxin test                             | Ph Eur 2.6.14 (GM B524)   |

-total saccharide content by the anthrone assay -total protein content by the Lowry method -endotoxin testing by the LAL gel clot method Type-specific  nephelometry  as  an  in-process  control  is  also  carried  out  to  ensure  that  a  minimum amount of each saccharide is present. Nephelometry is used as an in-process test in conjunction with the total protein and saccharide assays to ensure that all conjugates are present Batch  analysis  data  are  demonstrative  of  a  consistent  production  process  and  are  provisionally compatible with the specifications for the formulated bulk. Final container Release tests for final vials and syringes The  Ph  Eur  monograph  on  human  vaccines  requires  that  the  degree  of  adsorption  to  the  adjuvant should  be  tested.  The  company  has  provided  approved  monographs  for  total  saccharide  and  total protein content. The testing  of  aluminium  content as part of the final container routine release testing will continue until a suitable in-process correlate (e.g. transmittance) is validated and introduced through a variation to the Marketing Authorisation. Although the Ph Eur monograph on pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine requires pyrogen testing of the  finished  product,  the  proposal  of  the  company  to  use  LAL  testing  appears  reasonable.  The deviation has been supported by data from multiple commercial batches showing that the requirements of the pyrogen assay will be fulfilled when tested. The test for abnormal toxicity is also not included in the routine release tests. The omission is justified with data from development batches in mind. The removal of the rabbit immunogenicity test has been accepted. The test is not considered to be useful for a routine quality control test due to the observed variability of the immune response among animals.  Therefore,  other  immunological  and  physical-chemical  tests  are  chosen  for  routine  release tests, which is in line with other conjugated vaccines. Batch  analysis  data  are  demonstrative  of  a  consistent  production  process  and  are  provisionally compatible with the specifications for the final containers. The controls test methods have been validated adequately. Stability of the Product Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Stability of the active substances

Monovalent  Conjugate  concentrates: additional  data  submitted  during  the  procedure  allows  an extension  of  the  approved  shelf-life  of  12  months  for  each  of  the  pneumococcal  polysaccharide serotypes to 18 months when stored at either 2 - 8°C or &lt; -20°C.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(i)

The  company  has  committed  to  a  stability  program  including  data  on  the  suitability  of  the  ageing carrier protein CRM197, pneumococcal polysaccharide batches and activated pneumococcal polysaccharide batches for use in the conjugation process. Reports will be submitted to the CPMP on an annual basis.

· Stability of finished product Formulated bulk: the proposed holding time of six months at 5 ± 3 o C between formulation and final filling is acceptable. Final container: The  stability  of  Prevenar  filled  into  final  containers  (single  dose  vials  and  pre-filled  syringes)  is being evaluated in both real time (2-8°C) and accelerated (35-37°C) stability programs. The results from the real time study in vials demonstrate that % binding of protein and saccharide, pH and rabbit immunogenicity remain constant over the proposed 24 month shelf life. Vial: A shelf life when stored at 5± 3 o C as indicated in the SPC has been approved. Syringe: accelerated stability studies document similar behaviour of vials and syringes but no real time results  are  available  for  the  syringe  presentation  at  submission.  The  conjugates  appear  to  be intrinsically stable. A shelf life when stored at 5± 3 o C as indicated in the SPC has been approved. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The pharmaceutical development has been adequately described and validates the current composition. The method of preparation has been adequately described in the file and the production process  has  been  adequately  validated.  The  control  tests  and  specifications  of  active  substances (Pneumococcal Saccharide-CRM197 Conjugates) are considered adequate. The bacterial strains used to produce the carrier protein CRM197 and the pneumococcal polysaccharides  are  handled  using  a  cell-bank  system.  In  general,  the  description  of  the  cell-bank systems and their testing are adequate. However, the identity test for the CRM 197 seeds is specific for C. diphtheriae in general and not for the production strain. Batch  analysis  data  are  demonstrative  of  a  consistent  production  process  and  are  provisionally compatible with the specifications set for the pneumococcal polysaccharide-CRM197 conjugates. The control tests on the formulated bulk are considered to be adequate, as well as the tests on the filled finished product. A shelf life when stored at 5± 3 o C as indicated in the SPC has been approved. Prevenar  conjugate  vaccine  is  composed  of  components  derived  from  bacterial  fermentation  only. There is no living mammalian cell substrate involved in the process and therefore no potential for the propagation of viruses related to human disease. Reagents  of  animal  origin  are  used  during  preparation.  The  company  sources  these  materials  in accordance  with  the  appropriate  guidelines  (FDA  and  CPMP)  designed  to  minimize  the  risks associated with these materials. The risk of transmission of viruses or TSE presented by Prevenar  is considered to be negligible mainly due to the selection of the source materials. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 2. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

Unconjugated bacterial polysaccharides (such as PnC) are generally T-cell independent immunogens. Administration  in  the  native  state  induces  a  serum  antibody  response,  which  cannot  be  boosted  by subsequent  injections.  Moreover,  native  polysaccharide  vaccines  are  poor  immunogens  in  children. The conjugation of PnC polysaccharides with various carrier proteins has been shown to enhance their

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

immunogenicity, with a booster response indicating the induction of an immunological memory and the involvement of T-helper cells.

## Pharmacodynamics

## · Immunogenicity in rabbits

Opsonic antibody testing (complement-mediated opsonisation of pneumococcus by human polymorphonuclear leukocytes) has been carried out with human antisera and is thus evaluated in the clinical  part  of  the  documentation.  Regarding  antisera  from  animals,  the  in  vitro  opsonophagocytic activity of antisera collected from immunised rabbits with antibodies directed against three (14, 19F and  23F)  of  the seven  serotypes in Prevenar, was  tested. The  rabbit opsonic  assay  results demonstrated,  for  each  of  the  three  serotypes,  for  the  week  7  post-immunization  antisera  a  good

Various studies were conducted in the rabbit to test the immunogenicity of a number of pneumococcal vaccine formulations, in addition to the 7-valent final formulations proposed for marketing. Some of these studies also contain data about systemic toxicity. The route of immunisation was via s.c., thus, not  the  intended  clinical  route.  The  clinical  route  of  i.m.  was  used  for  immunogenicity  analysis performed as part of the repeat dose toxicity study described below. ELISA was used in all studies to determine serum antibodies levels to each of the serotype. · Dose-IgG response relationship The ratio between pre and postvaccination titres (week 4) were calculated for each serotype following two  immunisations  with  the  conjugated  7-valent  vaccine  (adjuvant  present)  in  the  range  0.01-2 µ g/dose or 0.02-4 µ g/dose (for 6B). A dose-dependent increase in IgG level that significantly levelled off with increasing dose increment was demonstrated for most serotypes. A depression of response (20-40%) at the top  dose  was  determined  for  serotypes  6B,  19F  and  23F.  Similar  high-dose  effects were  obtained  in  other  experiments.  Because  the  rabbit  model  may  not  be  predictive  of  human response (see part II assessment) clinical data were used for the determination of the optimal vaccine dose. The order of response (ratio 4 week GMT/week 0 GMT) to each serotype in nine clinical lots (2 µ g/dose or 4 µ g/dose for 6B) was as follows: 18C (1387) &gt; 4 (962) = 23F (939) &gt; 9V (656) &gt; 19F (353) &gt; 6B (292) &gt; 14 (168). · Demonstration of a booster response In an immunogenicity study, the antibody response to heptavalent PnC vaccine (same composition and dose level as Prevenar™) was evaluated in rabbits immunised at weeks 0 and 2. The results, showed that  the  antibody  response  is  much  more  pronounced  after  the  second  immunisation  (i.e.  booster effect), for each of the 7 serotypes. · Comparison of immunogenicity of conjugated and unconjugated PnC vaccine Another  immunogenicity  study  was  conducted  to  evaluate  the  antibody  response  of  rabbits  to  an heptavalent PnC conjugate vaccine, compared with a non-conjugate mixture of the 7 polysaccharides, either alone or with free CRM197 (but non conjugated). The immunogenicity of the 23-valent licensed vaccine  Pnu-Imune  23  was  also  tested.  The  composition  and  dose  level  of  polysaccharides  and adjuvant in the 7-valent vaccines used in this study were the same as in Prevenar™. Pnu-Imune 23 vaccine contained 10 GLYPH&lt;31&gt;g of each polysaccharide serotype unconjugated and without adjuvant. These  results  clearly  demonstrate  that  the  conjugation  of  the  polysaccharides  to  the  protein  carrier CRM197 strongly increased the antibody levels for each of the 7 serotypes. · Requirement for aluminium phosphate adjuvant The effect of aluminium phosphate as adjuvant on the antibody response of rabbits to 7 monovalent conjugate PnC vaccines (each containing 5 mcg of saccharide) was evaluated. The results showed an enhancing effect of the adjuvant on the antibody response to 6 of the 7 serotypes present in Prevenar™ (not for 9V), after both one or 2 doses of vaccine. It was thus decided to include aluminium phosphate as adjuvant in the Prevenar™ vaccine. The reasons for this enhancement of immunogenicity are not yet clear. · Functional antibody test Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

opsonisation  activity  (low  colony  growth)  compared  with  the  corresponding  preimmune  (control) serum. Since rabbit data may not be predictive of human response, testing was performed with clinical sera as reported in part IV.

## · Immunogenicity in mice

Prevenar has not been tested in mice. Instead data on IgG titres following one and two vaccinations with a nona-valent pneumococcal vaccine (0.1-1 µ g/dose or 0.2-2 µ g/dose for 6B), including the seven serotypes in Prevenar, are presented. These data demonstrated clear increases in serotype-specific IgG titres following two injections compared with one injection. A clear positive adjuvant effect was also noted for all serotypes after the second injection. An apparent dose-related increase in response was observed for serotypes 4 and 14 but not for the other five serotypes. The order of serotype potency in the  presence  of  adjuvant  (0.1 µ g/dose)  was  different  from  that  obtained  in  rabbit;  9V  &gt;  6B  (0.2 µ g/dose) &gt; 4 &gt; 19F &gt; 18C &gt; 14 &gt; 23F. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No specific data are presented in preclinical studies about the possible interactions between the PnC vaccine and other co-administered vaccines or medicinal products. Clinical findings are summarised in Part IV. · General and safety pharmacology programme No specific data about safety pharmacology has been provided. The lack of undesirable pharmacodynamic  effects  of  the  vaccine  is  considered  as  sufficiently  demonstrated  by  data  from toxicity studies, data from toxicity with related vaccines and the clinical safety data. However,  the  possible  induction  of  cross-reacting  (auto-)  antibodies  by  the  PnC  vaccine  and  the possible toxicity induced by the carrier protein CRM197 have been considered and are detailed under 'Toxicology'. Pharmacokinetics The lack of pharmacokinetic studies has been justified on the basis of the CPMP Note for Guidance, and has not been submitted for the following reasons: -the vaccine is intended for infrequent administration, at low dosage, over a short period of time -the adjuvant used and the route of administration are not new Toxicology · Single dose toxicity: No single dose toxicity study was conducted with the final product of Prevenar. · Repeat dose toxicity: No repeat dose toxicity study has been conducted with the final product of Prevenar. Medicinal product no longer authorised

However data from a 3-month repeat dose toxicity study in rabbits (5+5/dose) receiving a total of five intramuscular  injections,  given  at  three  week  intervals,  of  control  vehicle  (saline  and  aluminium phosphate/monophosphoryl lipid A, MPL, as adjuvant) or a CRM197-conjugated 9-valent pneumococcal vaccine (+serotypes 1 and 5) at a single dose-level of 2 or 4 µ g (6B) in the presence of aluminium phosphate (study SVT95-0001) were submitted. An additional four groups of rabbits were included in the study in order to investigate effects of adjuvant. Based on body weight, the margin of exposure at first injection, rabbit (at start 3-4 months old and weighed 2.2-2.3 kg) versus 6-week aged infant  (body  weight  of  approx.  4  kg)  is  only  about  1-2x.  In  the  in-life  phase,  clinical  examination, temperature and body weight recording, urine collection and blood sampling at various time-points for clinical  chemistry  (including  creatine  kinase  (CPK)  analysis),  hematology  and  ELISA  IgG  analysis were made (for IgG data see above). The pathology comprised of weighing and gross examination of spleen,  kidney,  liver,  lung  and  heart,  bone  marrow  histology  and  histopathology  of  injection  site biopsies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The rabbits (4-7 months of age) appeared to be immunologically mature (significant booster effect) in contrast  to  that  expected  in  the  proposed  target  group.  According  to  the  presently  available  data, besides  events  possibly  related  to  injection-trauma  (i.e.  injection  site  blood  and/or  hematomas), possible treatment-related effects were; inflammation at the injection site (subcutaneous cellulitis and muscle myositis), similar incidence and total severity scoring between the vehicle adjuvant (Al and MPL) control group and the vaccine-test group.

<!-- image -->

An  elevation  in  serum  CPK  was  noted  two  days  after  the  first  injection  compared  with  preimmunisation levels in both the Al/MPL-vehicle (365 ± 94 → 505 ± 201 IU/L) and the treatment-group (391 ± 153 → 819 ± 247 IU/L). No elevation in CPK was observed at the next sampling occasion on day 7 or at any other time-point, including sampling two days after the last injection. The study was stated to have not been conducted in strict accordance with GLP. The usefulness of this study  is  questionable  since  there  are  major  deficiencies.  However  these  deficiencies  may  be considered to be outweighed by the clinical experience gathered so far. · Carcinogenicity and genotoxicity: No studies have been submitted for the following reasons: -according to the vaccination schedule proposed for the product (a maximum  of 4 administrations in young children) , the exposure will be minimal in time; -the  components  of  the  vaccine  are  naturally-occurring  products  of  bacteria  which  may  be carried  in  the  human  nasopharyngeal  tract ;  no  evidence  for  any  mutagenic  or  carcinogenic effect has been reported after carriage or infection with the pneumococcal species ; -no evidence for any mutagenic or carcinogenic effect has never been reported after exposure to other  approved  related  products  (pneumococcal  conjugated  or  not  conjugated  polysaccharide vaccines). The justification provided by the applicant was considered to be acceptable. Moreover the CPMP Note for Guidance on vaccines states, « genotoxicity and carcinogenicity studies are normally not needed ». · Reproduction Toxicity No specific study is presented in the file for the following reasons: -the target population of the vaccine (children aged up to 2 years of age) does not include males or females of reproductive age ; -the  vaccine  contains  non-living  antigens,  which  will  normally  not  pose  any  problem  for  the reproduction ; -there  is  considerable  experience  about  the  safety  of  other  pneumococcal  polysaccharide vaccines to support the tolerance of such preparations even in the age of sexual maturity. · Local Tolerance: No tolerance  data  are  presented  with  the  intended  product  Prevenar™.  The  local  tolerance  of  a  9valent  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  was  evaluated  in  the  same  study  as  that  presented  for  the repeated-dose toxicity. The immunogenicity studies show that only reported injection site reaction was small nodules in 2 mice out of 950 mice observed. No adverse local reaction was reported during immunogenicity routine studies in rabbits, performed with the 7-valent PnC. · Immunotoxicity studies: Induction of cross-reacting antibodies Medicinal product no longer authorised

The anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) IgG assay is routinely used to detect the presence of autoantibodies in the sera of patients. A study was conducted in 30 healthy adults (males and females ; 18 to 60 years old) to compare Prevenar™ vaccine to Pnu-Imune  23 for their ability to induce autoantibodies. Each adult  received  0.5  ml  of  vaccine  and  blood  samples  were  collected  before  and  one  month  after  the injection. The results of the ANA test showed that immunisation with Prevenar™ did not increase the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

levels  of  antibodies  reactive  to  the  nuclei  of  human  cells  when  tested  1  month  after  vaccine administration.

## Potential toxicity of CRM 197

The  CRM197  protein  used  as  carrier  is  derived  from C.  diphteriae wild-type  toxin  by  single  point mutation. The reversion to wild type with production of active toxin during manufacture of CRM197 is possible, in theory. Each batch of CRM197 is monitored for the presence of active toxin by measuring the ADP-ribosyl transferase activity. Additionally, other tests (cytotoxicity in HeLa cells or Vero cells in  vitro ,  lethality  in  guinea  pigs in  vivo ,  abnormal  toxicity  test)  were  used  to  demonstrate  the  nontoxicity of CRM197 during the development of the production process, but these tests are considered to be less sensitive to detect the active toxin than the ADP-ribosyl transferase assay.

-

Sufficient data have been provided to demonstrate the safety of the product. The safety studies were not always strictly GLP compliant and were not always conducted with the final formulation, but the preparations used in these experiments were closely related to Prevenar™ formulation, so that they seem  appropriate  and  relevant  to  evaluate  the  toxicity  of  the  intended  product  and  of  all  its components.

Published data have suggested that CRM197 mutant has significantly greater specific nuclease activity in vitro than that of the wild-type molecule (Bruce et al, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:2995:1990). The risk  for  the  conjugated  or  the  free  CRM197 protein  to  affect  DNA  integrity  in  cells  likely  to  be relatively more exposed to the mutant protein (e.g. cells at the injection site and antigen-processing cells (APC, T and B cells)), has been considered. It is argued that endonucleases are present normally in the human body (with highest levels occurring in the pancreas, blood and platelets) and that low levels of endonuclease, if present in CRM197  (finding disputed by others in the field), would not be expected to have any clinical effect. The human safety profiles of the licensed vaccines HibTITER, Meningitec and 7VPnC, all of which contain CRM197 as a carrier protein, support the lack of toxicity of this protein. Potential toxicity of process-derived residuals Residual cyanide is expected to be present as sodium cyanide in the vaccine suspension. The residual specification of ≤ 5 ng cyanide per dose is 500,000 times lower than the ATSDR oral daily minimal risk  level  (MRL)  value  for  sodium  cyanide  of  0.05  mg/kg/day  (a  factor  of  100  to  reproduction toxicity). The safety margin is considered to be comfortable. Great safety margins to LD50 values in animals or LDLo value in humans were also estimated. The applicant also refers to the clinical safety data for 7VPnC and HibTITER, which also has the same specification for cyanide. DMSO is categorised by the ICH as a Class 3 solvent and has been administered orally, intravenously or topically for a wide range of medical medications. Category 3 solvents are recognised, as having low  toxic  potential,  with  daily  exposure  amounts  of  up  to  50  mg  considered  acceptable  without justification. The residual DMSO specification of &lt;16 µ g/dose is many times lower than the limit for Class 3 solvents. · Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk Assessment: The applicant for the following reasons presents no specific study: -the vaccine contains an established active ingredient (pneumococcal conjugated polysaccharides) with no known environmental implication ; -the vaccine is proposed for administration at a very low dose level and at a small number of injections ; there is no evidence for elimination of the active ingredient from the body after injection ; -the vaccine does not contain any live organisms or ingredients derived from recombinant DNA technology. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Several multidose studies have been conducted in rabbits and mice without any evidence of systemic or local toxic effects. The only observed effect was transient local irritation and inflammation at the injection site. The use of a closely related vaccine showed a good local tolerance.

The absence of reproductive toxicity, genotoxicity, and carcinogenicity studies is acceptable according to  the  CPMP  guidelines  on  vaccines.  Moreover,  additional  routine  safety  tests  applied  during development and production of the vaccine are provided and confirm the non-toxicity of the vaccine components.

D118-P3 and D118-P7: Two double-blind controlled studies of the safety and immunogenicity of the 7VPnC vaccine and a Meningococcal Group C conjugate vaccine given at 2, 4 and 6 months followed by a booster dose at 12-15 months.

The  immunogenicity  of  the  vaccine  for  each  serotype  has  been  also  well  demonstrated  by  a  large number  of  studies,  especially  in  rabbits.  The  enhancing  role  of  the  adjuvant  has  been  shown. Protection against a challenge with the pathogen was not shown in animals as recommended in the CPMP guidelines, but the protection can be assumed from the in vitro opsonic activity of both rabbit and human antibodies. No environmental risk is expected for this product. 3. Clinical aspects The clinical development programme for the pneumococcal saccharide conjugated vaccine, adsorbed (7VPnC) included a dose finding study (D92-P5), a phase I study in adults (D118-P2) and 10 primary immunogenicity studies in children (US D118-P3, P7, P8, P12, P16 and EU D118-P6, P502, P501, P503, P809). The trials established vaccination schedules, but also evaluated concomitant administration  of  other  routine  paediatric  vaccines,  booster  dose,  consistency  of  manufacture  and immunogenicity in older infants. In addition supportive data from several trials [D118-P9, D118-P12 (Amendments 2,4), D118-P15 (Amendment 1), D118-P16 and D118-P18] on the immunogenicity of the 7VPnC vaccine in older children were submitted. The efficacy of the  7VPnC vaccine against invasive pneumoccocal disease as well as against otitis media and pneumonia was assessed in a large-scale study (D118-P8), the Northern California Kaiser Permanente (NCKP) trial, which was performed between October 1995 and August 1998. A total of 37,868 infants were enrolled, whereof 18,297 received 7VPnC and 18,941 received an investigational meningococcal C conjugate vaccine (MnCC). A complete report on the efficay trial (FinOM D118P809) in Finnish children of 7VPnC for prevention of acute otitis media due to vaccine serotypes was provided during the evaluation procedure. All study protocols were designed according to the GCP guidelines. Complete reports of 12 clinical studies have been presented in this application. D92-P5: a  model and dose finding study in infants using pentavalent conjugate vaccine for primary vaccination  and  a  plain  polysaccharide  vaccine  as  a  booster  to  evaluate  the  induction  of  immune memory. Phase I studies D118-P2: a double-blind study in adults to compare the immunogenicity and acute safety of a single dose of 7VPnC vaccine with a licensed polysaccharide vaccine. Phase II immunogenicity studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

D118-P12: a  double-blind trial to compare the safety and immunogenicity of 3 pilot lots of 7VPnC vaccine given at 2, 4 and 6 months of age. A complementary report (Amendments 2, 4) evaluated the safety and immunogenicity of 7VPnC vaccine given at 7, 9 and 15-18 months.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

D118-P16: a  double-blind trial to compare the safety and immunogenicity of a full scale production lot of 7VPnC vaccine to a pilot lot of vaccine given at 2, 4 and 6 months of age.

## Phase II immunogenicity studies in older children

D118-P9: a  trial  to  evaluate  the  safety and immunogenicity of a single dose 7VPnC vaccine (2 lots administered on a double-blind randomised basis) given to 15 to 24 months old toddlers.

- P809)

- Accelerated schedule:

- 2, 3, 4 months (EU D118-P502, P501)

- Other schedule

- 3, 4, 5 months (EU D118-P503)

- Booster vaccination: 4 th dose at 12-15 months of age (US D118-P3, P7, P8, EU D118-P6, P809)

- Schedule in older unvaccinated infants: (D118-P9, P12, P15, P16, P18)

D118-P15: a  double-blind  study  of  the  efficacy,  immunogenicity,  safety  and  tolerability  of  7VPnC compared to MnCC vaccine in Navajo and Apache Indian infants (number planned=18,000). A report (Amendment 1) on a subset of children evaluated the immunogenicity of the 7VPnC vaccine and a Meningococcal  Group  C  conjugate  vaccine  given  as  2  doses  2  months  apart  to  children  12  to  24 months. D118-P18: an open-label, non-controlled out-patient study of the safety, tolerability and immunogenicity  of  7VPnC  in  children  between  1  and  9  years  of  age.  Children  below  24  months received 2 doses 7VPnC with 2 months interval and those &gt;24 months received one dose. Immunogenicity phase II trials in Europe D118-P6: an open label study to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of the 7VPnC vaccine given at 2, 4 and 6 months followed by a booster of either the 7VPnC vaccine or a polysaccharide vaccine administered on a double-blind randomised basis. D118-P501: a  randomised  trial  controlled  immunogenicity  study  performed  in  France.  The  study group  received  7VPnC+DTP/IPV/Hib  at  2,  3  and  4  months  of  age  and  the  control  group  received DTP/IPV/Hib alone. D118-P502: a  single-blind  controlled  study  to  assess  the  safety  and  immunogenicity  of  the  7VPnC vaccine mixed immediately prior to injection with lyophilised Hib vaccine given at 2, 3 and 4 months. D118-P503: an  immunogenicity  study  performed  in  Germany  of  a  DTPa-IPV/PRP-T  combination administered alone or at the same time as the 7VPnC at 3, 4 and 5 months of age. Phase III study D118-P8 , Northern California Kaiser Permanente trial: a double-blind controlled study of the safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of the 7VPnC vaccine and safety of a Meningococcal Group C conjugate vaccine in infants 2, 4 and 6 months with a booster at 12-15 months. Supplementary phase III study D118-P809 , FinOM trial: a randomised double-blinded multicenter cohort study of Finnish children to evaluate the efficacy of 2 heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PncCRM and PncOMPC) in the prevention of acute otitis media due to the vaccine pneumococcal serotypes. Both vaccines were compared with the same  control  vaccine  (HepB  vaccine).  Only the  results  evaluating  the  PncCRM were obtained. The majority of submitted studies were performed in the USA. Altogether five trials were performed in Europe: 2 in Finland (D118-P6, D118-P809), 1 in UK (D118-P502), 1 in France (D118-P501) and 1 in Germany (D118-P503). The vaccination schedules used were: Standard schedule: 2, 4, 6 months (US D118-P3, P7, P8, P12, P16 and EU D118-P6, Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- 7-11 month-old: 3 doses (1 month interval between first 2 doses and the 3 rd dose after &gt;2 months);   12-23 month-old: 2 doses  (2 month interval);  &gt;24 month-old: 1 dose
- Compatibility with other childhood vaccines (D118-P3, P7, P12, P16, P502, P501, P503)

## Overview of controlled trials

| Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy   | Controlled trials with reference therapy                                             |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study                                      | Number enrolled                            | Schedule (months)                          | N of doses                                 | Control                                    | Blinding                                   | Concomitant vaccines                                                                 |
| D118-P2                                    | 30 adults                                  | 18-60 years                                | 1                                          | PNU- IMUNE  23                            | Double-blind                               |                                                                                      |
| D118-P3                                    | Primary 212 Booster 122                    | 2, 4, 6 12, 15                             | 4                                          | MnCC                                       | Double-blind                               | DTP-HbOC, OPV, HbOC or MMR                                                           |
| D118-P7                                    | Primary 302 Booster 211                    | 2, 4, 6 12-15                              | 4                                          | MnCC                                       | Double-blind                               | DTP-HbOC, OPV, HepB, DTaP + HbOC                                                     |
| D118-P8 (Kaiser efficacy trial)            | 37 868                                     | 2, 4, 6 12-15                              | 4                                          | MnCC                                       | Double-blind                               | DTP-HbOC or DTaP + HbOC, OPV or IPV, HepB DTP-HbOC, DTaP+ HbOC, Varicellae, OPV ,MMR |
| D118-P502                                  | 360                                        | 2, 3, 4                                    | 3                                          | DTPw/lyoHib                                | Single-blind                               | DTP, HbOC, OPV                                                                       |
| D118-P15 Amendment I                       | 204                                        | 12-17 18-23 ≥ 24                           | 1 or 2 1 or 2 1                            | MnCC MnCC MnCC                             | Double-blind longer                        | DTaP, Hib, MMR, Varicella                                                            |
| D118-P501                                  | 160                                        | 2, 3, 4                                    | 3                                          | DTP/IPV/Hib                                | Single-blind                               | DTP/IPV/Hib                                                                          |
| D118-P503                                  | 200                                        | 3, 4, 5                                    | 3                                          | DTaP/IPV/ Hib                              | Single-blind                               | DTaP/IPV/Hib                                                                         |
| D118-P809                                  | 1662                                       | 2, 4, 6 12                                 | 3 1                                        | HepB                                       | Double-blind                               | DTP/Hib/IPV                                                                          |

| Study                                       | Number enrolled   | Schedule (months)                   | N of doses   | Control   | Blinding                | Concomitant vaccines            |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------|--------------|-----------|-------------------------|---------------------------------|
| D92-P5 (5VPnC)                              | 400 130           | 2, 4, 6 15-18                       | 3 1          | none none | Double-blind Open-label | DTP-HbOC DTP-HbOC               |
| D118-P6                                     | 60 58             | 2, 4, 6, 15 product                 | 3 1          | none none | Open-label Double-blind | DTP-HbOC, IPV, MMR              |
| D118-P12 (lot-to-lot consistency)           | 342               | 2, 4, 6                             | 3            | none      | Double-blind            | DTaP + HbOC, OPV or IPV         |
| D118-P16 (bridging pilot to manufacturing ) | 654               | 2, 4, 6                             | 3            | none      | Double-blind            | DTaP + HbOC, HepB, IPV          |
| D118-P9                                     | 60                | 15-24                               | 1            | none      | none                    | none                            |
| D118-P12 Amendments 2, 4                    | 60                | 7, 9 15-18                          | 2 or 3 2     | none      | none                    | none DTaP + HbOC or DTaP - HbOC |
| D118-P18                                    | 300               | 12-18 18-24 >24 <36 >36 <60 >5 <10y | 2 2 1 1 1    | none      | Single-blind            | none                            |

Overview of non-controlled trials Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Assays

The immunogenicity of the 7VPnC was evaluated by measuring the antibody response elicited by each vaccine pneumoccocal serotype. The immune response to other concomitantly administered vaccines was assessed by quantitation of antibodies to each component; responses between vaccine groups that received 7VPnC, MnCC, or no investigational vaccine were compared. The evaluation of the immune

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

response of subjects immunised with the 7-valent pneumoccocal conjugate vaccine used two methods: ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay) to measure the quantitative IgG levels to each serotype and  OPA (opsonophagocytic assay) to estimate  the  functional  activity  of  the  antibodies.  All  serum samples for immunogenicity analyses were tested blinded.



The evaluation of the immune response of subjects immunised with the routine paediatric vaccines used  established  methods  i.e.  standard  EIAs  for  measuring  antibodies  to  tetanus  toxoid,  diphtheria toxoid,  H.  influenzae  type  b  polysaccharide,  Hepatitis  B,  pertussis  (pertactin,  pertussis  toxin, filamentous haemagglutinin, fimbrial proteins) and virus neutralisation assay for polio (1, 2, 3). The percent of subjects achieving defined antibody concentrations were calculated for each antigen. For the control MnCC vaccine, a standard EIA and a functional antibody assay, meningococcal group C serum bactericidal assay (SBA), were used.

The ELISA method developed by the company (WLV assay) is validated and standardised and has been shown to demonstrate specificity, linearity, precision and accuracy with infant sera. All serologic data were analysed in one Wyeth Lederle laboratory in Rochester, NY, except for samples from D118P6, which were analysed by an ELISA (KTL assay) at the Finnish National Public Institute. The lower limit of the ELISA test (WLV assay) has been established at 0.01 µ g/ml. The ELISA measured the IgG antibody of each individual subject to each of the seven serotypes contained in the vaccine. The antibody concentrations one month following the third dose and one month following the booster dose were  presented  as  geometric  mean  concentration  (GMCs),  percentages  of  subjects  who  achieved antibody  concentrations  of  at  least  0.15µ g/ml  and  0.50 µ g/ml,  and  reverse  cumulative  distribution curves  for  each  study  by  serotype.  Geometric  mean  concentrations  (GMCs)  were  obtained  from computing  the  arithmetic  mean  of  log-transformed  (natural  logarithm)  antibody  concentrations  and then exponentiating this value, because historically antibody concentrations have followed a lognormal distribution. For this application, the working definition of the protective antibody concentration was set at 0.15 µ g/ml,  based  on  the  results  obtained  in  the  Kaiser  efficacy  trial.  It  was  based  on  the  estimate  for vaccine serotype efficacy, the antibody concentrations reached and the reverse cumulative distribution curves showing the greatest difference between the vaccine and control group around the concentration of 0.15 µ g/ml. Discussion on ELISA methods and protective antibody levels: Based on interlaboratory comparative studies of the ELISA, some differences in serotype-specific IgG assignments made by KTL and by WLV have been noted. However, there is general agreement in the assignment  of  antibody  values  in  two  Finnish  trials  (D118-P6;  FinOM),  with  the  exception  of  6B. WLV assigns  higher  values  to  sera  than  KTL;  the  reasons  for  this  are  under  active  investigation. Because  the  Kaiser  efficacy  study  has  enabled  Wyeth-Lederle  to  assign  IgG  concentrations  that distinguish between protected and vulnerable populations, it is important that other laboratories can develop  an  equally  sensitive  ELISA.  The  company  has  committed  to  co-operate  with  other laboratories in Europe to work on the standardisation of the ELISA. A significant antibody response was seen for all serotypes although GMCs varied among serotypes. The choice of the protective levels of IgG concentrations of 0.15 and 0.5 µg/ml has been explained but must be considered as an approximate. The minimum antibody concentration necessary for protection against invasive disease has not been determined for any serotype, which is clearly stated in the SPC. The OPA is a functional assay and not a quantitative test. The test is designed to show the presence or absence of complement-dependent killing of each serotype strain of S. Pneumoniae. The test method has been evaluated for compliance with the ICH guidelines for assay validation. The assay includes the  use  of  pooled  polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNL) from multiple donors and the addition of exogenous complement with the inclusion of pre-colostral calf serum. The test is not precise; however the company has committed to standardise the OPA assay. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Immunogenicity

Serum samples for measurement of antibodies following primary vaccination were obtained before the first  dose  and  approximately  one  month  after  the  last  dose.  In  studies  US  D118-P3,  P12,  and  EU D118-P6 additional samples were also obtained post dose 2 to investigate the kinetics of the antibody response. In the four studies of booster vaccination (4 th dose at 12-15 months of age) serum samples were obtained before and 1 month following immunization. In some studies, follow-up samples were collected at 24 months of age.

-

D92-P5: Model and dose-finding study in infants The  safety  and  immunogenicity  of  2  models  (oligosaccharide  and  polysaccharide)  of  a  pentavalent pneumococcal vaccine (5VPnC) including serotypes 6B, 14, 18C, 19F and 23F at 3 dose levels (5.0 µg, 2.0 µg and 0.5 µg) was evaluated in 400 infants immunized at 2, 4 and 6 months (6 treatment groups  and  a  control  group  receiving  DTP-HbOC  only).  There  were  no  clinically  significant differences  between  treatment  groups  in  terms  of  local  reactogenicity,  and  between  treatment  and control groups  in  terms  of  systemic  symptoms.  The  polysaccharide  formulations  were  more immunogenic  than  the  oligosaccharide,  and  the  5.0  and  2.0  µg  polysaccharide  resulted  in  similar responses.  Based  on  this  data,  the  2.0  µg  polysaccharide  formulation  was  used  as  the  basis  for  the 7VPnC vaccine development. (For serotype 18C, due to manufacturing reasons, an oligosaccharide was used. For type 6B, the least immunogenic type, the dose was increased to 4ug). In  this  study,  a  booster  dose  of  plain  23-valent  polysaccharide  vaccine  was  administered  at  15-18 months of age to all subjects, including the control group. All 5VPnC vaccine groups experienced a substantial  increase  in  GMCs  to  all  serotypes.  The  control  group  had  virtually  no  immunologic response to the polysaccharide vaccine. D118-P2: Adult phase I study The  acute  safety  and  the  immunogenicity  of  a  single  dose  of  7VPnC  vaccine  was  assessed  in  30 healthy adults in a randomized double blind trial in comparison with the commercial polysaccharide. The 7VPnC vaccine resulted in post-immunization GMCs that were higher than the polysaccharide vaccine for all serotypes except for 9V. The rates of local and systemic reactions were quite high for both vaccines and somewhat higher, although not statistically significant, for the conjugate vaccine. · Immunogenicity following primary immunisation Studies US D118-P3, P7, P8, P12, P16 and EU D118-P6, P502 and supplementary data from D118P501, D118-P503 and D118-P809 : The  immunogenicity  of  the  7VPnC  vaccine  was  evaluated  in  10  completed  studies.  Five  of  these studies were performed in the USA, and five in Europe. Seven studies evaluated the standard 2, 4 and 6 months schedule, two evaluated the accelerated 2, 3 and 4 month schedule (D118-P501 and P502) and one evaluated the 3, 4, 5 month schedule (D118-P503). Data were presented as GMCs post dose 3, as % of subjects with antibody concentrations equal or higher than 0.15 and 0.5 µg/ml and as reverse cumulative  distribution  curves  for  each  serotype.  The  opsonophagocytic  activity  of  antibodies generated by the candidate vaccine was studied in 48 children from study D118-P3 following primary immunization. The kinetics of antibody response after each dose of the primary vaccination series was evaluated in study D118-P6. The following conclusions can be drawn from these studies: More than 90% of infants achieved antibody concentrations equal  or higher than 0.15 µg/ml across  all  studies  and  serotypes.  The  immunogenicity  differed  between  serotypes  with  the highest GMCs attained for serotype 14 and with the lowest for serotypes 4 and 9V. The kinetic antibody  profiles  were  demonstrated  to  be  serotype-specific  but  for  most  types  the  largest increase in antibody titer occurred following the second dose. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -The  antibodies  elicited  by  vaccination  during  the  primary  series  had  functional  activity,  as evaluated by the opsonophagocytic assay

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Other  vaccines  administered  at  the  same  time  as  the  candidate  vaccine  varied  among  studies (acellular or whole cell pertussis, attenuated or inactivated polio, HBV, Hib). The distributions of antibody responses for each serotype were similar among studies, as shown by the reverse distribution  curves.  This  suggests  that  other  vaccines  given  concurrently  did  not  have  a significant  impact  on  the  immunological  response  to  7VPnC,  except  in  association  with  the booster dose in study D118-P7 where concurrent DTaP and HbOC resulted in a lower response to all pneumococcal serotypes except for 18C. However, these differences were not statistically significant.
- Immunogenicity following booster vaccination (4 th dose administered 12-15 months of age)

-The candidate vaccine administered at 2, 4 and 6 months resulted in levels of antibody that were associated  with  protective  efficacy  against  invasive  disease  in  the  Kaiser  efficacy  trial.  The results of the different studies were consistent. -The immunogenicity of the 2, 3, 4-month schedule was documented in 2 studies (D118-P501 and D118-P502). The GMCs after the 3rd dose were satisfactory, (although lower for certain serotypes, see below) and comparable with those of the 2, 4, 6-month schedule in the Kaiser trial.  The  persistence  of  serotype-specific  antibody  response  up  to  the  age  of  12  months  (8 months after the 3rd dose) following the accelerated schedule has been documented in a total of 87  infants.  The  pre-challenge  GMCs  were  lower  than  those  attained  with  the  standard immunisation schedule (6 months after the 3 rd dose).  No  booster  data  on  the  7VPnC  vaccine after  the  accelerated  schedule  have  yet  been  submitted.  However,  a  booster  dose  with  the polysaccharide  vaccine  resulted  in  an  anamnestic  response  indicating  an  immunological memory . Summary of salient findings Of note is that the immunogenicity of the 7VPnC vaccine was never tested given alone in the primary series. In all studies different concurrent vaccines were administered. The overall results demonstrated that the primary schedule elicited a satisfactory and consistent antibody response. Functional  activity,  as  measured  by  OPA,  was  evaluated  by  WLV  in  a  subset  of  immunized  and control  subjects  after  the  primary  series  in  one  study  (D118-P3).  Additional  data  from  immunized infants generated by KTL using a different OPA protocol were provided in the form of submitted and published papers. While the correlation of OPA titers to ELISA IgG concentrations varied by serotype and  by  method,  the  results  show  that  the  post-immunization  sera  were  usually  associated  with functional activity. WLV has committed to standardize the OPA assay. It is agreed that it is premature to interpret data that could estimate the avidity of antibodies due to the use  of  different  and  non-validated  test  methods  as  concluded  by  the  investigators.  The  clinical significance of antibody avidity still needs to be demonstrated. An  important deficiency of the submitted documentation  was  the lack on data of vaccine immunogenicity and functional antibody activity in high-risk children. Only limited data in patients with sickle cell disease were provided which is stated as such in the SPC. The Company submitted additional information that briefly described the trials that have been completed in high-risk categories and those that are ongoing. The populations included are appropriate i.e. those of high-risk categories, but the numbers are insufficient for any conclusions to be drawn. In addition, certain risk groups such, as patients with nephrotic syndrome, congenital or acquired splenic dysfunction and malignancy were not included. The proposed revised SPC reflects the lack of data on groups with high risk of invasive pneumococcal disease. Immunogenicity data on the 3, 5, 12 month schedule are not available. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Studies US D118-P3, P7, P8, and EU D118-P6 and supplementary data from D118-P503 and D118P809 :

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  persistence  of  antibodies  following  the  primary  vaccination  with  7VPnC  vaccine  and  the immunogenicity  of  a  booster  administered  at  12-15  months  of  age  was  evaluated  in  4  trials  (3 performed in the USA, 1 in Europe). In the 3 US trials, all children were boosted with the 7VPnC vaccine. In the European study (D118-P6), children were randomized to receive the 7VPnC vaccine or a polysaccharide vaccine as a booster. Data are presented as GMCs prior to and 1 month post booster dose,  as  %  subjects  with  antibody  concentrations  equal  or  higher  than  0.15  and  0.5  µg/ml  and  as reverse cumulative distribution curves for each serotype.

Study D118-P16 was designed to bridge between a pilot lot and manufacturing lots: 1 manufacturing lot using Lederle aluminium phosphate as the adjuvant (the formulation intended for marketing), and a manufacturing  lot  using  another  source  of  adjuvant.  The  immunogenicity  of  the  manufacturing  lot intended for marketing was comparable to the pilot lot used in the efficacy trial, although higher titres were  observed  for  the  pilot  lot.  Study  D118-P16  was  designed  to  test  non-inferiority  of  the manufacturing  and  pilot  lots.  It  is  noteworthy  that,  with  a  response  level  of  0.15  µg/ml,  all  of  the responses for the manufacturing lot were greater than 90% and, with a response level of 0.50 µg/ml, none of the estimated differences were greater than 10% for any antigen. It is considered unlikely that any of these differences has clinical relevance.

The following conclusions can be drawn from these studies: -the  antibody  levels  declined  substantially  during  the  period  between  the  end  of  the  primary vaccination  series  and  the  booster  dose.  In  all  studies  there  was  a  substantial  increase  in  the antibody concentrations after the 4 th dose. -the  priming  effect  of  the  primary  vaccination  which  had  been  shown  in  study  D95-P2  was confirmed in study D118-P6 in which children were randomized to receive the 7VPnC vaccine or a polysaccharide vaccine as a booster. The antibody response elicited by plain polysaccharide was either comparable or higher than that elicited by the 7VPnC vaccine. -serotype 14 achieved the highest pre- and post-booster concentrations in most studies, and serotype 4 the lowest. Summary of salient findings The magnitude of the observed booster response of the 7VPnC  suggests  the induction of immunological  memory.  There  were  differences  between  serotypes  regarding  the  booster  response with type 4 being the least immunogenic. The highest rise in antibodies was observed for 6B. Of note is that there was a substantial decline in antibodies both at 6 to 8 months after the primary series and at 12 months after booster. Types 4, 9V and 18C exhibited the lowest levels before the 4 th dose and also during follow-up at 24 months. The persistence of antibodies has only been followed up to 24 months and in a limited number of subjects. The rapid decline of antibody levels suggests that further booster doses might be needed. The conjugate vaccine also showed a good priming capacity by a vigorous booster response to the 23valent  vaccines.  However,  according  to  a  recent  Finnish  study  the  avidity  of  IgG  pneumococcal antibodies after boosting with the polysaccharide vaccine seemed to be lower than after boosting with the  conjugate  vaccine.  Due  to  the  current  lack  of  standardised  methods  to  measure  avidity  or functional  antibodies,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  regarding  any  differences  in  the  qualitative antibody responses between the conjugated and unconjugated polysaccharide vaccines. · Lot-to-lot consistency Studies D118-P12 and P16: The two efficacy studies (US D118-P8 and EU D118-P809) and most of the immunogenicity studies (US D118-P3, P7, P8 and EU D118-P6, P502, P501 and P503) were performed using pilot lots. The consistency of manufacture of 3 pilot lots was evaluated in study D118-P12. In this study children were randomized to receive 1 of 3 lots. There were no statistically significant differences in GMCs or percent subjects achieving antibody concentrations equal or higher than 0.15 and 0.5 µg/ml for any of the seven serotypes. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Compatibility with other childhood vaccines

## Studies US D118-P3, P7, P12, P16 and EU D118-P502 and supplementary data from D118-P501, 503 :

The compatibility of administration of the candidate vaccine with other routine pediatric vaccines was assessed in 7 studies. Five of these studies (US D118-P12, P16 and EU D118-P502, P501 and P503) contained a control arm with routine pediatric vaccines only. In the others, the 7VPnC vaccine was compared with a meningococcal C conjugate vaccine in a randomized double blind manner. In study D118-P502,  one  group  received  the  7VPnC  vaccine  mixed  with  lyophilized  Hib  vaccine.  In  study D118-P7, children were randomized to receive the booster of the candidate vaccine either at the same time  or  at  one-month  distance  of  the  DTP-HbOC  booster.  In  the  French  study  D118-P501, DTP/IPV/Hib was given concurrently and in study D118 -P503, DTPa-IPV/PRP-T combination was administered alone or at the same time as the 7VPnC.

The studies suggest that there is some interference in antibody responses when 7VPnC is concurrently given with childhood vaccines, although the clinical relevance is difficult to evaluate. The negative interference  of  the  7VPnC  on  the  booster  responses  to  DTaP  and  HbOC  has  been  included  in  the approved SPC.

Primary immunisation: The  overall  picture  of  interactions  between  7VPnC  and  childhood  vaccines,  indicates  that  there  is evidence  for  some  interactions  between  7VPnC  and  other  vaccines;  in  particular,  with  acellular pertussis vaccines, that raises some concern. It should be noted that in Europe there is only one trial (D118 P503) in which acellular pertussis vaccine given concurrently with 7VPnC is evaluated. In this trial  a  significantly  decreased  response  to  pertactin  post-dose  3  GMCs  were  found  in  the  7VPnC group. However, the response to pertactin was still of very high magnitude (28-fold) in the 7VPnC group. In the US study D118 P12 (DTaP) also an interaction with pertussis antigens FHA, pertactin and fimbriae was observed. Also a slight interference with the IPV (serotype I) was demonstrated in study D118-P16. The clinical relevance of these interactions is at present unknown. An amendment to the SPC has been made describing the occurrence of vaccine interactions regarding the pertussis, and polio components. The enhanced response to HbOC and diphtheria observed in some studies might be influenced by the presence/immunogenicity  of  the  carrier  protein,  which  is  contained  in  both  the  7VPnC  and  HbOC vaccine.  As  all  these  antigens  share  a  common  protein,  the  diphtheria  CRM197  protein  and immunisation with this carrier would increase the number and state of activation of diphtheria-specific memory T-cells.  Upon  subsequent  exposure,  these  T-cells  enhance  the  B-cell  antibody  response  to both diphtheria and the conjugate polysaccharide. The mechanisms implicated however are complex. An amendment to the SPC has been made describing the occurrence of vaccine interactions regarding the diphtheria and Hib components. The immunogenicity of the co-administered Hep B vaccine did not indicate a significant interaction. Few subjects were investigated for the MMR response and higher numbers of subjects needs to be studied  to  confirm  the  obtained  results.  A  subset  of  samples  was  also  investigated  for  diphtheria response by Vero cells to ascertain the validity of the ELISA results. These results were submitted post-authorisation and confirmed the consistency of both ELISA and Vero cell testing.. The  compatibility  of  concurrent  administration  of  7VPnC  with  the  new  combined  multicomponent vaccines childhood vaccines have not been performed which is clearly stated in the SPC. Booster immunisation : During booster vaccination statistically significant lower GMCs for diphtheria; HibPRP, PT and FHA were attained in the 7VPnC group compared with the control group. No differences between groups were detected for the percentage of subjects achieving defined antibody levels. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Immunogenicity in older children

## Studies  D118-P9,  P12,  P15  and  supplementary  data  from  D118  P18  and  D118-P16: ' Catch-up studies'

Schedules for the primary vaccination of children who are older than 7 months have been evaluated in so-called 'Catch-up studies'. Five studies were performed, including subjects aged 7 to 35 months. Children were divided in 4 age groups for analysis: 7 to 11 months for whom a 2-dose and a 3-dose schedule were evaluated, 12-17 months and 18-24 months for whom a 1-dose and a 2-dose schedule were  evaluated,  and  &gt;24  months  for  whom  a  1-dose  schedule  was  evaluated.  The  schedule recommended  by  the  manufacturer  is  the  one  for  which  the  serological  response  exceeds  the serological  response  of  the  subset  of  infants  evaluated  for  immunogenicity  in  the  D118-P8  Kaiser efficacy trial.

The  data  on  the  7-11-month  old  group  showed  that  the  immune  response  after  a  3-dose  catch-up immunisation schedule was more optimal than after a 2-dose schedule. It was demonstrated that the GMCs after 3 doses were acceptable and similar to those achieved after the 2, 4, 6  month primary series of the efficacy trial, but documentation concerning the need for additional doses is lacking. The 2-dose schedule in 11-23 month-old elicited a good response to each serotype and was assessed in more than 99 subjects. Study D118-P18 investigated included subjects aged 12-17 months, 18-23 months, 24-35 months, 3659 months, 5-9 years (mean 7.4 years). Although the number of analysed samples was limited, strong antibody responses and of an anamnestic character were demonstrated after most vaccine schedules. Almost all subjects had pre-dose serotype-specific antibody levels above the protective level of 0.50 µ g/ml. However, in the age groups 24-35 month and 36-59 month olds, which included few subjects, a decreased antibody response to some of the serotypes following one vaccine dose was observed. It could  be  questioned  whether  two  doses  should  be  given  to  these  age  groups.  A  higher  local reactogenicity  of  the  vaccine  was  found  in  the  older  children  as  compared  to  infants.  Due  to  the limited  data  on  immunogenicity  and  safety  in  the  older  children  the  present  indication  has  been restricted to children up to 2 years of age. Data  are  lacking  to  support  a  booster  recommendation  after  the  first  booster  dose  following  the primary series or to assess the need for further vaccine doses in older children. Clinical efficacy Main study: Kaiser efficacy trial (Study D118-P8) (phase III, therapeutic confirmatory trial) Description of the study The efficacy of the heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (7VPnC) was evaluated in one large randomised, double-blinded study in 2-month old infants. Subjects were equally randomised into one of  four  treatment  groups  (group  A-D),  such  that  two  groups  received  the  7VPnC  vaccine  and  two groups  received  the  control,  MnCC  vaccine.  The  vaccines  were  given  according  to  the  standard schedule at 2, 4, 6 and 12-15 months, which was based on the recommended schedule for receiving other childhood immunisations. Efficacy was assessed against culture proven invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD), clinical otitis media and clinical pneumonia. The rates of the diseases were compared between the 7VPnC and MnCC vaccine groups. A sequential design was used with an interim analysis to  be  performed  when  17  cases  of  IPD  due  to  vaccine  serotypes  had  occurred  (August  1998).  The study was terminated at that date, but blinding was maintained so that vaccine efficacy on all cases of IPD could be assessed through the follow-up date of April 1999. For efficacy against otitis media and pneumonia,  diagnosis  was  only  considered  until  April  1998.  For  ruptured  eardrums,  the  follow-up period was prolonged until November 1998. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Enrolment in the Kaiser study was terminated on 24 August 1998. At that time 37,868 infants had been randomised and received at least one immunisation, whereof 18,927 subjects had received the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

7VPnC vaccine and 18,941 subjects the MnCC vaccine. The majority of children had received 3 doses of DTP-HbOC or DTaP vaccines concurrently by the age of 12 months, through August 24, 1998.

## a) Efficacy measures for IPD

## Primary efficacy endpoint:

The primary objective of the  study  was  to  determine  the  protective  efficacy  of  the  7VPnC  vaccine against IPD due to serotypes included in the vaccine during the per-protocol follow-up period

Secondary endpoints: · To assess the safety and tolerability of the 7VPnC vaccine administered as a primary series in infants at 2, 4, 6 months of age with a booster at 12 and 15 months of age. · To assess the safety and tolerability of meningococcal group C conjugate vaccine (MnCC) in infants immunised at 2, 4, 6 and 12 to 15 months of age · To determine the protective efficacy of 7VPnC vaccine in an intention-to-treat analysis -To evaluate the effectiveness of vaccination with 7VPnC on overall invasive pneumococcal disease in the PP and ITT populations · To assess the effectiveness of vaccination on rates of acute otitis media and pneumonia in the study population as determined from computerised data sources · To assess the immunogenicity of 7VPnC vaccine following a primary series and booster dose Efficacy measures for otitis media Primary outcome: Overall incidence  of  acute  otitis  media  episodes  (new  visits)  during  per-protocol follow-up. Secondary outcomes: Overall incidence of AOM (new visits) during the intention-to-treat follow-up period and risk of at least one episode, frequent otitis media episodes, tympanostomy tube placement, overall  incidence  of  AOM  (all  visits)  and  spontaneously  ruptured  ear  drums  in  all  per-protocol vaccinated children during the per-protocol follow-up and in all randomised children during intentionto-treat follow-up. Statistical analysis Efficacy invasive disease/pneumonia The protective efficacy of 7VPnC against IPD was estimated as 1- disease rate ratio. Exact binomial test  was  used  to  test  the  null  hypothesis  of  no  vaccine  efficacy.  Confidence  interval  for  vaccine efficacy  was  determined  using  exact  binomial  distributions  (Clopper-Pearson  method).  The  trial incorporated  a  group  sequential  design  with  one  interim  analysis  at  17  cases  of  primary  endpointinvasive  pneumococcal  disease  due  to  vaccine  serotypes  during  per-protocol  follow-up  period  in immunocompetent  children  and  the  final  analysis  at  26  cases.  The  acceptance  criteria  set  for  the primary analysis had a type 1 error of 0.0024 and ensured that the overall type 1 error α for the group sequential design was below 0.05. Effectiveness otitis media Andersen-Gill  formulation  of  proportional  hazard  method  was  used  to  analyse  recurrent  event  data including the primary otitis media endpoint-overall incidence of all otitis media episodes during perprotocol  follow-up.  Robust  variance  estimates  were  used.  The  Cox  proportional  hazard  model  was used  to analyse  single  event  data  including  risk  of  first  episode,  frequent  otitis  media,  and tympanostomy tube replacement. The exact binomial test was used to analyse the cases of ruptured eardrum due to vaccine types. Secondary analyses included the evaluation of frequent otitis  media, tympanostomy tube placement and ruptured eardrums due to pneumococcal infections. Efficacy results Efficacy against invasive pbeumococcal disease. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Of the randomised 37,868 subjects (ITT population), 27,118 infants were included in the Per-protocol (PP) population (13,549 in 7VPnC and 13,569 in MnCC group).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       | Cases October 1995 through August 20, 1998       |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Invasive pneumococcal disease                    | Number of cases                                  | Number of cases                                  | p-value* between vaccine groups                  | Vaccine Efficacy Estimate(VE)                    | 95% confidence limits of VE                      | 95% confidence limits of VE                      |
| Invasive pneumococcal disease                    | 7VPnC                                            | MnCC                                             | p-value* between vaccine groups                  | Vaccine Efficacy Estimate(VE)                    | Two-sided limits                                 | One-sided limit                                  |
| Vaccine serotypes                                |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |
| PP analysis                                      | 0                                                | 17                                               | <0.0001                                          | 100%                                             | (75.4%, 100%)                                    | 80.5%                                            |
| ITT analysis                                     | 0                                                | 22                                               | <0.0001                                          | 100%                                             | (81.7%, 100%)                                    | 85.4%                                            |
| All serotypes                                    |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |
| PP analysis                                      | 2                                                | 20                                               | 0.0001                                           | 90.0%                                            | (58.3%, 98.9%)                                   | 64.5%                                            |
| ITT analysis                                     | 3                                                | 27                                               | <0.0001                                          | 88.9%                                            | (63.8%, 97.9%)                                   | 68.6%                                            |
| Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer | Cases October 1995 through April, 20 1999 longer |
| Vaccine serotype s                               |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |
| PP analysis                                      | 1                                                | 39                                               | <0.0001                                          | 97.4%                                            | (84.8%, 99,9%)                                   | 87.2%                                            |
| ITT analysi s                                    | 3                                                | 49                                               | <0.0001 no                                       | 93.9%                                            | (81.0%, 98.8%)                                   | 83.4%                                            |
| All serotypes                                    |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |                                                  |
| PP analysis                                      | 3                                                | 42                                               | <0.0001                                          | 92.9%                                            | (77.6%, 98.6%)                                   | 80.5%                                            |
| ITT analysis                                     | 6                                                | 55                                               | <0.0001                                          | 89.1%                                            | (74.7%, 96,2%)                                   | 77.3%                                            |

<!-- image -->

*Two-sided P-values and confidence limits were based on exact binomial distributions At  the  time  of  interim  analysis  (August  20,  1998)  all  17  cases  of  IPD  had  occurred  in  the  MnCC group. Fourteen of the 17 cases had a diagnosis of bacteremia (including 2 with AOM, 1 with cellulitis and  1  with  febrile  seizure),  whereas  2  had  septicaemia  and  1  had  pneumonia.  The  most  common serotype was 19F (n=7, 35%) followed by 18C (n=4), two of each of 6B and 9V and one each of type 14 and 23F. There was no invasive disease due to serotype 4 observed during the study. ITT  analysis  confirmed  the  VE  demonstrated  in  the  PP  analysis  (0  vs  22  cases).  The  estimated incidence of vaccine-serotype disease in children vaccinated with 7VPnC was 0 versus 82.0 cases per 100,000 child-years in the MnCC recipients. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Exploratory analysis of vaccine efficacy against vaccine-serotype by dose was 100% regardless of the number of doses. Due to the limited follow-up and number of IPD cases, the point efficacy estimate in children who received 2 doses or less was uncertain (p=0.063).

Explorative  analysis  of  vaccine  efficacy  against all IPD  accrued  through  April  1999  revealed  that further  30  IPD  cases  were  identified.  The  estimated  efficacy  against  IPD  due  to all  pneumococcal serotypes was 85.7% in children who received 2 doses or less (p=0.070). In the ITT population for all

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

serotypes a total of 61 cases were recorded with 6 cases in the 7VPnC and 55 in the MnCC group. The corresponding figures for vaccine serotypes were 3 and 49 cases, respectively. The three IPD cases in the  7VPnC  group  included  one  immunocompromised  child  with  AML  (type  19F)  and  two immunocompetent subjects, whereof one was pneumonia (type 19F) after receipt of 4 doses and one was bacteremia (type 6B) after receipt of only one dose.

| Acute otitis media outcome               | Per-protocol analysis             | Per-protocol analysis   | Intention-to-treat analysis       | Intention-to-treat analysis   |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
|                                          | Estimated risk reduction (95% CI) | p-value no              | Estimated risk reduction (95% CI) | p-value                       |
| All AOMepisodes                          | 7.0% (4.1%, 9.7%)                 | <0.0001                 | 6.4% (3.9%, 8.7%)                 | <0.0001                       |
| First AOMepisode                         | 5.4% (2.3%, 8.4%)                 | 0.0008                  | 4.9% (2.3%, 7.5%)                 | 0.0003                        |
| FrequentAOM                              | 9.5% (3.2%, 15.3%)                | 0.0035                  | 9.2% (4.3%, 13.9%)                | 0.0004                        |
| Tympanostomy tube placement              | 20.3% (1.8%, 35.4%)               | 0.0335                  | 20.6% (4.0%, 34.3%)               | 0.0171                        |
| All AOMvisits                            | 8.9% (5.8%, 11.8%)                | <0.0001                 | 7.8% (5.2%, 10.2%)                | <0.0001                       |
| Ruptured ear drum with vaccine serotypes | 55.6% (-59.3%, 90.0%)             | 0.267                   | 57.1% (-18.7%, 86.5%)             | 0.115                         |

<!-- image -->

This was a randomised double-blinded multicenter cohort study that estimated the protective efficacy of 7VPnC against bacteriologic proven acute otitis media in 1,662 Finnish children. Altogether 831 children were assigned to receive PncCRM and 831 HepB vaccines. Vaccines were administered at 2, 4 and 6 months, and a 4th dose was given at 12 months. The vaccinees were further randomised to receive  concomitantly  DTPw-HbOC or DTPw-PRP-T in the other thigh. The surveillance for otitis media was carried out at study clinics. AOM was defined as having at least one symptom suggesting AOM and abnormal tympanic membrane at pneumatic otoscopy suggesting middle ear fluid. If AOM

The distribution of vaccine serotypes among the 49 IPD cases in MnCC group (ITT analysis) was 19F (n=13), 14 (n=11), 18C (n=9), 6B (n=7), 23F (n=6), 9V (n=3) and 4 (n=0). IPD cases caused by nonvaccine serotypes (3 in the 7VPnC and 6 in the MnCC group) were scattered among several different types  without  any  specific  pattern.  An  analysis  of  serotype-specific  efficacy  for  all  per-protocol vaccine  serotype  cases  revealed  statistically  significant  differences  between  treatment  groups  for serotypes 19F, 14, and 18C. In the ITT analysis significant differences were detected for serotypes 19F, 14, 18C, 6B and 23F. Significance level was not reached for 6B. Of all IPD cases, 92.9% were caused by vaccine serotypes. Efficacy against bacteremic pneumonia due to vaccine serotypes of S. Pneumoniae was 87% (7,9995%CI) Effectiveness (no microbiological confirmation of diagnosis was performed) against clinical pneumonia was also assessed. The estimated risk reduction for clinical pneumonia with abnormal Xray (primary outcome) was 33% (6,52- 95% CI) and for clinical pneumonia with consolidation 73% (36,90- 95% CI). Efficacy against clinical otitis media Summary of vaccine effect on acute otitis media The primary analysis was the overall incidence of AOM episodes (new visits) during the per protocol follow-up. From the beginning of the study Oct 1995 through the end of April 1998 a total of 16,124 AOM episodes were identified  in  11,849  7VPnC  children  versus  17,405  AOM  episodes  in  11.897 MnCC subjects. The overall incidence of AOM episodes was reduced from 1.72 episodes per child year in MnCC recipients to 1,60 episodes per child-year in the 7VPnC recipients, a 7.0% reduction, which represents a prevention of 12 episodes per 100 child-year. The incidence of AOM decreased over time in both vaccine groups reflecting the increasing age of the subjects. A lower incidence was seen  in  the  7VPnC  group  for  all  but  one  time  point  throughout  the  follow-up  period.  Secondary outcomes  are  shown  in  the  above  table.  A  total  of  157  children  in  the  7VPnC  group  had tympanostomy tubes placed versus 198 in the MnCC group, which equaled a 20% reduction in risk of tube replacement. Supplementary phase III study: Finnish Acute Otitis Media (AOM) trial (D118-P809): Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

was diagnosed, myringotomy with fluid aspiration for bacterial culture was performed. Immunogenicity  of  the  vaccine  was  also  evaluated  by  measuring  serotype-specific  antibody  levels prior  to  vaccination,  1  month  post-dose  3  and  post-dose  4.  Systemic  and  local  reactogenicity  of 7VPnC was recorded.

The following table summarizes the results:

|                                            |   7VPnC group |   Control (Hepatitis B Vaccine) group |   Total |
|--------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------------|---------|
| Clinical OMwith MEF sample obtained        |          1177 |                                  1267 |    2444 |
| Pneumococcal otitis media                  |           271 |                                   414 |     685 |
| Vaccine serotype pneumococcal otitis media |           107 |                                   250 |     357 |

<!-- image -->

The point estimate for the efficacy of the 7VpnC vaccine is 57% against vaccine serotype otitis media, 34% against  all  pneumococcal  otitis  media  and  6%  against  all  episodes  of  otitis  media  with  MEF taken. The data reported from the control group indicate that Streptococcus pneumoniae accounted for 33%  (414/1267)  of  the  episodes  of  otitis  media  and  that  vaccine  serotypes  accounted  for  66% (250/414)  of  the  episodes  caused  by Streptococcus pneumoniae.  This  percentage  is  in  the  range expected from background epidemiological information. In the FinOM trial significant efficacy was demonstrated against serotypes 6B, 14, 23F and for related serotype 6A with efficacy estimates of 57-85%. The point estimate for vaccine efficacy was highest for serotype 6B (84%). However, for serotype 19F low efficacy was shown (25%) and also against the related serotype 19A (34%). Also in the Kaiser efficacy trial cultures from draining ears suggested low protection against 19F. Despite the low efficacy, the serological response to 19F was excellent in the Finnish children. It can not be denied that the 7VPnC vaccine has efficacy against otitis media caused by the vaccine serotypes of pneumococci, but to a lower extent than against invasive infections. Moreover the overall impact of the vaccine on total number of otitis media episodes is small, approximately 6%. Even if otitis media is a very common disease in children this extent of vaccine efficacy does not support an indication. The protection afforded by the vaccine against otitis is an add-on beneficial effect, and is only described in the section 5.1 of the SPC. In the FinOM Trial, pneumococcal nasopharyngeal carriage was measured at 12 and 18 months of age, as present or absent. At 12 months, when the booster dose was administered, no significant impact on pneumococcal  nasopharyngeal  carriage  was  evidenced.  At  18  months,  a  statistically  significant decrease in the percentage of vaccine serotypes carried, 16.2% versus 9.5% (difference: 6.7%; 95%CI 3.3,10,1; p&lt;0.01) was observed indicating that the 7VPnC vaccine reduces vaccine serotype carriage. Meanwhile, a higher proportion of serotypes other than vaccine and vaccine-related serotypes (11.2% versus  7.7%)  (Difference:  3.5%;  95%CI  -6.5,-0.5;  p=0.02)  was  found  among  7VPnC  recipients, indicating that replacement by other serotypes had occurred. Medicinal product no longer authorised

During a follow-up period comparable to the Kaiser Efficacy Trial, the FinOM Trial has shown an increase in AOM due to other than vaccine and vaccine-related serotypes among 7VPnC recipients, with a rate of 10.69 versus 7.96 per 100-person year, indicating that replacing serotypes may cause AOM. However significant overall vaccine efficacy against all pneumococcal AOM, a 34 % reduction (21-45, 95% CI), was still demonstrated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Summary of salient findings

In the Kaiser efficacy trial, the 7-valent vaccine was shown to be highly efficacious against invasive pneumococcal disease caused by the serotypes contained in the vaccine. There was no indication of decreasing efficacy during the follow-up period. Due to the limited number of cases of IPD, serotypespecific efficacy could not be demonstrated for types 6B, 9V and 4.

The power to assess efficacy in partially immunised children was limited by the short follow-up period between dose 1, 2 and 3 allowing for accrual of 8 IPD cases due to any pneumococcal serotype only. Therefore,  in  spite  of  high  point  estimate  of  efficacy  in  partially  immunised  children,  no  definitive conclusion  can  be  drawn  about  VE  for  those  that  received  &lt;2  doses.  Twelve  of  the  22  vaccineserotype IPD cases accrued up to August 20, 1998 occurred in children less than 12 months of age but the amount of follow-up was highest in the age group of 6.5 months to 12 months old. In  the  Kaiser  efficacy  study,  there  was  no  evidence  of  increase  of  disease  due  to  non-vaccine serotypes.  However,  post-vaccination  epidemiologic  studies  of  serotypes  causing  both  colonisation and invasion will be important to determine if serotypes not covered in the vaccine will become more prevalent. The effectiveness of 7VPnC against otitis media was demonstrated in this trial across all endpoints except  ruptured  ear  drums.  The  overall  risk  reduction  (7%  PP,  6.4%  ITT)  of  the  primary  outcome measure  was  low,  representing  prevention  of  12  episodes  per  100  child-years.  Efficacy  was  more promising in the group with recurrent and potentially more serious otitis (tube placement) (20.3%). Most  likely  the  vaccine  should  be  targeted  at  this  group  with  more  serious  and  recurrent  AOM. However, the otitis part of the Kaiser trial suffers from important limitations, since there were no prespecified  criteria  for  the  diagnosis  and  no  bacteriologic  confirmation.  The  results  of  the  FinOM vaccine  trial  (overall  efficacy  6%)  were  very  similar  to  that  obtained  in  the  Kaiser  trial  (overall efficacy 6.4%). The 7VPnC vaccine was demonstrated to be efficacious against clinical pneumonia with abnormal Xray  and  consolidation,  i.e.  those  pneumonia  cases  with  the  most  probable  bacterial  diagnosis.  The effect was more pronounced in the ITT population for unknown reasons. The modest efficacy of 7VPnC in relation to the observed side effects does not support otitis and nonbacteraemic pneumonia as separate indications. In conclusion The  efficacy  of  the  candidate  vaccine  against  invasive  pneumococcal  disease  caused  by  vaccine serotypes has been established in a large scale field trial performed in the USA (the Kaiser Permanente trial). In this study, vaccine serotypes caused &gt;90% of the invasive diseases. In the same study, there was some evidence that the vaccine reduced the risk of clinical pneumonia with consolidation on chest X-ray, and had an impact on the occurrence of otitis media. In the FinOM vaccine trial the efficacy against otitis media has been presented. The efficacy against vaccine serotype otitis media (57%) was lower than that reported for invasive infections in the Kaiser Permanente trial (97%). Vaccine serotypes caused only 66% of the pneumococcal otitis media in this trial,  and S.  pneumoniae caused  33%  of  the  otitis  media  with  MEF  sample  obtained.  As  a consequence, the vaccine had only a modest impact on the total number of acute otitis media episodes with MEF obtained regardless of etiology (6% reduction). Medicinal product no longer authorised

During a follow-up period comparable to the Kaiser Efficacy Trial, the FinOM Trial has shown an increase in AOM due to other than vaccine and vaccine-related serotypes among 7VPnC recipients, with a rate of 10.69 versus 7.96 per 100-person year, indicating that replacing serotypes may cause AOM. Importantly, the overall vaccine efficacy against all pneumococcal AOM was significant, with a 34 % reduction (21-45, 95% CI).

As to  whether  serotype  replacement  really  occurred,  or  whether  previously  co-colonising  serotypes have  actually  increased  in  density  with  the  absence  of  dominant  serotypes  is  not  clear.  If  serotype

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

replacement  does  occur,  the  propensity  of  these  strains  to  cause  IPD  is  not  known.  However,  the relatively limited number of serotypes associated with invasive diseases in children suggests that only a small number of them are intrinsically virulent. Furthermore, antibiotic resistance today is associated with  a  few  serotypes  6B,  9V,  14,  19F  and  23F,  that  are  well  represented  in  the  7VPnC  vaccine. Replacement strains are likely to be susceptible to most commonly used antibiotics, at least initially.

In conclusion, although replacing serotypes have been associated with AOM in the FinOM Trial, it is reassuring that the most recent available data on IPD from the Kaiser Efficacy Trial do not support a possible increase in IPD caused by non-vaccine serotypes. Clinical safety Patient exposure In the immunogenicity trials no deaths occurred except for 3.5 month-old male infant in trial D118P16  who  died  of  SIDS  47  days  following  7VPnC  immunisation.  During  the  Kaiser  efficacy  trial 18 deaths  were  reported  through  April  30,  1998  and  an  additional  12  deaths  during  May  1  and December 1998. Of these 30 deaths, 10 occurred in the 7VPnC and 20 in the MnCC group. None of the deaths were considered related to vaccination. The most prevalent diagnosis was SIDS (n=13, 4 7VPnC, 9 MnCC) and only three occurred in relatively close temporal relation to immunisation (5, 6 and 7 days following the vaccine dose). Other deaths were due to events such as accidents, drowning, congenital diseases and homicide. Local and systemic reactions · Local reactions Primary immunisation: The  local  reactions  recorded  after  each  dose  were  erythema,  induration  and  tenderness.  Significant reactions  were  defined  as  erythema  and  induration  &gt;2.4  cm  or  tenderness  that  interfered  with  leg movement.  The  local  reactogenicity  of  concurrent  immunisations  in  the  opposite  leg  of  the  same subjects was also assessed for comparison. If two injections were given in the same limb at separate sites and reactions occurred at both sites the most severe reaction was recorded. For studies D118-P3, P12, and P16, acute reactions were assessed for 3 days, whereas for D118-P7 and P8 reactions were assessed for two time periods following each immunisation: first 2 days and 3-14 days. Across all studies rates of erythema were 12.1%, 14%, and 15.2% after doses 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Induration  occurred  in  10.7%,  12.4%  and  12.1%  of  subjects  and  tenderness  in  25.2%,  22.9%  and 22.3% of subjects after dose 1, 2 and 3, respectively. For erythema a modest increase upon repeated doses  was  observed  in  the  majority  of  trials,  which  was  not  the  case  for  other  local  reactions. Significant  reactions  occurred  for  erythema  (&gt;2.4  cm)  in  0.6%  to  3.8%  of  immunised  subjects,  for induration (&gt;2.4 cm) in less than 3% and for tenderness (interference with leg movement) in 1.8% to 7.9%  of  subjects.  7VPnC  vaccine  was  in  general  less  reactogenic  than  DTP-HbOC,  whereas  the opposite was demonstrated in comparison with DTaP injection site. In the Finnish trial (D118-P6) a much higher rate of local reactions was reported and, in particular for tenderness, than in the US trial. Up to 23.7% (mean 17.2%) of the 59 Finnish infants who received 7VPnC experienced significant tenderness with interference of movement compared with 6.9% of the US infants. Also, regarding erythema and induration high rates of around 26% were observed. In the UK trial (accelerated schedule) the local reactogenicity was also higher than that reported in the US. The  rates  of  swelling,  induration  and  tenderness  were  25.2%,  20.7  %  and  23.5%,  respectively. However  frequencies  of  significant  reactions  did  not  differ.  Increased  reactogenicity  was  observed when 7VPnC was mixed with lyoHib, with rates of  tenderness  of  up  to  31.1%.  Subjects  receiving DTwP suffered from local reactions nearly twice as often as the ones receiving 7VPnC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In older children the safety profile was different regarding local reactogenicity compared with that in infants. In study D118-P9, enrolling subjects 15-24 months of age, a higher rate (46.7% to 48.3%) of local reactions were reported compared with other catch-up trials in this age group (13-16.7%). The results in older children &gt;24 months of age and in particular, in those &gt;36 months of age indicated an

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

unusually high rate of local reactogenicity. Especially the rates for tenderness were very high, 58%82%, and those of significant grade interfering with leg movements (21%-39%).

Table: Summary of local reactions within 3 days of immunisation (% of subjects)

| Protocol Age group                  | Sample size                   | Erythema           | Significant erythema   |               | Induration   | Significant induration Tenderness   | Significant tenderness   |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------|------------------------|---------------|--------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| D118-P12 7-11months 3doses D118-P16 | Dose 1 54 Dose 2 51 Dose 3 24 | 16.7 11.8 20.8 7.4 | 1.9 0 0 0              | 16.7 11.8 8.3 | 3.7 0 0      | 13.0 11.8 12.5 8.6                  | 1.9 2.0 4.2              |
|                                     | Dose 1                        | 81                 |                        | 7.4           | 0            |                                     | 1.2                      |
| 7-11months                          | Dose 2                        | 76 7.9             | 0                      | 3.9           | 0            | 10.5                                | 1.3                      |
| 3 doses                             | Dose 3                        | 50 14.0            | 0                      | 10.0          | 0            | 12.0                                | 0                        |
| D118-P9 12-23 months                | Dose 1                        | 60 48.3            | 6.7                    | 48.3          | 3.3          | 46.7                                | 3.3                      |
| D118-P18                            | Dose 1 114                    | 10.5               | 1.8                    | 8.8           | 0.9 longer   | 25.7                                | 6.2                      |
| 12-23 months                        | Dose 2 117                    | 9.4                | 1.7                    | 6.0           | 0.9          | 26.5                                | 8.5                      |
| 24-35 months                        | Dose 1                        | 46 6.5             | 0                      | 10.9          | 2.2          | 41.3                                | 13.0                     |
| 36-59 months                        | Dose 1                        | 48 29.2            | 8.3                    | 22.9          | 6.3          | 58.3                                | 20.8                     |
| 5-9 years                           | Dose 1                        | 49 24.2            | 7.1                    | 22.5          | 9.3          | 82.8                                | 39.4                     |

The rates of systemic events in the US trials have been presented. Compared to the MnCC vaccine, the 7VPnC  vaccine  was  more  reactogenic  with  regard  to  fever  &gt;38 o C,  with  frequencies  ranging  from 15.1% to 40.6% (fever &gt;39 o C 0% to 5.3%). Across all studies the concurrently given DTP-HbOC was more reactogenic regarding fever, decreased appetite, fussiness than the DTaP and HbOC. Fever also tended to increase with increasing number of doses, possibly due to the whole-cell pertussis vaccine. When 7VPnC recipients were compared with controls receiving DTaP and HbOC alone, higher rates of  fever  &gt;38 o C were observed (15.7% vs 9.5%). Overall fussiness  was the  most  prevalent  reaction with the highest rate (71.3%) in study D118-P8 (DTP-HbOC). In the FinOM trial the fever rate ≥ 38°C following any one of the 3 primary series doses in the 7VPnC group (41.2%) exceeded statistically significantly (p&lt;0.001) the fever rate in the control group (27.9%). The reactions were transient, of limited duration and fever &gt; 39°C was reported in 3.3% (vs 1.2%) (p=0.007) of children. These results are  consistent  with  what  was  observed  in  the  Kaiser  Trial  and  other  US  studies  where  DTP  was

Booster immunisation: The local reactogenicity of the 4 th dose  did  not  reveal  any  increased rate of  erythema and swelling. However,  for  significant  tenderness  as  many  as 18.5%  of  the  children  receiving  DTP-HbOC  had significant tenderness that interfered with leg movement, which is much higher than that during the primary  series  (7.9%).  Similar  to  the  primary  series,  reactogenicity  was  lower  for  DTaP  than  for 7VPnC.  Compared  with  the  polysaccharide  vaccine  (PNU-IMUNE)  administered  as  a  booster  in D118-P6, the 7VPnC subjects experienced more local reactions, although not statistically significantly higher. The Finnish children again had a very high frequency of local reactions following the booster dose. · Systemic reactions Primary immunisation: Systemic  events  were  assessed  for  2  or  3  days  following  each  dose  by  diary  cards  and  telephone interviews. Rates of fever, fussiness, drowsiness and decreased appetite were recorded in all studies as well  as  gastrointestinal  symptoms,  rash/hives  and  sleep  disturbances  in  most  studies.  Prompted systemic  events  were  recorded  in  up  to  9,191  doses  of  7VPnC+DTP-HbOC,  3,848  doses  of 7VPnC+DTaP and HbOC and 538 doses of DTaP and HbOC alone. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

concomitantly  administered.  In  the  UK  trial,  lower  than  expected  temperatures  were  observed, possibly  due  to  auxillary  temperatures  being  used.  A  recommendation  for  the  use  of  prophylactic antipyretic has been mentioned in section 4.4 of the SPC.

In the older age groups receiving primary immunisation there was no consistent increase in systemic reactogenicity.  In  study  D118-P9  the  highest  rates  of  reactions  were  observed  with  fever  &gt;38 o C in 36.7% and fussiness in 40% of the subjects.

Booster immunisation: The  incidence  of  systemic  events  associated  with  a  booster  of  7VPnC  was  similar  to  that  of  the primary  series.  The  incidence  was  highest  in  infants  receiving  the  whole-cell  pertussis  vaccine concurrently and considerably lowers in the ones receiving 7VPnC alone (n=727). In the Finnish trial the polysaccharide booster elicited more reactions except for fever. Adverse events and serious adverse event/deaths In the non-Kaiser US trials (D118-P3, P12) a total of 20.4% of 362 subjects reported AEs compared with 17.4% of 86 controls. The most common event was upper respiratory infections such as otitis media (4.7%), bronchitis (3.3%) and viral infections (3.3%). From the listings the following events were notable: apnoea (n=1), abnormal crying (n=4), HHE episode (n=1) and convulsions (n=2). It is noted that these infants were concurrently given pertussis vaccines. One case of seizure occurred 4 days after the first dose of 7VPnC and was judged possibly related to immunisation. In the Kaiser trials (D118-P7, P8 and P16) a total of 17,806 infants that received the 7VPnC vaccine were  monitored.  The  vaccine  studies  were  combined  together  across  all  doses  and  regardless  of concurrent vaccinations. A summary of the most frequent reasons for hospitalisation within 60 days is presented. The most common reason was bronchiolitis (0.54%). Of note is that 16 children (1.87 per 1000 person-years) had febrile seizures, whereof one case was considered related to immunisation? Emergency  room  visits  within  30  days  revealed  that  infectious  diseases  were  the  most  prevalent diagnosis such as otitis media (1.3%). Fourteen children sought the ER due to seizures. Twenty-six AEs were considered possibly  related  to  immunisation;  febrile  illness  (n=17),  irritable  child  (n=4), febrile seizure (n=2), and one each of HHE, sepsis and upper respiratory infection. Seizures:  In  comparison  with  the  control  vaccine  MnCC,  there  were  some  events  that  occurred  in statistically higher frequencies in the 7VPnC group, the most important being febrile seizures. Since both vaccine groups received the same concurrent vaccinations the whole-cell pertussis vaccine may not  be  the  sole  cause  for  the  difference  in  rates.  Seizures  were  pre-specified  events  of  particular concern  during  the  Kaiser  trial  and  the  occurrence  of  these  events  was  followed  very  carefully.  In total, 32 children (out of 17,066 7VPnC vaccinated) experienced an acute seizure within 30 days after immunisation,  whereof  8  within  3  days.  Out  of  the  8  febrile  seizures  in  the  7VPnC  recipients,  4 children had other possible causes of febrile seizures. Six out of 8 received whole-cell DTP; 2 DTaP concomitantly. In the MnCC group 4 cases with febrile seizures within 3 days of vaccination were identified. The true incidence of febrile seizures in relation to 7VPnC is difficult to estimate, due to the concomitant pertussis vaccines. A causal relationship of 7VPnC with the HHE episode and the eight cases with unusual crying is also difficult to establish. All these events will be subject to particular attention during post-marketing surveillance undertaken by the company. In  the  FinOM  trial  12  febrile  seizures  were  observed  in  the  7VPnC  group.  None  of  them  occurred within 3 days after vaccination. The earliest febrile seizure was experienced 28 days after vaccination and none of them was considered vaccine related by the investigator. The overall incidence of febrile seizures was not different from the one in the control group (N = 14). There were no febrile seizures in the French (D118 P501) and the UK (D118 P502) trials. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## In conclusion

The 7VPnC vaccine was shown to be quite reactogenic in combination with the whole-cell pertussis vaccine. Significantly higher rates of fever &gt;38 o C (41 vs 28% and of high fever &gt;39 o C (3.3 vs 1.2%) occurred  when  the  7VPnC  vaccine  was  given  concomitantly  with  DTP,  as  was  also  the  case  for seizures,  the  majority  of  febrile  origin.  The  SPC  section  4.4  have  been  amended  accordingly  i.e.  a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

recommendation to use prophylactic antipyretic medication when 7VPnC is used concurrently with whole-cell  DTP  or  when  administered  to  children  with  seizure  disorders.  The  rate  of  seizures occurring  in  the  Kaiser  trial  was  lower  than  that  found  in  another  referenced  study  with  DTP immunisations.

## Discontinuation due to adverse events

Of the  approximately  18,000  subjects  receiving  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine,  71  subjects  were withdrawn from the study due to adverse events, whereof 43 due to seizure activity. Sixteen AEs were considered temporally related to vaccination, of which 8 due to unusual crying, 3 due to HHE, 2 due to rash/hives and 4 due to febrile convulsion. Laboratory findings The limited data submitted on laboratory measurements did not allow any conclusions. In the Kaiser trial medical records of children were reviewed for haematological and other diagnosis throughout the length of the study. The incidence of other conditions such as aplastic anemia, autoimmune disease, diabetes mellitus  and  neutropenia did not exceed  those  of historical controls.  Ten  cases of thrombocytopenia  were  reported,  which  should  be  viewed  in  relation  to  22  expected  cases  on historical rates. Discussion on clinical safety One important deficiency of the submitted documentation is that in no infant study was the 7VPnC vaccine was given alone. It could be argued that the 7VPnC vaccine would probably always be used concurrently with other childhood vaccines, but nevertheless a study evaluating the safety of 7VPnC alone is considered appropriate. The exact contribution to systemic reactogenicity of the 7VPnC was difficult to determine due to the concurrently given vaccines. Local tolerance of the 7VPnC vaccine assessed at two primary schedules was acceptable, except for that  reported  in  the  Finnish  trial  (D118-P6).  The  rate  of  23.7%  (n=59)  for  significant  tenderness following the primary series that was reported in this trial is not acceptable. However, in the larger FinOM  trial  D118-P809  (n=822)  such  high  rates  of  local  reactions  were  not  recorded,  which  is reassuring. The unusually high rates of local reactions observed in study D118-P9 remain unexplained, but  might  be  due  to  normal  variability,  since  the  larger  trial  (D118-P18)  did  not  confirm  these findings. The second dose at 12-23 months did not result in increased frequency of local reactions. However, the results in older children &gt;24 months of age and in particular, in those &gt;36 months of age indicate an unusually high rate of local reactogenicity. Especially the rates for tenderness were very high, 58%-82%, and those of significant grade interfering with leg movements (21%-39%). Although the  numbers  are  small,  the  high  frequencies  of  local  reactions  were  confirmed  in  two  trials.  This finding  is  important  and  might  indicate  that  the  vaccine  should  not  be  used  in  older  children.  The indication as stated in the SPC has been modified and is limited to children up to 2 years of age. Except for erythema, no tendency of increased reactogencity with subsequent doses was noted. In association with the booster dose a high rate of significant tenderness (18.5%) was reported. This was documented in the largest study including 599 infants and, thus, it seems that reactogenicity might be increased following the 4 th dose. The 7VPnC vaccine in general was less reactogenic than DTP-HbOC but more reactogenic compared with DTaP. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Systemic reactogenicity data revealed that the 7VPnC elicited higher rates of fever compared with the control groups (MnCC and DTaP alone). An unknown factor in this context is the extent of antipyretic use and any differences that might be present between groups. In most trials it seems that the 7VPnC group used more antipyretics, which could have resulted in an underestimation of fever reactions. The very high rates of fever that was reported in the Finnish trial D118-P6 (61% after dose 3) may indicate a higher actual incidence, although the fever (&gt;38°C) rate following dose 3 in the larger Finnish trial D118-P809 (n=813) was 26%. Study D118 P3 showed that the use of antipyretics was significantly higher in the 7VPnC group (75%) compared with the MnCC control group (58%) (p=0.013), whereas

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the rate of fever was similar in both groups. These data demonstrate the higher systemic reactogenicity following administration of the 7VPnC vaccine. A general statement on antipyretics was included in the SPC.

The whole cell pertussis  vaccine  and  concurrently  administrated  7VPnC  were  associated  with  high reactogenicity, in particular with regard to fever (33%) and fussiness (71%).

4. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  Safety  and  Batch  to  batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  test  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications. The currently available information demonstrates a sufficiently consistent production of Prevenar and a  well-defined  quality,  suitable  for  human  use.  The  company  has  undertaken  to  provide  all  the outstanding data, which remain as follow-up measures. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Overall, the primary pharmacodynamic  studies provided adequate evidence that Prevenar is immunogenic in rabbits and mice. The  lack  of  carcinogenicity  and  reproductive  toxicity  studies  has  been  justified.  Overall,  no  major objections were identified in the toxicology programme performed. Safety and efficacy The outstanding issues presented by the company during an oral explanation before the CPMP in their meeting in September 2000 are summarised below. The serotype epidemiology in Europe differs from that in the US and the coverage of vaccine strains is generally lower in Europe (55-85%). The coverage is less in the Nordic countries, but is high in some countries such as the UK, France, Belgium and Spain (80%). The Company has revised the SPC with amendments to section 5.1 regarding the serotype epidemiology within Europe, the vaccine coverage in Europe compared to the US. An  age  dependent  coverage  of  the  vaccine  serotypes  was  demonstrated  with  reduced  coverage  in children &gt;2 years. Of all IPD cases 25% occur in the age group 2-5 years. It is estimated that this will correspond to 434 preventable IPD cases per year in Europe. In addition, data from clinical studies suggest  a  contribution  of  herd  immunity  with  reduction  of  the  carriage  of  vaccine  serotypes  in siblings. These facts might support an extension of the indication up to the age of 5 years. However, at the time of the initial approval there were only limited data available on safety and immunogenicity of Prevenar in the age groups above 2 years. The decreased antibody response to some of the serotypes in the  24-35  month  old  group  following  one  dose  of  Prevenar  raises  the  question  whether  two  doses should be given. The high reactogenicity observed in older children was also taken into consideration in the risk/benefit balance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Due  to  the  limited  data  on  immunogenicity  and  safety  in  the  older  children  the  indication  was restricted  to  children  up  to  2  years  of  age  at  the  time  of  the  initial  granting  of  the  marketing authorisation..

The  Prevenar  vaccine  has  efficacy against otitis media  caused  by  the  vaccine  serotypes  of pneumococci, but to a lower extent than the efficacy against invasive infections. Moreover the overall impact of the vaccine on total number of otitis media episodes is small, approximately 6%. Even if

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

otitis media is a very common disease in children this extent of vaccine efficacy does not support an indication. The protection afforded by the vaccine against otitis is an add-on beneficial effect, and has only been described in the section 5.1.

The updated report from the Kaiser trial (February 2000) has not revealed an increase in cases with IPD caused by non-vaccine serotypes, whereas the FinOM trial showed an increase in AOM due to non-vaccine  serotypes  among  the  7VPnC  recipients.  Monitoring  of  pneumococcal  nasopharyngeal carriage  in  the  FinOM  study  at  18  months  after  immunisation  revealed  a  limited  decrease  in  the carriage of vaccine serotype pneumococci, but a decrease of non vaccine-associated serotypes among the  vaccinated  subjects  compared  with  the  control  group.  Also  in  South  Africa  similar  shifts  in carriage  of  serotypes  were  observed.  These  findings  are  early  warnings  and  suggest  that  the  nonvaccine  serotypes  could  increase,  replace  the  vaccine  serotypes  and  cause  disease  leading  to  a reduction  in  vaccine  efficacy.  The  virulence/susceptibility  to  penicillin  of  the  non-vaccine  strains might change/increase in this scenario. The  validity  of  the  assumption  that  the  7VPnC  would  also  cover  vaccine-related  serotypes  is strengthened  by  the  submitted  documentation,  including  preclinical  data.  The  efficacy  data  in  the FinOM  trial  supports  the  concept  of  cross-protection  against  related  serotypes.  It  is  reasonable  to believe that this is also the case for invasive pneumococcal disease. The serogroup estimations could thus  be  considered  justified.  However,  regarding  vaccine  serotype  19F  and  the  related  type  19A, preclinical data suggest poor cross-protection. Additional issues have been addressed in a number of postmarketing surveillance programs and post marketing studies that have been undertaken by the company. Post marketing data Since the Marketing Authorisation was granted, new data have been received which led to changes in the prescribing and patient information. These data concerned the occurrence of febrile seizures and post-marketing  information  in  relation  to  serious  and  severe  hypersensitivity  reactions,  skin  and subcutaneous tissue disorders (angioneurotic oedema and erythema multiforme), general disorders and administration  site  conditions.  New  safety  information  on  lymphadenopathy  and  on  overdose  cases was also introduced. Moreover, changes have been introduced to reflect available data on concomitant administration with meningoccoccal C conjugate vaccines as well as with hexavalent vaccines. As a condition for licensing, the MAH committed to further evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of Prevenar in previously unvaccinated older children aged 24-36 months (study 0887X-100961). In addition, the MAH committed to submit the final study report from a phase IV observational safety trial  in  older  US  children,  involving  four  different  paediatric  age  groups:  7  to  11  months,  12  to  23 months,  2  to  5  years  and  5  to  9  years  (study  0887X  -100175).  These  two  studies  have  now  been submitted  and  constitute  the  basis  for  a  variation  application  to  extend  the  maximum  age  of vaccination from 2 years to 5 years of age. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Although  the  rate  of  local  reactions  following  a  Prevenar  injection  in  the  older  children  was remarkably  high  in  these  studies,  this  must  be  weighed  against  the  seriousness  of  the  invasive pneumococcal disease. However, the incidence rates of IPD and its occurrence in different age groups as well as the distribution of serotypes vary by age and by geographic region both on a global basis and within the European community. Based on contemporary surveillance data from the countries of Europe, the serotype-specific vaccine coverage of Prevenar for older children (from 2 to 5 years, or from 2 to 6 years) is about 50 to 75%. In general the incidence rates of invasive pneumococcal disease are much lower in children above 2 years of age than in the younger infants, but still some 25% of IPD occur  in  children  2  to  5  years  of  age.  The  incidence  of  invasive  disease  varies  also  greatly  by geographic region. In addition, there is an age-dependent difference in vaccine coverage, being less in older children. However, the increasing incidence of drug-resistant pneumococcal strains is problematic and more so in certain regions, such as in South and Eastern Europe. Also, the seriousness of IPD, as shown by data on mortality rates and rates of sequelae, is notable also in older children and this supports the requested extension of indication. In conclusion, the benefit/risk ratio differs between

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

countries  and  the  use  of  the  vaccine  in  general  and  in  the  older  children,  in  particular,  must  be determined on the basis of official recommendations, as already stated in the current SPC.

The  local  reactogenicity  of  the  vaccine  in  children  &gt;2  years  of  age  is  troublesome,  but  it  was demonstrated that these reactions were transient and self-limited. Moreover, only a single injection is required  in  these  age  groups.  The  safety  data  do  not  seem  to  raise  any  major  concerns,  with  the exception of those for children with symptomatic HIV infection. Additional data are needed to clarify the benefit/risk ratio in this risk group.

The  overall  benefit/risk  relationship  of  Prevenar  in  older  children  from  2  to  5  years  of  age  was considered favourable and this variation (II-0018) received a positive opinion of the CHMP in June 2004 and a positive Commission Decision in August 2004. Benefit/risk assessment Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of Prevenar was favourable in the  following indication: Active immunisation against invasive disease (including sepsis, meningitis, bacteraemic pneumonia, bacteraemia) caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F and 23F in: -infants and young children from 2 months of age to 2 years of age -previously unvaccinated children aged 2 years to 5 years Medicinal product no longer authorised