---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:01:12
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/procomvax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: procomvax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.4503492
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-18 22:54:32.494924
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Procomvax.  This  scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2004. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Introduction Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) has been an important cause of bacterial meningitis and other serious diseases in children. Infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is also a significant public health problem  throughout  the  world  that  can  lead  to  serious  liver diseases such  as cirrhosis  and hepatocellular carcinoma. Both Hib and HBV infection can be prevented with vaccines, and a growing number of countries are recommending routine vaccination of infants against Hib and HBV. Routine use of these vaccines has been associated with a marked decline in the incidence of these diseases. Much effort has been invested in combining as many vaccines as possible in a single multivalent dose, in an attempt to reduce the cost of vaccination and to increase the acceptability and affordability of vaccination. Achieving this final goal involves the choice of appropriate formulations in order to avoid potential  interferences  and  to  ensure  compatibility  and  stability  of  the  combined  antigens.  With Procomvax it will be possible to vaccinate infants  against  invasive  Hib  disease  and  HBV  infection using  only  a  total  of  three  injections,  whereas  more  than  three  injections  would  be  needed  if monovalent Hib and Hepatitis B vaccines were used (up to 6 injections, the exact number depending on the vaccine and the vaccination schedule used). Procomvax is a combined Haemophilus influenzae type b and hepatitis B vaccine. The immunogenic components consist of polyribosylribitol phosphate (PRP) purified from Haemophilus influenzae and chemically coupled to the outer membrane protein complex (OMPC) of Neisseria meningitidis, and the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) of HBV, derived from cultures of a genetically recombinant strain of yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The immunogens in Procomvax are also the components of the licensed monovalent Hib vaccine PedavaxHIB and Pedvax HIB liquid [Haemophilus b conjugate vaccine (Meningococcal protein conjugate)] containing 15 and 7.5 µg PRP per dose and the licensed monovalent  recombinant  Hepatitis  B  vaccine  (Recombivax  HB,  HB-VAX,  H-B-VAX  II,  HB-VAX DNA, GEN H-B-VAX). Procomvax is indicated  for  vaccination  against  invasive  disease  caused  by  Haemophilus  influenzae type b and against infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in infants 6 weeks to 15 months of age. The pharmaceutical form of this vaccine is a suspension for injection provided in glass vial. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition This combined vaccine contains the following active substances: Haemophilus  influenzae  type  b  capsular  polysaccharide  (polyribosylribitol  phosphate  i.e.  PRP) covalently linked to a carrier protein (the outer membrane protein complex (OMPC) of the B11 strain of  Neiseria  meningitidis  group  B)  and  hepatitis  B  surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  derived  from  a recombinant strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae The active ingredients of Procomvax are 7.5 µ g PRP, 125 µ g OMPC and 5 µ g HBsAg formulated with 225 µ g aluminum as aluminum hydroxide in a 0.5 ml dose.

The dosage for Procomvax is based on the paediatric dosages for the marketed components of the vaccine, the  new  liquid  PedvaxHIB  formulation  (PRP-OMPC)  and  H-B-VAX-II  (Hepatitis  B  surface  antigen; HBsAg).  In  Procomvax,  the  PRP-OMPC  and  HBsAg  components  are  formulated  with  an  aluminium hydroxide adjuvant to produce the bivalent vaccine. The active components are provided in a convenient,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

pre-mixed, aluminium hydroxide-adsorbed, preservative-free, liquid formulation. It should be noted, that the formulation of Procomvax differs from the monovalent vaccines by the absence of a preservative.

A single  dose  of  combined  vaccine  Procomvax is  presented    as  a  monodose  in  a  glass  vial  (type  I glass: nominal capacity 2/ml) with an grey butylstopper and a lacquered aluminium seal with a plastic cap. An overage of 0.2 - 0.25 ml is added (final volume 0.7/ml).

<!-- image -->

Phospholipase  D  treatment  is  performed  to  separate  the  polysaccharides  from  the  phospholipids. Protein, endotoxin and residual phospholipase D are removed by phenol treatment repeated four times. Lipopolysaccharides and residual phenol are removed using a polystyrene divinylbenzene resin. The PRP product is then precipitated using calcium chloride and ethanol.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Method of preparation Briefly,  the  formulation  of  Procomvax  consists  of  the  mixing/blending  of  the  alum  adsorbed  PRPOMPC and alum adsorbed HBsAg bulks together with the dilution medium. The final bulk is mixed and stored for a maximum of 24 hours between 2-8°C until filling. The bulk is then  mixed  and  re-circulated  for  15  minutes  to  ensure  that  the  suspension  is  homogenous  prior  to filling. The mixing is maintained during the filling operation. The filled vials are stored in a cold room at 2-8°C. In accordance with the Ph. Eur., a sterility test is only  performed  on  the  final  bulk  immediately  after  mixing.  The  absence  of  a  sterile  filtration  step during the  formulation  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  the  two  active  ingredients  as  well  as  the  diluent medium are aluminium adsorbed. Furthermore, adequate sterile filtration steps as well as sterility tests are carried out ensuring sterility of the active substances at the time of blending. The validation plan of the process steps was considered to be satisfactory. Control of starting materials · Alum adsorbed PRP-OMPC Haemophilus influenzae type b bulk production (PRP) The Haemophilus influenzae type b strain was isolated from a patient in 1971, passaged several times and  lyophilised.  The  pre-master,  master  and  working  seed  lot  of  Haemophilus  were  prepared  by culture  on  chocolate  agar  slants.  The  cultures  obtained  after  suspension  in  Haemophilus  inoculum medium and modified Gotschlich medium respectively, are pooled and dispensed into cryovials stored at a temperature of ≤ - 60 ° C. All the cultures are tested for purity, identity, viability immediately after preparation. The master and the working seed cultures are also tested at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 years for identity and viability. Fermentation:  the  culture  is  prepared  after  thawing  and  inoculating  the  working  seed  vial  onto chocolate  agar  slants  and  is  then  transferred  into  liquid  media.  This  inoculum  is  transferred  to  a fermentor  containing  40  l  of  medium  and  incubated.  The  culture  is  then  transferred  to  a  800  l fermentor containing approximately 550 L of the previous medium and fermented at a pH between 6.6 and  7.4  under  stirring  and  aeration  conditions.  A  phenol  solution  is  added  to  inactivate  the  culture which is held at a temperature between +36 ° C and +42 ° C for at least one hour. The culture is cooled and  transferred  to  a  tank  maintained  at  +2 ° C  to  +8 ° C.  The  culture  is  clarified  and  collected  in  a portable tank and held for up to 45 days at a temperature of +2 ° C and +8 ° C. Chocolate  agar  also  contains  only  category  IV  bovine  material  since  December  1997  when  the supplier implemented a change (replacement of the only category II risk material originally used in the chocolate agar by category IV bovine material). A certificate of origin is provided for Chocolate agar medium showing that bovine material used originates from U.S., New Zealand and Australia. Purification: the culture broth is concentrated by ultrafiltration at a temperature below +12 ° C in order to  reduce  the  level  of  low  molecular  weight  impurities.  Ethanol  is  added  to  precipitate  protein  and nucleic acid impurities at a temperature below +12 ° C. This step is repeated four times. At the fourth step, the product is precipitated, dried and stored at a temperature below -60 ° C.

All the steps of the fermentation and purification process are clearly described.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Deviations from Ph.Eur. requirements relating to the testing for protein, endotoxin and pyrogenicity are fully justified by the company.

## Neisseria meningitidis bulk production (OMPC)

The Neisseria meningitidis group B (strain B11) was isolated from a patient in 1966 and passaged four times. In 1986, the master and the working seed lot system was prepared using Mueller-Hinton agar slants. In 1988, the master seed lot was re-qualified as a pre-master seed lot.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Culture and fermentation: after thawing, the working seed vial is inoculated onto Mueller-Hinton agar slants and incubated. The resulting colonies are resuspended using Gotschlich medium and added into larger flasks containing this medium, for incubation on a shaker until the optimum optical density is achieved  at  37ºC.  This  inoculum  is  transferred  to  a    fermentor  containing  50  l  of  Neisseria meningitidis medium and incubated at 37ºC for up to 8 hours.  After exposure of the culture in a 1000 L fermentor at 37ºC for at least 10 hours, the culture is inactivated by adding phenol.  Inactivation is performed at 36-42ºC for up to 4 hours. Mueller Hinton agar contains bovine material of category type IV and is therefore considered safe. Purification: OMPC is isolated from the cell slurry by detergent extraction. Cell debris are removed first by a low speed centrifugation. The second and third centrifugation steps are carried out at a high speed level in order to pellet OMPC and to leave the soluble impurities in the effluent. The product is resuspended in TED buffer and filtered. Filtration concentrates the product to 4 L and a diafiltration with 20 L of sterile distilled water is performed. The purified OMPC bulk is stored at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C for up to 2 years. Conjugation and adsorption of PRP and OMPC The purified PRP and the OMPC are chemically derivatised in order to produce the reactive bridging chains for PRP and the terminal thiol for OMPC necessary for conjugation. The derivatised PRP bulk is stored at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C for up to 160 days. These groups react together to form the final PRP-OMPC conjugate which is concentrated and purified by diafiltration in order to eliminate impurities. The PRP-OMPC bulk is stored at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C for up to 1 year. The PRP-OMPC bulk is diluted and mixed with aluminium hydroxide diluent to form the bulk alum adsorbed liquid vaccine, which is stored at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C for up to 1 year. All reagents used are adequately sterile filtered. Characterisation: characterisation testing of PRP-OMPC is performed by amino acid analysis of the conjugated product. The PRP/OMPC ratio and molecular sizing provide evidence of the conjugated PRP and free PRP. Analytical  validation:  all  the  methods  used  for  the  in-process  controls  (IPCs)  for  the  release  of  the active substance have been validated. The company has shown that immunogenicity of PRP-OMPC in man does not clearly correlate with immunogenicity in mice. In addition, the company has identified some biochemical parameters which give more relevant immunogenicity information on the conjugation of PRP to OMPC. The omission of the  mouse immunogenicity assay is scientifically justified and therefore this test may be omitted in agreement with the Ph.Eur. monograph. Process validation: the process validation consists of a retrospective analysis of 35 production batches. Assay data are given for important intermediate products, as well as for the final products. Most of the 35  batches  presented  contained  mercurothiolate  as  preservative,  which  has  subsequently  been withdrawn from the production of PRP-OMPC valence. Only few preservative-free batches have been produced so far. Hence no statistical analysis is proposed for these batches. Results  from  a  prospective  validation  study  have  demonstrated  that  the  PRP-OMPC  conjugation process removes residual reagents.

The active ingredient is defined as a Bulk Alum Product (BAP) which is a sterile suspension of the antigenic particles adsorbed onto alum in isotonic saline solution buffered with sodium phosphate.

Batch sizes and batch analysis: the batch sizes range from 9 to 100 l with a typical batch size of about 20 l. The data of six validation lots covering batch sizes from 7.4 - 29.4 L have been shown to meet

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the criteria of passing all of the intermediate product release test specifications. Analysis certificates have  been  provided  for  eight  production  batches  (PRP-OMPC  conjugated  alum  adsorbed  bulk). Controls  were  carried  out  at  each  step  of  the  production  process.  All  batches  complied  with  the proposed specifications.

## · Alum adsorbed recombinant Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)

Medicinal product no longer authorised Development  genetics:  the  biosynthesis  of  the  HBsAg  antigen  utilizes  a  recombinant  plasmid expressed  in  the  host  cell  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  The  plasmid  codes  for  a  24  kDa  membrane protein called the S protein. Cell bank system: the pre-master, master and working seed lot were prepared according to the same procedure consisting of re-suspension in a medium containing 17% glycerol. The cultures obtained were aliquoted, frozen and stored at a temperature of ≤ -60 ° C. A new lot of Master Seed has recently been prepared, for which extensive analyses, including a full-scale fermentation showed satisfactory results. Culture  and  fermentation:  the  working  seed  is  expanded  to  sufficient  cell  suspension  volume  for inoculation in a production fermentor (800 or 1000/l). At the optimum optical density, the culture is transferred to the production fermentor containing the YEHD medium (containing dextrose, yeast and soya peptone). The entire fermentor is harvested through a 0.65 micron pore size filtration membrane. The cellular suspension obtained after concentration can be stored at -20 ° C for up to one year. HBsAg is extracted with Triton X-100 after the mechanical disruption of cells in the presence of a protease inhibitor. Purification: the process purification is defined as two phases of purification, followed by several steps of chemical treatment leading to the aluminium adsorbed active ingredient Bulk Alum Product (BAP). A diafiltration is carried out in order to eliminate residual thiocyanate as well as other impurities and a sterile  filtration  and  an  appropriate  dilution  (or  concentration)  are  then  performed.  The  product  is stored into glass bottles at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C for up to one year. Formaldehyde treatment; this treatment is carried out at +36 ° C ± 2 ° C for at least 60 hours and results in the Final Aqueous Product (FAP). Formulation: an alum solution is added to the FAP. The pH increase caused by the addition of NaOH causes the precipitation of aluminium hydroxide and antigen adsorption. After a 2-hour incubation, the bulk alum adsorbed product is tested for completeness of adsorption. After at least 5 settle/decant/resuspension cycles, the active substance is obtained at a concentration of 40 µ g/ml. It can be stored for 2 years at a temperature between +2 ° C and +8 ° C. The process is well described. Characterisation: characterisation has been carried out on five manufacturing batches of HBsAg at two different steps, using physicochemical, biological and immunological techniques. Specifications  and  routine  tests:  on  the  basis  of  the  experience  gained  with  this  product,  it  can  be concluded that the active substance is released for further  processing  after satisfactory  control tests (IPCs and tests are performed on the BAP). These tests comply with the requirements of the Ph. Eur. monograph and provide assurance of the quality and consistency from batch to batch. Process  validation:  the  active  ingredient  BAP  is  well  characterised.  A  sufficient  number  of  batches have been analysed in detail and show the consistency of the production process.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Based on this experience, the company proposed to tighten the in-process control for:

- proteins for filtered sterile solution
- formaldehyde
- aluminium for the bulk adsorbed product
- endotoxins

## · Finished product

Medicinal product no longer authorised Impurities:  potential  impurities  such  as  yeast  protein,  thiocyanate,  triton  X-100  and  formaldehyde arising during the production process are routinely tested for. On the basis of batch analysis results, other impurities such yeast DNA, carbohydrates, lipids and proteins, are not routinely tested. Batch analysis: results are provided for 8 batches, 3 containing mercurothiolate as preservative and 5 preservative-free. Satisfactory answers have been given to the authorities with regard to the present fiducial limits for IVRP test for future batches and with regard to the batch sizes of the consistency lots. · Other Ingredients Information  on  each  constituent  of  the  dilution  medium  and  the  Ph.  Eur  specifications  for  routine control tests has been provided. The composition of the dilution medium is used for both monovalent bulks. · Packaging materials The packaging materials are quality controlled.  The vaccine is contained in glass vials (Type I glass) enclosed by rubber stoppers, aluminium seals and plastic caps. Control of the finished product Specifications  and  routine  tests:  the  proposed  routine  tests  to  be  performed  are:  sterility,  general safety,  pyrogenicity,  completeness  of  adsorption,  PRP/HBsAg  identity,  in  vitro  relative  potency (IVRP for HBsAg), PRP content, pH determination, aluminium content, sodium chloride content and filling volume. Evaluation of data to set a specification for the hepatitis B IVRP test is currently in process. Improvements were made during the assessment concerning specifications for the IVRP test, pH and aluminium content.  The deletion of the mouse immunogenicity assay for the Hib component of the vaccine was fully justified by the company. Determination of aluminium by atomic emission spectrometry, pyrogenicity, testing according to 21 CFR, part 610.13 method and LPS testing at the bulk conjugate are not in full compliance with the Ph.Eur. requirements, but have been fully justified by the company. Validation  data  have  been  provided  for  the  non  Ph.  Eur.  methods.  Batch  analysis  data  have  been provided for 8 batches, 3 containing thiomersal as preservative and 5 preservative-free. Stability Extensive  stability  data  have  been  provided  for  three  lots  of  each  of  the  two  aluminum  hydroxideadsorbed bulks used to manufacture Procomvax, as well as three lots of the finished product vaccine. · Active substances The  data  demonstrate  that  the  Preservative-Free  Liquid  Alum  Adsorbed  PRP-OMPC  bulks  and  the HBsAg  bulks  remain  stable  when  stored  at  2-8 ° C  for  24  months,  supporting  a  24  month  dating period. All of the assays used are described and have been validated. Mouse potency data for the HBsAg after storage of the BAP for 24 months have been presented for 3 lots.

Three lots of the finished product Procomvax were assessed for stability at 2-8º C over a 24 month period with an additional 12 months planned in the study. No significant changes were observed for any of the parameters tested on the three lots over a 24 month period. The data provided support a 24-month  dating  period  for  the  finished  product  vaccine.  Data  on  the  36  month  time  point  were

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

prepared  at  the  time  of  the  initial  submission  and  the  company  intended  to  file  a  variation  for  the extension  of  the  shelf  life.  This  data  has  later  been  supplied.    Due  to  the  deletion  of  the  mouse immunogenicity test for Hib, the date of filling of final containers is used for calculation of the period of validity.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Accelerated stability studies were carried out for six months at 20-25º C and 36-38º C. No changes were observed in any of the parameters tested for 6 months at 20-25º C. Notable decreases in PRP polysaccharide levels as assayed by EIA could be observed for all three lots at 36-38º C. Due to the high  variability  of  the  EIA  the  company  has  implemented  a  new  HPLC  assay  to  assess  the  PRP content of Procomvax. The new assay is more reliable and variability is about 5% RSD in contrast to the EIA that shows variability of 20% relative standard deviation (RSD). 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics The company to progress to the clinical studies of the combined vaccine regarded the preclinical data gained  with  the  mono  components  as  sufficient.  However  the  combination  Hib-Hep  B  as  a  new vaccine is addressed with some deficiency, especially in the preclinical part, with respect to the 'Note for Guidance on Preclinical Pharmacological and Toxicological Testing of Vaccines' (CPMP/465/95). However, this Note for Guidance was not in force at the time of preparation and submission of the dossier. Nevertheless the company has provided the relevant clinical data for the combination product. From the current point of view this procedure may be criticised, but information and data presented form a sufficient basis to allow approval of Part III of the dossier. · Immunogenicity Anti-PRP Preclinical studies have been conducted in animals to demonstrate the equivalence of antibodies raised against  the  Hib   component  of  the  newly  formulated  combination  vaccine  to  those  induced  by  the monovalent  PedvaxHIB   formulation  (P).  These  include  infant  Rhesus  and  African  Green  monkey immunogenicity studies and immunogenic potency determined in BALB/c mice by estimation of the minimum dose required to induce an antibody response in 50% of immunized mice (ED 50 ). Infant Rhesus Monkeys:  Since the primary target population for initiating the immunization series for the Hib conjugate vaccine is 2-month-old infants, the immunogenicity of the Hib component of the vaccines was tested in 2- to 3-month old infant Rhesus monkeys. Infant Rhesus monkeys were injected intramuscularly on days 0 and 28 with doses of either 1 or 0.01 µg of polysaccharide as PRP-OMPC conjugate or a monovalent PedvaxHIB. The monkeys were bled prior to each injection and on day 42. Doses of either 1 or 0.01 µg of polysaccharide as PRP-OMPC conjugate both induce high-titer antiPRP antibody responses in 2- to 3-month-old infant Rhesus monkeys. However 1µg was selected for further evaluation, as it is closer to the dosage level used in human infants. The results demonstrate that a 1 µg dose of polysaccharide as PRP-OMPC conjugate in Procomvax (PR), is as immunogenic as a 1 µg dose of the monovalent PedvaxHIB vaccine (P). Both induce high antibody  titers  in  infant  Rhesus  monkeys.  The  immune  response  was  found  to  increase  with  the number  of  injections.  The  geometric  mean  antibody  titers  (GMT's)  at  day  42  were:  39  -  404  for thiomersal-free  PRP-OMPC  conjugate  in  combined  vaccine,  79  -  164  thiomersal-containing  PRPOMPC conjugate in combined vaccine and 30-159 for the monovalent vaccine. Anti-HBsAg

African Green Monkeys: Infant African green monkeys were chosen to test the combination vaccine, since the target population for the combination vaccine is children less than 2 years old.

Infant  African  green  monkeys  were  injected  intramuscularly  on  days  0,  28  and  96  with  0.5  ml  of inoculum containing a full  human  dose  of  either  Procomvax  or  a  monovalent  Recombivax  HB (R) control. The same dosage, i.e. 5 µ g, of Recombivax HB and Procomvax (from thiomersal-containing

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

lots) was used. The monkeys were bled prior to each injection and on days 42 and 110.  The sera were evaluated for anti-HBs antibody by using a commercial RIA kit.

Evaluation of the antibody titers obtained by immunization with Recombivax HB and the combination vaccine Procomvax show that both vaccines induce a strong immune response in the infant African Green  monkey  model.  However  the  titers  achieved  by  Procomvax  vaccination  are  only  one  third compared to Recombivax HB. The company comments that anti HBsAg titers observed in African green monkeys should not be extrapolated to humans. In addition the GMT increase observed after the second  and  third  dose  are  comparable  for  both  Recombivax  HB  and  the  combined  vaccine.  A statistically  significant  lower  GMT  for  the  PR  group  than  that  for  the  P+R  group  has  also  been observed  in  the  pivotal  clinical  study  study  002.  However  the  reduction  in  titer  is  of  questionable clinical significance as anti-HBs titers =10mIU/ml are regarded as fully protective.

The  lack  of  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  is  accepted  now  in  view  of  the  arguments  and  data presented. Firstly, Procomvax represents a combination of two well-known components, which have been proven to  be  safe  and  well  tolerated  in  clinical  use,  without  addition  of  any  new  component. Secondly, the potential for toxicity was addressed in clinical studies, based on the positive results of the few preclinical tests performed.

Medicinal product no longer authorised No analysis has been performed with respect to the class of antibodies formed and the duration of the immune response. However the company notes that the isotype response in African green monkeys is not  predictive  of  the  response  in  humans  and  consequently  the  study  was  focussed  on  determining antibody responses, which is generally accepted as a surrogate marker for protective immunity. Inbred Mice: Studies of immunogenic potency were carried out in 6 to 8 week-old female BALB/c mice.  Groups of 6 to 8 mice were injected intraperitoneally with 0.5 ml of vaccine containing 0.5 µg, 0.1 µg, 0.02 µg or 0.004 µg PRP-OMPC in aluminium diluent on days 0 and 14. The mice were bled on  day  21.  ED 50  values  were  calculated  by  determining  the  number  of  mice  that  responded  with greater than or equal to 1 µg anti-PRP antibody/ml for each dosage level. The results  show that the dosage range of the combination vaccine required to induce = 1 µg antiPRP/ml  in  at  least  50%  of  the  mice  is  comparable  to  the  dosage  range  of  the  monovalent  liquid PedvaxHIB formulation. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic  studies  have  only  been  performed  with  the  Hib  component  of  the  combination vaccine Procomvax. The company has justified this. Toxicology · Safety Testing General Safety testing is conducted on each lot of  Procomvax. This testing is conducted in two animal species, guinea pigs and mice. The results complied with the requirements. · Acute toxicity (for the HepB component) Recombivax HB was evaluated for acute toxicity by the oral, intraperitoneal, and subcutaneous routes in mice and rats.  The resulting responses were not significantly different from the placebo (aluminium diluent) and the LD 50  observed was &gt; 50 mL/kg. · Rabbit Pyrogen Testing PR was tested for pyrogenicity by injecting  New Zealand White rabbits intravenously with 1.0 ml of diluted  test  vaccine  (containing  at  least  0.025  µg  PRP/ml)  per  kg  of  rabbit  body  weight.  A  second pyrogenicity test also was conducted in which 1.0 ml of aluminium-adsorbed vaccine containing 7.5 µg of PRP-OMPC was administered intramuscularly (IM) to each rabbit, and temperatures were monitored for five hours. PR with or without thiomersal was found not to give an increase of more than 0.6ºC in temperature. All lots of Procomvax were found to pass the pyrogen tests. It is confirmed that pyrogenicity tests were performed according to the U.S. CFR. · Repeated dose toxicity studies

## · Mutagenicity studies

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Mutagenicity studies were not performed in accordance to relevant guidelines.

## · Carcinogenicity studies

Studies were not performed in laboratory animals for PR

## · Local tolerance toxicity study

<!-- image -->

| Study                                            | Vaccination Period                               | Study Sites                                      | Number Enrolled/ Receiving PR                    | Study Design                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| General safety in adults                         | General safety in adults                         | General safety in adults                         | General safety in adults                         | General safety in adults                                                                                                                                                                               |
| 001                                              | 8/90-9/90                                        | US                                               | 21/21                                            | open study, PR administered at Day 0 and one month later                                                                                                                                               |
| Safety and immunogenicity in infants             | Safety and immunogenicity in infants             | Safety and immunogenicity in infants             | Safety and immunogenicity in infants             | Safety and immunogenicity in infants                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 002 Pivotal                                      | 3/92-10/93                                       | US                                               | 882/661                                          | longer randomized, open, infants given PR from 1 of 3 lots or concurrent injections of monovalent vaccines (P+R), at 2, 4, 12-15 months Concurrent administration of other pediatric vacines permitted |
| 004                                              | 6/93-4/95                                        | US                                               | 126/126                                          | open, infants given PR with coadministration DTwP/IPV or DTwP+OPV, MMRat 15 months                                                                                                                     |
| 005                                              | 12/93-12/95                                      | US                                               | 208/69                                           | no randomized, open, infants given PR, P+R, P?R with co-administration of DTwP+OPV and MMR                                                                                                             |
| 009                                              | 1/96 ongoing                                     | US                                               | product 254/254                                  | randomized, open, children 12-15 months of age given a dose of PR concurrently or 6 weeks prior to MMRand Varicella vaccine                                                                            |
| 411-295                                          | 1/96 ongoing                                     | US                                               | 67/67                                            | control arm of a randomized of open study, infants given PR+IPV and DTaP at 2, 4, 6 months.                                                                                                            |
| Expanded surveillance for serious adverse events | Expanded surveillance for serious adverse events | Expanded surveillance for serious adverse events | Expanded surveillance for serious adverse events | Expanded surveillance for serious adverse events                                                                                                                                                       |
| 013 014 017                                      | 1/93-2/96 12/92-4/96 3/95- ongoing               | US                                               | 721/721 214/214 60/60                            | randomised, double blind (or open) study, infants given PR concomitantly with an investigational pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (with DTwP, OPV)                                                       |
| U93- 3663-01 U93- 3663-02                        | 5/93-5/95 5/93-5/94                              | US                                               | 294/294 527/527                                  | randomised, double blind (or open) study, infants given PR concomitantly with investigational DTwP/IPV vaccine.                                                                                        |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The company refers to the information available for the mono components. Since no new components were included within the combination, the evaluation of safety in clinical study is regarded as justified and sufficient. Overview of part IV of the dossier: clinical aspects Clinical data of Procomvax (PR) are summarised in the following table: The submitted dossier included only the complete reports of four of these studies (001-002-004-005). Summaries of protocol 009 and 411-295 have been submitted; complete final reports are awaited.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Phase I studies

Protocol 001 was a general safety study involving 21 adults. This was an open-label study designed to evaluate the safety of PR in healthy adults prior to initiating studies in healthy infant population. The combined vaccine was administered at day 0 and one month later.

## · Phase III studies

Medicinal product no longer authorised Pivotal  study  (002)  was  an  open,  randomized  study  of  safety  and  immunogenicity  comparing three batches (CW927, CW928, CW929) of combined PR vaccine with the two monovalent vaccines (P+R) administered concurrently at different sites. Two  schedules  2-4-15  months  and  2-4-12  months  were  assessed.  At  each  study  site,  infants  were initially  assigned  to  the  2-4-15  month  schedule  until  approximately  half  of  the  total  targeted enrollment was achieved. All infants enrolled after that were assigned to the 2-4-12 month schedule. However, the scheduling of a third dose of vaccine was not randomised. One of the three consistency lots of PR was not available when the study started; it was put into use only  when  subjects  were  assigned  to  vaccination  at  2-4-12  months.  At  that  point,  allocation  to treatment was based on the second randomisation schedule. Concurrent administration of other standard pediatric vaccines with PR or P+R according to standard immunization  practices  (DTwP,  OPV,  MMR)  was  permitted  but  not  required.  In  these  cases,  they were administered at a separate injection site. The  vaccines  were  administered  by  intramuscular  injection  in  the  thigh.  Antibodies  to  PRP  and HBsAg  were  measured  in  blood  samples  taken  at  2,  4,  6,  12  or  15  and  13  or  16  months.  By amendment, the protocol allowed for the collection of blood samples at approximately 7 months of age from a non-random volunteer subset of subjects who had received PR or P+R concurrently DTwP and OPV to ascertain antibody responses. The original analysis tested for difference as failure to reject the null hypothesis and was intended to lead to a conclusion of similarity. A re-analysis of the immunogenicity data was requested by the US FDA: analysis was performed consistent with the objective of evaluating equivalence among the PR lots and between the PR lots and P+R (difference of 10 percentage points in the rates of subjects with anti-PRP titer &gt; 1µg/ml and anti-HBs titer = 10 mIU/ml). A per-protocol approach was used. A total of 882 subjects were enrolled. Protocol 004 was an open-label, multicenter study designed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of  routine  paediatric  vaccines  given  concomitantly  with  PR.  A  total  of  126  infants  were  enrolled. Infants were given PR at 2, 4, and 15 months with coadministration of DTPw+OPV at 2 and 4 months of age (or DTPw/IPV at 2 months of age) and DTPa+OPV+MMR at 15 months of age. Blood samples were taken at 6 months of age and 1 month after the third injection. The null hypothesis being that the immunological  response  rates  to  PR  given  concomitantly  with  other  routine  paediatric  vaccines  is more than 10 percentage points lower than the pre-specified expected responses. Protocol 005 was a randomized open-label multicenter study. A total of 208 subjects were enrolled. Infants  given  PR,  P+R,  or  P  followed  by  R  a  month  later,  at  2,  4,  and  15  months  of  age  with  coadministration  of  DTPw+OPV  at  2  and  4  months  of  age  and  MMR  at  15  months  of  age.  Blood samples were taken at 2, 4, 6, 7, and 17 months of age. The objective of the study was to estimate antiPRP and anti-HB levels at 6 months of age and the levels of antibodies to diphtheria toxin, tetanus toxin, pertussis and poliovirus at 7 months of age. No formal statistical comparisons were performed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Antibody to (Assay Methods)                                               | Protocol 002                                                             | Protocol 004                                                                                         | Protocol 005                                                                                  |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| PRP (RIA)                                                                 | %>1.0 µ g 2 months post injection 2 (P2)                                 | %>1.0 µ g 2 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 75%                                       | %>1.0 µ g 2 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 70%                                |
| HBsAg (AUSAB RIA)                                                         | % ≥ 10mIU/ml 1 month post injection 3 (P3)                               | % ≥ 10mIU/ml 2 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 90%                                    | % ≥ 10mIU/ml 2 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 86%                             |
| Poliovirus types 1, 2, 3 (inhibition test)                                | %neutralising antibody ≥ 4 3 months post injection 2 (P2)                | %neutralising antibody ≥ 4 3 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 90%                      | %neutralising antibody ≥ 4 3 months post injection 2 (P2) expected response 90%               |
| Diphtheria (vero cells) Tetanus (EIA) Pertussis (microagglut ination EIA) | % ≥ to fourfold rise relative to baseline 3 months post rejection 2 (P2) | longer % ≥ to fourfold rise relative to baseline 1 month post rejection 3 (P3) expected response 90% | % ≥ to fourfold rise relative to baseline 1 month post rejection 3 (P3) expected response 90% |
| Measles (EIA) Mumps (EIA) Rubella (EIA)                                   | seroconversion in initally seronegative subjects                         | no seroconversion in initally seronegative subjects expected response 90%                            |                                                                                               |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Immunogenicity Antibody levels of &gt;1.0 µg/ml anti-PRP titer and ≥ 10 mIU/ml of anti-HBs titer were designated as the primary  endpoints  for  assessing  immunogenicity.  In  the  original  protocol,  Geometric  Mean  Titers (GMT)  was  defined  as  the  primary  outcome  variable.  In  the  final  data  analysis  plan,  GMT  was designed as a secondary outcome variable because it was felt that the development of certain antibody levels were more relevant clinically, than GMTs. · Anti-PRP response Two months after the second dose of vaccine, at the primary time point of 6 months of age, the serum anti-PRP response was considered to be satisfactory, within the range of anti-PRP responses obtained in immunogenicity studies of monovalent vaccine (53% to 100%). However in the pivotal study 002 the responses in the PR and P+R treatment groups are considered as slightly low and are not considered to be equivalent. Moreover, data on anti-PRP responses (% achieving &gt; 0.15 µg/ml and &gt; 1 µg/ml) against different lots demonstrated a lack of consistency that required clarification. During the oral explanation on 15 December 1998, the company clarified the variability observed between lots. Eight  to  11  months  after  the  second  dose  of  vaccine,  before  administration  of  the  third  dose,  the percentages of subjects developing anti-PRP &gt; 1.0 µ g/ml were found to be very low - lower than those usually reported, whatever the schedule of vaccination.

Although precise immunological correlates of protection against invasive Hib disease have not been established, antibody estimates such as = 0.15 µ g/ml (assumed to give short-term protection) and = 1 µ g/ml  (assumed  to  correlate  with  long-term  protection)  have  been  widely  used  in  all  studies  with modern conjugated Hib vaccines. Before the third injection, the responses of children in the PR and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

P+R treatment group were not considered to be equivalent for both % &gt; 0.15 µ g/ml and the % &gt; 1.0 µ g/ml.

Therefore in order to address the question of adequate protection of infants between the second and the third booster dose, the company provided additional information. In several studies, PR was shown to  induce similar levels of anti-PRP titers and GMTs when compared to P containing 7.5 µ g liquid PRP-OMP (Monovalent PedvaxHIB containing either 7.5 µ g liquid or 15 µ g lyophilized PRP-OMP are equivalent as far as immunogenicity is concerned). Prior to the third dose (at 12-15 months of age), 77.0 % of the infants given PR had &gt; 0.15 µ g/ml and 22.1 % had &gt; 1.0 µ g/ml of anti-PRP.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The company also refers to a former study in the Navajo population. In this study, anti-PRP responses elicited by 2 doses of lyophilized PedvaxHIB given at 2 and 4 months of age were similar to those of protocol 002. The efficacy for protection in the Navajo study was estimated at 93 % (for follow-up through 18 months of age) and 100 % (for follow-up through 15 months of age). Nevertheless considering the low levels of anti-PRP titers before the third injection and the fact that the  primary  immunisation  schedule  comprises  only  2  doses,  an  injection  of  a  third  dose  at  12/15 months of age is considered to be absolutely mandatory; a statement indicating that all three doses must be administered to complete the vaccination regimen has been incorporated into the SPC. · Anti-HBs response In the pivotal study 002, the percentage of infants with anti-HBs ≥ 10 mIU/ml before the third dose were  lower-following  administration  of  the  combined  vaccine  PR  (78%  -  80%)  than  that  observed with  the  monovalent  anti-hepatitis  B  vaccine  (95%  -  97%).  One  month  after  the  third  dose  of  PR vaccine, more than 97% of subjects in each of lots of schedule groups developed ≥ 10 mIU/ml of anti HBs. However, the comparison of GMTs of PR to P+R following the third injection showed a statistically significant difference (p=0.011), lower for the PR group than for P+R group. However, the reduction in titer (4468 mIU/ml as compared to 6944 mIU/ml) is of questionable clinical significance as antiHBs titers = 10 mIU/ml are regarded as fully protective. · Concomitant use with other vaccines Antibody responses to poliovirus types 1-3 In study 004, 95% to 100% developed antibodies to all polio types following the third dose which was considered  to  be  satisfactory.  Discrepancies  between  centres  and  vaccines  administered  have  been observed. Among the 23 non-responders from the largest study site, serologically followed up after the third  dose,  some remained poor responders with low antibody titers. More detailed information has been provided by the company and data are available for 22 of 23 non-responders after a 3 rd dose of OPV. Of the 22 non-responders 19 seroconverted after an additional dose of OPV, however, 3 failed to develop specific antibodies (1 to polio type 1 and 2 to polio type 3). It is not clear why the response to polio vaccine in protocol 004 differed qualitatively by Centre. Nevertheless it seems rather unlikely that PR impairs the immune response to polio antigens. Antibody responses to DTP In  studies  002,  004  and  005,  90%  to  100%  of  the  children  receiving  PR  concomitantly  DTwP, displayed  a ≥ 4-fold  rise  in  antibody  to  diphtheria  toxin  and  100%  displayed  a ≥ 4-fold  rise  in antibody to tetanus toxin. There is good evidence that PR can be co-administered with DTwP. The initial data on co-administration of PR with DTaP for the primary series was too small (18 subjects) to allow any definite conclusions. However additional data (51 subjects) on the efficacy evaluation  of  the  primary  vaccination  series  of  an  acellular  pertussis  vaccine  based  upon  defined serological correlates of protection was presented by the company during the oral explanation on 15 December 1998. A statement indicating the limited data has been incorporated into the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Antibody responses to measles, mumps and rubella (MMR)

In studies 002, 004 and 005, among the children given MMR concomitantly with PR and P+R, 94 to 100% of subjects developed antibodies to measles virus, 97.3 to 100% developed antibodies to mumps virus and 91.3 to 100%  developed  antibodies  to rubella virus.  Additional  data  (GMT  and seroconversion  rates  compiled  from  studies  002,  004,  005  and  009)  have  been  provided  by  the company  showing that the PR can be administered concurrently with MMR.

The  rate  of  unusual  high-pitched  crying  reported  in  a  large,  historical  study  following  DTwP vaccination is 0.1% which is much lower than the rate observed in the studies provided in this dossier. According to the company reporting of 'unusual high-pitched crying' may be an artefact because this event  was  prompted  for  on  diary  cards  without  a  precise  definition  (parents  might  have  confused unusual prolonged crying with high-pitched screaming).

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Interchangeability Although  there  is  indirect  evidence  from  published  data on  the  interaction  of  Hib  vaccine,  direct evidence  for  interchangeability  of  PR  (Procomvax)  with  other  single  Hib  conjugate  vaccines  in  a priming series is presently unavailable. The SPC has been amended accordingly. Safety Body temperature, injection site and systemic adverse events in studies 001, 002, 004 and 005 were recorded for at least 6 days after each injection. In addition, subjects vaccinated in all 11 studies were monitored for serious adverse events. · Local reactions Of the subjects enrolled in study protocol 001, 95% (20/21) reported injection site reactions after the first dose (one subject withdrew from the study) and 85% after the second dose. In study protocol 002, no significant differences were found for injection-site reaction between PR and P + R. Local reactions in study protocol 004 were reported with a higher frequency following administration of DTwP/IPV (dual-chambered syringe) +PR than after the administration of DTwP+OPV+PR. These differences  may  reflect  the  dose  volumes  given  at  2  months  of  age,  since  DTwP/IPV  is  a  1.0  ml injection and DTwP+OPV is only a 0.5 ml injection. · Systemic reactions Of the subjects enrolled in study protocol 001, systemic adverse reactions were reported in 14% of the subjects (following the first dose): none were serious. In study 002, the frequency of unusual high-pitched crying (UHPC) following administration of PR as compared  to  P+R,  was  significantly  higher  after  the  second  injection  (p=0.016).  Regarding  other systemic adverse events, irritability was significantly more frequent in the PR treatment group at any injection (p=0.045). Cases of rash were more frequently reported following administration of PR than following administration of P+R. In a post hoc investigation of the data, the odds-ratios were calculated to compare the frequency of unusual  high-pitched  crying  in  subjects  receiving  DTwP+PR  versus  those  receiving  PR  alone.  The odds ratio was 1.72 (95% CI 0.77-3.88) post dose 1 and 1.63 (95% CI 0.57-4.66) post dose 2. This suggests that unusual crying is more likely with concurrent DTwP. However, the lower bound of the 95%  CI  is  below  1.0  (no  association)  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  firmly  concluded  that  DTwP  is associated with a higher incidence of these adverse events. The company provided review of studies with P and R in infants who received these vaccines without concurrent DTwP.  The  frequency  of unusual high-pitched crying  was 0.8%-1.7%  following administration of 15 µ g dose of the licensed lyophilised Hib formulation (P) and this event was not reported in two previous studies of R (2.5 µ g).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  study  004,  as  there  was  no  control  group  (DTwP  -  PR)  the  analysis  of  the  results  is  difficult. Systemic reactions, particularly unusual high-pitched crying, were reported with an exceptionally high frequency (with a higher incidence in the treatment group DTwP/IPV).

As with the two previous study protocols 002 and 004, systemic reactions, particularly unusual highpitched crying, were reported with an exceptional high frequency infants enrolled in study protocol 005.

1.

2.

3.

4.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Serious adverse events Thirty nine events which met one or more of the defining criteria of a serious adverse event (SAE), were reported within 14 days in a total of 3353 subjects in the groups PR, P+R, P followed by R one month later. Of the 39 SAEs the numbers observed in each group were: -33/2993 (1.1%) receiving PR -6/290 (2.1%) receiving P+R -none of the 70 subjects receiving P followed by R one month later None were considered by the investigator to be possibly, probably or definitely related to the study vaccines.  A  re-evaluation  and  a  detailed  report  of  the  39  cases  with  serious  adverse  events  was submitted  by  the  company.  After  analysis  of  the  data,  a  causal  relationship  seems  rather  unlikely between administration of PR and these serious adverse events. · Deaths Detailed  reports  on  the  4  deaths  have  been  submitted.  An  association  between  these  deaths  and preceding vaccinations (including PR/ Procomvax or P+R) seems unlikely and the deaths have been attributed to Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Consistency of lots Data  from  study  002  on  anti-PRP  responses  (percentage  achieving  &gt;  0.15 µ g/ml  and  &gt;  1 µ g/ml) against different PR lots demonstrated a lack of consistency that required clarification. During the oral explanation on 15 December 1998, the company clarified satisfactorily the variability observed between lots. Post-marketing experience Data collected from a large post-marketing database show that PR is generally well-tolerated and no condition consistent with, or suspicious for, unusual or high-pitched crying is documented. However it is noted that adverse events such as crying may not be spontaneously reported by physicians. Two post-marketing safety studies of PR are ongoing; a trial evaluating the concomitant use of PR with DTaP and IPV (Protocol 011) and a field trial to evaluate medical events following vaccination (Protocol 012). The design of these trials do not address the question of UHPC as they do not compare the 2 groups PR and P+R. Further information provided by the company The company discussed the following outstanding issues during the oral presentation on 15 December 1998. efficacy of PRP-OMPC; necessity of the third dose interaction with other paediatric vaccines (DTaP) interchangeability with other Hib vaccines additional data demonstrating batch consistency safety; unusual high-pitched crying (UHPC) During the oral presentation on 15 December 1998, the company provided satisfactory explanations to all except the safety issue. The SPC was amended with respect to the first three issues relating to the efficacy, interaction, interchangeability.

<!-- image -->

Regarding the safety issue,it was discussed and agreed by the CPMP that further written explanation was  required;  in  particular,  the  potential  significance  of  'UHPC'  in  relation  to  brain  damage  and neurological sequelae.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Following  the  submission  of  the  additional  written  explanation  by  the  company  which  included opinions  from  four  independent  experts  on  the  clinical  and  scientific  meaning  of  'UHPC',  it  was concluded that there are no scientific data pointing to an association between 'UHPC' occurring after administration of inactivated vaccines such as PR, and brain damage.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A  higher  frequency  of  'UHPC'  and  irritability  with  PR  compared  to  P+R  has  been  observed,  the difference  being  statistically  significant  only  at  some  time  points.  Thus  in  the  case  of  Procomvax, there has been considerable difficulty in concluding whether the reactogenicity profile of PR is similar to  the  reactogenicity  profile  of  P+R.  However  the  higher  reactogenicity  of  the  combined  vaccines compared with the mono components has been a general problem in the past and is not peculiar to Procomvax  alone.  Furthermore  it  was  noted  that  the  severity  of  'UHPC'  was  rated  as  mild  to moderate by parents and no drop-outs were recorded due to this systemic side effect In order to determine whether the differences observed between the 2 groups are an artefact resulting from the method of data collection and multiple comparisons, the company committed to perform a post-authorisation  clinical  safety  study  to  compare  the  reactogenicity  profile  of  Procomvax  versus concomitant administration of P + R in infants vaccinated at 3 and 5 months of age. This study will be a controlled study, with the assessment of the frequency of 'UHPC' as primary criterion and the power of the statistical analysis will assume that the previous observed difference is not reproducible. 4. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Although  there  has  been  some  difficulty  in  concluding  whether  the  reactogenicity    profile  of  the combined vaccine Procomvax is similar to that of the monovalent components P and R, there have also been some trends such as the mild to moderate severity of 'UHPC' and the lack of drop-outs due to  this  effect,  which  allow  the  reactogenicity  profile  for  this  combined  vaccine,  to  be  considered acceptable. Considering  all  the  information  submitted  by  the  company  throughout  the  procedure,  and  also  the pharmaceutical,  biological  and  clinical  follow-up  measures  undertaken  by  the  company,  the  riskbenefit appeared favourable for the following indication approved by the CPMP: 'Procomvax is indicated for vaccination against invasive disease caused by Haemophilus influenzae type b and against infection caused by all known subtypes of hepatitis B virus in infants 6 weeks to 15 months of age.' The CPMP granted a positive opinion for Procomvax, monodose suspension for injection in a vial. At the time of the 5-year renewal, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of Procomvax continued to be favourable and therefore recommended the renewal of the Marketing Authorisation.