---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:25:59
document_pages: 34
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/quintanrix-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: quintanrix-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 16.6848744
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-25 04:52:39.883725
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Name of the medicinal product: Quintanrix Marketing Autorisation Holder: GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals S.A. 89 rue de I'Institut B-1330 Rixensart Belgium Active substances: Diphtheria toxoid, adsorbed Tetanus toxoid, adsorbed Inactivated Bordetella pertussis, adsorbed Hepatatis B surface antigen (rDNA), adsorbed Haemophilus i nfluenzae type b polysaccharide  (PRP) conjugated to tetanus toxoid (T), adsorbed Common Name: Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whole cell), hepatitis B (rDNA) and Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccine (absorbed) Pharmaco-therapeutic group (ATC Code): Bacterial and viral vaccines combined ATC code: [proposed: under application] Therapeutic indication(s): Primary immunisation of infants (during the first year of life) against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and invasive disease caused by Haemophilus influenzae type b and for booster immunisation of young children during the second year of life

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

| Medicinal Diphtheria toxoid 1 Tetanus toxoid 1 Inactivated Bordetella pertussis 2 Hepatitis B surface antigen (rDNA) 2, 3 Haemophilus influenzae type b   | not less than 30 International Units less than 60 International Units not less than 4 International Units 10 micrograms   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                           | not                                                                                                                       |
| polysaccharide (polyribosylribitol phosphate) 2                                                                                                           | 2.5 micrograms                                                                                                            |
| conjugated to tetanus toxoid as a carrier                                                                                                                 | 5-10 micrograms                                                                                                           |
| 1 adsorbed on aluminium hydroxide hydrated                                                                                                                | Total: 0.26 milligrams Al 3+                                                                                              |
| 2 adsorbed on aluminium phosphate                                                                                                                         | Total: 0.40 milligrams Al 3+                                                                                              |
| 3 produced in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells by recombinant DNA                                                                                           | technology                                                                                                                |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Since  the  1940's,  diphtheria,  tetanus  and  whole  cell  pertussis  vaccines  have  been  administered  as combined vaccines (DTPw). In 1992, the World Health Organisation (WHO) 's Expanded Programme of  Immunisation  (EPI)  set  targets  for  incorporation  of  hepatitis  B  (HBV)  vaccination  into  national immunisation  programmes  by  1995  for  high,  and  by  1997,  for  low  endemic  countries.  The  WHO endorsed  the  development  of  the  DTPw-HBV  combination  vaccines  in  order  to  facilitate  the incorporation of HBV vaccination into the EPI. In 1998, the WHO recommended the incorporation of Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) into routine infant immunisation programmes as appropriate to national  capacities  and  priorities.  Because  of  the  fact  that  Hib,  DTPw  and  HBV  vaccines  share  the same  vaccination  schedules  in  early  childhood  it  is  possible  to  co-administer  these  vaccines  at  the same time and even to administer them as a single combined vaccine. Clinical data have shown that the liquid Tritanrix HepB (a combined diphtheria, tetanus, whole cell pertussis  and  HBV  vaccine)  can  be  used  to  reconstitute  GSK's  lyophilised  Hib  conjugate  vaccine, Hiberix. These data indicated that the mix did not impair the immune response or reactogenicity when compared with the administration of Tritanrix HepB and Hiberix in separate injections. The monovalent Hib conjugate vaccines, licensed during the early 1990's, contained 10 µg or more of polyribosyl-ribitol-phosphate (PRP) antigen. Since 1998, several studies have demonstrated that the PRP antigen content of these vaccines may be reduced while maintaining a similar immunogenicity. Therefore, GSK Biologicals developed a combined diphtheria-tetanus-whole cell pertussis-hepatitis Badsorbed Haemophilus  influenzae type  b  vaccine  with  a  reduced  PRP  antigen  content  (DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g) and submitted an application for a marketing authorisation in accordance with Art 8.3 of Directive 2001/83/EC. Quintanrix is a pentavalent vaccine against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and Haemophilus influenzae type  b  developed  on  the  basis  of  the  combination  of  the  existing  diphtheria-tetanusinactivated whole cell pertussis-hepatitis B vaccine (Tritanrix HepB) and a lyophilized adsorbed Hib vaccine  (modified  from  the  approved  Infanrix  Hexa).  The  primary  vaccination  schedule  consists  of three  doses  to  be  administered  at  intervals  of  at  least  4  weeks  within  the  first  6  months  of  life  in accordance with local official recommendations. The first dose can be administered at 6 weeks of age. 2. Quality aspects Composition The finished product is presented as a vial with lyophilised Haemophilus influenzae type b and a vial containing a suspension of diphtheria, tetanus, whole cell pertussis and hepatitis B. After reconstitution, a suspension for deep intramuscular injection is obtained. After reconstitution, 1 dose (0.5 ml) contains: 3 produced in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells by recombinant DNA technology

The vaccine is presented as monodose, 2-dose and 10-dose preparations in neutral type I glass vials (Ph. Eur) closed by grey butyl rubber stoppers with aluminium caps and flip-off tops.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## DTPw-HBV component

As  the  DTPw-HBV  component  is  identical  to  the  one  used  in  Tritanrix  HepB,  the  details  on  the manufacturing process and purification, specifications and stability have not been re-assessed and are only briefly summarised below.

Since then, two modifications to Tritanrix HepB were made:

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Manufacturing process and purification The D, T and Pw antigens are manufactured by Chiron-Behring, Marburg, Germany and are supplied as aluminium-adsorbed DTPw concentrate to GSK Bio. Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids are obtained by formaldehyde treatment of purified Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Clostridium tetani toxins. The  whole  cell  pertussis  (Pw)  component  is  obtained  from  a Bordetella  pertussis suspension,  and inactivated with thiomersal and heat. The surface antigen of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) is produced by culture of genetically engineered yeast cells ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) which carry the gene coding for the major surface antigen of the hepatitis B virus. Manufacturing process development In accordance with the CHMP points to consider on the reduction, elimination or substitution of thiomersal in vaccines (CPMP/BWP/2517/00, April 2001), the thiomersal content in the DTPw-HBV vaccine was reduced from 25 µ g/0.5 ml to 6 µ g/0.5 ml by omitting thiomersal from the formulation process of DTPw and DTPw-HBV bulks. This thiomersal reduction has been approved previously for Tritanrix HepB. Comparative data demonstrate the equivalence of potencies of bulks formulated with and without thiomersal. This change has no demonstrable impact on the potency, sterility, toxicity and stability of the vaccine. For the purpose of the multidose presentations, this reduced amount has still antimicrobial activity so as to pass the Ph. Eur. criteria B and C for antimicrobial effectiveness (performed on three lots of DTPw-HBV). Specifications The  D,  T  and  Pw  active  ingredients  are  produced  and  controlled  in  accordance  with  Ph.  Eur requirements 0445 for DTP vaccine. D and T are identical to that used for production of GSK Bio's acellular pertussis-based vaccines: Infanrix, Infanrix-polio, Infanrix HepB, Infanrix Penta and Infanrix Hexa. The HBV is the same as that used for the production of the other HBV-containing vaccines (Engerix, Twinrix, Ambirix, Infanrix HepB, Infanrix Penta and Infanrix Hexa). The product is manufactured and controlled according to approved monographs. The adsorbed DTPw concentrate is tested as intermediate product by Chiron-Behring for aluminium content,  formaldehyde  content,  sodium  chloride  content,  pH,  sterility,  specific  toxicity,  potency  in animals and by GSK Bio for pH, sterility, identity and aluminium content. Stability The diphtheria and tetanus toxoids, the HBV antigen, the adsorbed HBV concentrate and the adsorbed DTPw concentrate  are  prepared  in  advance  and  a  shelf  life  is  claimed  for  them.  The  stability  data presented in the application support all agreed storage period for the active ingredients. The initial shelf-life granted for the final DTPw-HBV bulk (Tritanrix HepB monodose and 10-dose presentation) was 24 months at +2°C to +8°C. The shelf-life was extended up to 36 months following approval on 25/09/1997 of variation (EMEA/H/C/093/I/01).

1) an additional 2-dose presentation was approved. Three lots of the 2-dose presentation are currently being assessed for stability at +2°C to +8°C for up to 36 months.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

2)  change  in  vaccine  composition  (thiomersal  reduction).  Six  lots  are  currently  being  assessed  for stability at +2°C to +8°C for up to 36 months.

Results after 36 months were submitted to the EMEA and are currently under review. Interim results assessed  so  far  support  the  maintenance  of  the  36  months  shelf-life  for  the  final  DTPw-HBV component.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Hib active substance The  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  component  cannot  be  administered  as  a  stand-alone  preparation  but  only  after reconstitution with the DTPw-HBV suspension. The  active  ingredient  in  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  consists  of  the  capsular  polysaccharide  of Haemophilus influenzae type b (PRP), purified and covalently bound to purified tetanus toxoid (TT) used as carrier protein. The glycoconjugate is indicated as PRP-T and is adsorbed onto aluminium phosphate. The same PRP is used in all the other Hib containing vaccines manufactured by GSK Bio: Hiberix (monovalent  PRP-T  vaccine)  and  the  combined  acellular  pertussis-based  vaccines:  Infanrix/Hib, Infanrix-IPV/Hib and Infanrix Hexa (DTPa-HBV-IPV/Hib) vaccines. As compared to the Hib component of Infanrix Hexa, a number of modifications were made: · Reduction of the number of pre-culture steps for PRP · Seed-lot system Hib · Production process of the tetanus toxoid carrier protein · Hib polysaccharide content reduced from 10 µ g/dose to 2.5 µ g/dose These changes are described in more detail below (manufacturing process development). Manufacturing process and purification Production of the Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g includes the following steps: 1. Production of purified PRP 2. Production of tetanus toxoid concentrate (TT) 3. Purification of the tetanus toxoid concentrate (T) 4. Coupling of PRP to T to obtain the PRP-T conjugate 5. Adsorption of PRP-T on aluminium phosphate 6. Formulation, filling and lyophilisation Step 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 are performed by GSK Bio, Rixensart, Belgium. Step 2 is performed by GSK Biologicals  Kft,  Gödöllö,  Hungary.  Reprocessing  does  not  occur  at  any  step  in  the  manufacturing process. The  PRP-T  conjugated  bulk  is  manufactured  in  compliance  with  the  Ph.  Eur.  monograph  on Haemophilus influenzae type b vaccine and on WHO requirements for the same vaccine. The PRP-T is then adsorbed on aluminium phosphate. The process used for PRP-T adsorption is that used for the adsorbed Hib component of GSK Bio's Infanrix Hexa vaccine. A brief description of the manufacturing process and summary of the process, containing the operating parameters  and  in-process  controls  of  the  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  which  includes  the  TT  purification,  PRP activation, conjugation and adsorption have been provided.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Control  of materials, in process  controls and  corresponding  specifications  in  use  during  the manufacture of PRP and TT bulks, PRP-TT are the same as those for the production of Hiberix and Infanrix Hexa. The production process is appropriately monitored.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised According to the applicant, the storage of intermediate harvests is not applicable. Manufacturing process development The Company has validated a new working seed that will replace the current working seed once the stock is depleted. The production of this new working seed is slightly modified in order to stabilize the antigen productivity. A detailed description of the preparation of the MS and WS and a description of the  in-process  controls  (identity,  microbial  purity,  optical  density  and  control  of  inactivation) performed on the seeds has been submitted and are considered adequate. With  regard  to  TT,  two  sources  were  used  in  the  clinical  lots:  one  supplied  by  Chiron-Behring, Marburg, Germany and a second supplied by Human Serum Production and Medicine Manufacturing Co Ltd, Gödöllö, Hungary. This company was acquired by GSK Bio in 2002 and was renamed GSK Biologicals  Kft  (GSK  Bio  Kft.).  For  commercial  lots,  the  TT  will  be  sourced  exclusively  from  the Gödöllö facility. Since completion of the clinical development of Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g, several changes of the TT production process  have  been  validated  and  were  submitted  for  approval  with  the  present  dossier.  The  main changes relate to the removal of thiomersal and to the reduction of the use of material of animal origin. Eight lots of TT were produced with all the changes implemented and QC tested according to the Ph. Eur  0542  requirements.  All  the  lots  met  the  requirements  and  consistent  results  were  obtained regarding antigen purity and antigen content. Characterisation and specifications of the active substance The  purified  PRP,  the  TT  and  the  conjugated  PRP-T  have  been  characterised.  Results  have  been provided and are considered satisfactory. Impurities  in  purified  PRP  may  come  from  the  pathogen  itself  (components  of  the  bacterial  cells), from  the  culture  media  used  in  fermentation,  from  the  buffers  and  other  materials  used  during polysaccharide purification, activation and derivatization. Various  steps contribute during the production to the elimination or reduction to traces of the possible different impurities, which are all properly monitored by suitable methods validated for Infanrix Hexa. Tetanus toxoid (TT) bulks provided by GSK Biologicals Kft. comply with the Ph. Eur. requirement (monograph  0452)  for  antigenic  purity:  i.e.  not  less  than  1,000  Lf/mg  protein  nitrogen.  Before coupling to PRP, TT bulks are purified at GSK Biologicals in order to remove aggregates and the Ph. Eur. purity test is carried out on each lot of purified TT. Results are presented in the dossier and meet the Ph. Eur. specification for antigenic purity of the TT used as carrier protein ( ≥ 1,500 Lf/mg protein nitrogen -EP monograph 1219) Specifications  have  been  set  for  the  fermentation  product,  purified  PRP  (moisture  content,  ribose content,  phosphorous  content,  protein  content  (Lowry),  nucleic  acid  content,  endotoxin  content, molecular  size  distribution  (HPLC)  and  identity  (ELISA)),  purified  TT  (protein  nitrogen  content, purity, sterility), activated PRP (molecular size distribution (HPLC)) and bulk conjugate (carbodiimide content, cyanide content, PS content, protein content (Lowry), sterility, free PS (ELISA), free carrier protein (HPLC) and molecular size distribution (HPLC)). The analytical methods for release testing are the same as those used to release final container lots of the Hib\\_ads 10 µ g component pertaining to the combined Infanrix Hexa.

Data on the validation of the analytical methods have been provided and are considered satisfactory.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Results obtained for lots of purified polysaccharide, activated polysaccharide, purified tetanus toxoid and bulk conjugate have been provided. All lots meet the current proposed specifications for all the tests, as well as the specifications in force at the time of the release of the lots when different from the current proposed specifications. Consistent results were obtained.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Results  obtained  for  10  final  bulk  lots  and  10  final  container  lots  of  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  component  (4 monodose, 3 two-dose and three 10-dose) have been provided. The tests and specifications are those that were in force at the time the lots were released. All the 10 Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component lots comply with the specifications in force at the time of lot release. Stability Stability data have been provided regarding the polysaccharide, tetanus toxoid, activated polysaccharide, PRP-T conjugate and adsorbed PRP-T conjugate. The stability data presented in the application support all agreed storage periods for the active ingredient. However, the Applicant has initiated additional stability studies to cover the modified production process. Other ingredients The  powder  component  (Hib)  contains  lactose  (stabiliser  and  bulking  agent)  and  the  suspension component (DTPw-HBV) contains thiomersal (preservative), sodium chloride (tonicity) and water for injections  as  excipients.  Both  components  contain  aluminium  as  an  adjuvant  (as  aluminium  oxide hydrated and/or aluminium phosphate). Lactose, sodium chloride and water for injections comply with Ph. Eur. Aluminium and thiomersal comply with the British Ph. Product development and finished product The Tritanrix HepB/Hib combination is not licensed as such. However sections 4.5 ('Interaction with Other  Medicinal  Products  and  Other  Forms  of  Interactions')  and  6.6  ('Instructions  for  Use  and Handling') of the Tritanrix HepB SPC say that the vaccine can be used mixed with Hiberix. As a matter of fact, this combination is so widely used, particularly in developing countries, that there is a need (mostly the Hib component) to increase availability of the vaccine. As production capacity of PRP-T is limited, GSK Bio has evaluated the possibility to decrease the dose of PRP and has compared 10, 5 and 2.5 µ g of PRP in clinical studies. It should be noted that the TT used in the clinical studies was produced by Human Co. according to a process  that  involved  blood  and  meat  of  bovine  origin  and  thiomersal.  Human  Co.  initiated  the development  of  a  meat-  and  thiomersal-free  process  which  was  pursued  and  validated  following acquisition of the Gödöllö facility by GSK Bio. The data provided regarding these changes indicate that  the  TT  produced  using  the  thiomersal-  and  meat-free  process  is  deemed  appropriate  for  use  as protein carrier for the PRP-T conjugate. The lots of Tritanrix HepB used in the clinical studies contained 25 µ g of thiomersal per dose whereas in the current product the thiomersal content is 6 µ g/dose. Compatibility studies using both the 25 µ g and 6 µ g thiomersal-containing vaccines gave satisfactory results, when tested in animal according to Ph. Eur requirements; it is generally accepted that vaccines lots that meet these requirements will elicit an appropriate immune response. Therefore, reduction of thiomersal content in Tritanrix HepB should not impact on the efficacy of the vaccine. Manufacture of the Product Production of the final DTPw-HBV bulk consists in mixing the sterile adsorbed DTPw concentrate with  the  sterile  adsorbed  HBV  concentrate  and  a  sterile  solution  of  sodium  chloride  in  water  for injections.  The  final  bulk  is  then  aseptically  distributed  in  siliconized  sterile  vials  which  are  closed with sterile rubber closures.

The formulation Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component is performed by mixing a concentrated sterile solution of lactose  with  water  for  injections  and  subsequently  adding  the  appropriate  amount  of  adsorbed  Hib conjugate bulk (adsorbed PRP-T). The proportions of lactose and of adsorbed antigen vary depending

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

on the final presentation (1-dose and 2-dose presentations vs. 10-dose presentation). The final bulk is then filled into sterile siliconised vials. After filling, the vials are automatically loosely stoppered with sterile  siliconised  butyl  rubber  stoppers  and  transferred  aseptically  to  a  freeze-dryer.  A  detailed description  of  the  formulation,  the  filling  and  the  lyophilisation  of  the  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  has  been provided. Appropriate in-process controls during formulation, filling and lyophilisation are in place. Validation  data  for  media  fill  tests  with  or  without  freeze-drying  simulations  for  filling  lines  are presented in the dossier.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Product Specification The final DTPw-HBV component is tested for description, identity, pH, volume, aluminium content, thiomersal  content,  free  formaldehyde  content,  sterility,  abnormal  toxicity,  specific  toxicity  and potency to approved specifications. The specifications for the release of the final containers for the adsorbed Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate component (Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component) include tests for identity, sterility, PRP content, moisture  content,  endotoxin  content,  aluminium  content,  pH  and  free  polysaccharide  content  after desorption. The specifications are in line with the Ph. Eur. Monograph 1219 and the WHO Monograph TRS 897 (2000) on Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccines. The only difference with the latter being that the test for abnormal toxicity is not proposed for routine lot release. According to the WHO monograph, the test may be omitted for routine lot release once consistency of production has been  established  and  when  GMPs  are  in  place.  Given  the  satisfactory  results  obtained  on  6  lots  of Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component the regular inspection of GSK Biologicals by Authorities for GMP, and the four times reduced PRP dosage as compared to Hiberix and Infanrix Hexa, the omission of the test is acceptable. In line with GSK Bio's other Hib vaccines, a specification limit of NLT 80% of the PRP content stated on the label is applied (tested on the bulk conjugate). Given the importance of this test for consistency of vaccine production, the applicant committed to establish alert limits based on consistency data of NLT 15 batches. In  order  to  demonstrate  the  compatibility  of  the  DTPw-HepB  and  the  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  components, various  parameters  were  monitored  just  prior  to  and  following  reconstitution  of  different  lots  of adsorbed Hib component with different lots of DTPw-hepB component. The results obtained support the compatibility of the two components following reconstitution. However,  additional  compatibility  studies  will  be  performed  on  3  additional  monodose  and  2 multidose batches and results will be provided as a post-approval commitment. In the meantime, the Applicant  states  that  they  will  perform  release  tests  on  the  reconstituted  DTPw-HepB  and  Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g  vaccine  until  completion  of  the  commitment. In addition, completeness of adsorption will be tested to demonstrate consistency in completeness of adsorption. Batch release data for 11 lots of Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component (5 monodose, 3 two-dose and three 10dose) have been submitted. All the 11 Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component lots complied with the specifications in  force  at  the  time  of  lot  releaseand  with  the  proposed  specifications  for  commercial  lot  release. Initially, no batch release data had been submitted for lots of vaccines produced according to the new updated  process.  Subsequently,  data  on  four  batches  corresponding  to  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  monodose obtained from the commercial process have been provided. The total polysaccharide content for the four 'new process' monodose lots seemed consistently lower than for four out of five monodose lots prepared according to the 'old process'. Therefore, the applicant committed to submit the results of not less than 15 batches of Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g as soon as they become available and re-discuss the issue of a  possible  systematic  difference  between  the  total  polysaccharide  content  of  the  two  production processes.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TSE and viral safety

TSE and viral safety related issues were taken into account for the DTPw-HBV component; it was concluded that the satisfactory assessment of these issues for Tritanrix HepB was fully relevant for the DTPw-HBV component of Quintanrix.

The  amounts  of  the  active  ingredients  used  do  not  exceed  the  amounts  used  in  other  combination vaccines used for the target population. More specifically,

Medicinal Product no longer authorised As no cell substrate is used during the preparation of Hib component of the vaccine, validation studies for virus removal/inactivation were not performed. All biological reagents used are sterilised. The Hib master and working seeds used in clinical lots were identical to those used in Infanrix Hexa, for  which  compliance  with  the  TSE  Guideline  has  been  demonstrated.  In  the  new  Hib  master  and working  seed,  the  materials  of  animal  origin  that  have  been  used  are  compliant  with  the  TSE Guideline. The materials of animal origin used in the production process of Hib are identical to the one used in Infanrix Hexa, for which compliance with the TSE Guideline has been demonstrated. For the tetanus toxoid produced according to the meat containing process and used in clinical lots, a certificate  of  suitability  was  granted  by  EDQM.  The  tetanus  toxoid  intended  for  commercial lots is produced according to a meat-free production process, produced from blood-free and meat-free master and working seeds. All the reagents of animal origin used in the production process of tetanus toxoid are compliant with the TSE guideline. Stability of the Product On the basis of a real time, real temperature stability study on six lots of finished product, a shelf life of  36  months at  +2°C to +8°C is accepted. The tests performed during the study were the same as those for batch release. In addition the applicant performed other assays like immunogenicity test in mice, aluminium phosphate, identity, completeness of adsorption and osmolality. The three lots of Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g adsorbed finished product in monodose and multidose presentation complied  fully  with  specifications  after  36  months  of  storage  at  +2°C  to  +8°C.  Higher  moisture content was observed after 36 months but there was no impact of this higher moisture content on the other parameters such as free polysaccharides. With regard to stability data on finished product produced with the intended commercial process, data on 3 monodose lots stored up to 6 months have been submitted so far. These lots will be further tested according to the stability protocol and the applicant commited to provide stability results after 12, 24 and 36 months of storage as soon as the results are available. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The data submitted for the DTPw-HBV part of Quintanrix are identical to the data for Tritanrix-HepB, its variations and follow-up measures, and are considered satisfactory. For the Hib part, a number of modifications as compared to the Hib component of Infanrix Hexa were made. However, the applicant has  adequately  addressed  all  concerns  raised  with  regard  to  modifications  via  responses  and commitments. 3. Non-clinical aspects Introduction All antigens of this vaccine have already been registered in the European Union as active ingredients of several of the Company's mono-valent and combined paediatric vaccines. Several of the antigens have also been registered worldwide as part of the Company's paediatric combination vaccines.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- ¾ the amount of D, T, Pw and HBsAg is exactly the same as in the licensed Tritanrix HepB vaccine, as it is the Tritanrix HepB vaccine that is used as the liquid component of the combined DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine.
- ¾ the amount of the Hib component is 1/4th of the amount used in the Company's licensed Infanrix HeXa and Hiberix vaccines.

Additionally study Hib-091 was conducted to compare the immunogenicity, safety and reactogenicity of DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix) to Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM when administered as a three-dose primary vaccination course to healthy infants.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised With  respect  to  the  excipients  (aluminium  phosphate,  aluminium  hydroxide,  sodium  chloride, thiomersal and water for injections and lactose), these are not novel, and are used at an amount within the  range  classically  used.  Of  note,  in  line  with  recent  concerns  on  potential  too  high  exposure  of infants  to  thiomersal  during  childhood  vaccination,  the  Company  has  reduced  the  amount  of  the thiomersal  preservative  from  25 µ g  per  dose  in  the  past  to  6 µ g  per  dose.  At  this  concentration, thiomersal has been shown to be still effective as preservative as per Ph. Eur. requirements, which is important for the multi-dose presentation of this vaccine. Based  on  the  fact  that  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  can  be  considered  as  a  new formulation  of  existing  and  licensed  antigens,  no  specific  non-clinical  toxicity  studies  were  done, neither was a detailed study on the immune response induced in animals conducted. Due to the fact that Quintanrix is composed of Tritanrix HepB and the PRP Hib component of Infanrix hexa  and  Hiberix,  vaccines  that  have  been  administered  in  many  children,  it  has  been  considered acceptable that no additional pre-clinical data were collected. Of note, at the time the clinical development of the vaccine started, the CHMP 'Note for Guidance on non-clinical  pharmacological  and  toxicological  testing  of  vaccines'  was  not  yet  adopted.  However, data generated during quality control testing of the vaccine allowed to conclude that specific toxicity concerns are not warranted and that the immune response induced by the combined vaccine is similar to the one induced by the two components. The similar immunogenicity and overall acceptable safety profile are further confirmed in clinical studies. 4. Clinical aspects Introduction The  candidate  vaccine  Quintanrix,  is  a  combined  vaccine  DPwT-hepatitis  B  and  Haemophilus influenzae type b (DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g) vaccine, which contains a quarter of the dose of PRPT antigen contained in GSK Biologicals' Hiberix™ vaccine. The reformulated Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g is the only  novel  component  in  the  candidate  vaccine.  All  antigens  of  this  vaccine  have  already  been registered in the European Union as the active ingredient of several of the Company's monovalent and combined paediatric vaccines and several of the antigens have been registered worldwide as part of the Company's  paediatric  combination  vaccines.  The  amounts  of  the  active  ingredients  used  do  not exceed the amounts used in other combination vaccines used for the target population. In total nine studies were performed to evaluate the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine. A total  of  1497  infants  received  the  vaccine  as  a  primary  course,  with  435  receiving  the  vaccine  as  a booster dose. Of these, 1312 (70%) were tested for immunogenicity and 1865 (96%) were analysed for reactogenicity. One  feasibility  study  (study  Hib-052)  was  followed  by  four  pivotal  phase  III  studies  conducted  in Myanmar, Nicaragua, Panama, Turkey, Belgium and the Philippines, evaluating a three-dose primary vaccination course with the candidate vaccine in infants aged 6 to 18 weeks at the time of first dose (studies  Hib-078,  -079,  -080  and  -081).  Three  different  schedules  were  assessed  with  either  a  onemonth or a two-month interval between doses.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One booster study (study Hib-064) was performed to assess the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine as a fourth dose in the second year of life following priming with the same vaccine in study Hib-052. Subjects primed in the five different vaccine groups in study Hib-052 were invited to receive a fourth consecutive dose of the same vaccine, co-administered with measles-mumps rubella (MMR) vaccine at  15-24  months  of  age  in  study  Hib-064.  Safety  data  were  provided  from  two  additional  studies, DTPw-HBV/HibMenAC-TT-002 and DTPw-HBV/HibMenC-TT-003.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised An overview of studies evaluating the candidate vaccine is represented in the following Table 1 . The  study  designs  took  into  account  the  Good  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines  in  use  at  the  time  of initiation of each study and that the Declaration of Helsinki and its amendments were respected.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Overview of studies evaluating the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine

<!-- image -->

| Immuno                  | 128 129 130 127 129                                                                                                                    | 552 183                                                | 133 146                 | 107 108                                                                   | 100 102                                                                               | 95 94                                                       | 1217                                                                                                                                              | 63 73 65 69 62                                                                                                         | -                                                             | 63                                             |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Analysed Safety         | 135 136 135 136 136                                                                                                                    | 626 209                                                | 173 174                 | 148 146                                                                   | 122 130                                                                               | 96 95                                                       | 1430                                                                                                                                              | 65 75 68 72 65                                                                                                         | 139 106                                                       | 435                                            |
| subjects Per group      | 136 136 136 136 136                                                                                                                    | 636 212                                                | 180 180                 | 148 146                                                                   | 151 150                                                                               | 96                                                          | 96 1497                                                                                                                                           | authorised 66 75 68 74 68 125 -                                                                                        | 139 106                                                       | 435                                            |
| Number Enrolled Total   | 694*                                                                                                                                   | 848                                                    | 360                     | 294                                                                       | 318*                                                                                  | 192                                                         | - 357*                                                                                                                                            | -                                                                                                                      |                                                               | -                                              |
| Vaccination of Schedule | 6-10-14 weeks                                                                                                                          | 2-4-6 months                                           | 2-4-6 months            | 3-4-5 months                                                              | 6-10-14 weeks                                                                         | no dose g 6-10-14 weeks                                     | vaccination 15-24 months                                                                                                                          | longer 15-18                                                                                                           |                                                               | dose                                           |
| Study groups            | Medicinal DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 5 µ g DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 10 µ g Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ Tritanrix™-HepB + Hib_ads 10 | µ g DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg Tritanrix™-HepB + Hiberix™ | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ | Product DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg (following a of HBV at birth) | Tritanrix™-HepB low thio /Hib_ads 2.5 µg (6 µ thiomersal) µ | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ - (25 g thiomersal) receiving DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg as a primary DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5µg+MMR DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 5 µ g+MMR | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 10 µ g+MMR Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™+MMR Tritanrix™-HepB + Hib_ads 10 µ g+MMR DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg* | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg DTPw- HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg + Meningitec | receiving DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg as a booster |
| Country                 | Myanmar                                                                                                                                | Nicaragua Panama                                       | Turkey                  | Belgium                                                                   | Philippines                                                                           | Philippines                                                 | of subjects Myanmar                                                                                                                               | Philippines                                                                                                            |                                                               | of subjects                                    |
| Study                   | Hib-052                                                                                                                                | Hib-078                                                | Hib-079                 | Hib-080                                                                   | Hib-081                                                                               | Hib-091                                                     | Total number Hib-064                                                                                                                              | DTPw- HBV/HibMe                                                                                                        | nAC-TT-002 DTPw- HBV/HibMe                                    | nAC-TT-003 Total number                        |

\"/\" = combined administration in a single injection after extemporaneous mixing; \"+\" = separate injection infants born to HBsAg seropositive mothers were enrolled in a separate group: 14 infants in study Hib-052 received DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µ g, 6 infants in study Hib-064 received DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Medicinal Product no longer authorised

µ g, and 17 infants in study Hib-081 received DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g * data from other study groups not provided in the dossier

 EMEA 2005

12/34

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Immunogenicity

## METHODS

|                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Vaccines                                                                                                 | Vaccines                                                                                 | Vaccines                                   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Contents                                                                                                                                                                                        | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg                                                                                  | Tritanrix™-HepB                                                                          | Hiberix™                                   |
| Diphtheria toxoid Tetanus toxoid (TT) Bordetella pertussis , killed r-DNA HbsAg PRP (conjugated to TT) Lactose Aluminium (Al 3+ ) from: aluminium oxide hydrated aluminium phosphate Thiomersal | ≥ 30 IU (7.5 Lf) ≥ 60 IU (3.25 Lf) ≥ 4 IU (15 OU) 10 µ g 2.5 µ g (5-10 µ g) 12.6 mg 260 µg 400 µg 25 µ g | longer ≥ 30 IU (7.5 Lf) ≥ 60 IU (3.25 Lf) ≥ 4 IU (15 OU) 10 µ g - - 260 µg 370 µg 25 µ g | - - - - 10 µ g (20-40 µ g) 12.6 mg - - - - |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Treatments The candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine was compared with the licensed Tritanrix™-HepB and Hiberix™ vaccines, given either as separate concomitant injections (Tritanrix™-HepB +Hiberix™) or extemporaneously mixed in one single injection (Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™). The compositions of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine and the licensed comparators Tritanrix™-HepB and Hiberix™ vaccines used in the clinical trials are given in the following Table 2 . Table  2:  Compositions  of  the  candidate  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5  µg  vaccine  and  the  licensed comparators In  the  feasibility  study  Hib-052  immunogenicity  and  reactogenicity  of  different  quantities  of  the reformulated Hib component were assessed. The following vaccine groups were evaluated: DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g, containing 2.5 µ g of PRP DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µ g, containing 5 µ g of PRP DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 10 µ g, containing 10 µ g of PRP Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™, licensed vaccines containing 10 µ g of PRP Tritanrix™-HepB + Hib\\_ads 10 µ g, administered as two separate injections During the development of Quintanrix, the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine, the clinical trials  were  conducted  with  the  formulation  of  DTPw-HBV  which  was  licensed  at  that  time  (ie  full thiomersal;  25 µ g).  These  are  the  trials  that  are  presented  in  the  Quintanrix  Dossier.  However,  the current  application  for  licensure  of  Quintanrix  is  for  the  DTPw-HBV  component  that  is  currently licensed (low thiomersal; 6 µ g). Therefore study Hib-091 was conducted to compare the immunogenicity, safety and reactogenicity of DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix) to Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM when administered as a three-dose primary vaccination course to healthy infants. Objectives The  feasibility  study  Hib-052  was  designed  to  assess  the  feasibility  of  reducing  the  PRP  antigen content of the Hib component to be used in the combined DTPw-HBV/Hib vaccine. Three  trials  were  conducted  to  compare  the  immunogenicity  of  the  candidate  vaccine  with  the Tritanrix™-HepB and Hiberix™ vaccines, either given as separate concomitant injections (Hib-078) or as a mix (Hib-079 and Hib-080). Vaccines were administered at either 2, 4 and 6 months of age (Hib-078 and Hib-079) or at 3, 4 and 5 months of age (Hib-080).

A fourth trial (Hib-081) compared the immunogenicity of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine when administered at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age, between infants who received hepatitis B vaccine at birth and infants who did not receive.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study Hib-091 was conducted to compare the immunogenicity, safety and reactogenicity of DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix) to Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM when administered as a three-dose primary vaccination course to healthy infants at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Study  Hib-064  was  conducted  to  document  the  persistence  of  antibodies  up  to  booster  age  and  to document  the  booster  effect  among  infants  seen  in  study  Hib-052  (see  Persistence  of  antibodies following primary vacination). Subjects who had completed the primary vaccination course in study Hib-052  were  invited  to  receive  a  booster  dose  of  the  same  vaccine  they  received  for  primary vaccination, co-administered with MMR vaccine at 15-24 months of age. In all studies, except Hib-064, non-inferiority testing was used to evaluate the anti-PRP response to the reformulated Hib component of the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccinecompared to the control groups  in  terms  of  the  percentage  of  subjects  with  anti-PRP  antibody  titre ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml  postvaccination (primary endpoint) and anti-PRP GMT ratio. In studies Hib-078 and Hib-080, non-inferiority testing was also used to evaluate antibody response to all other vaccine antigens (seropositivity/seroprotection rates, vaccine response rates and GMT ratios) in the experimental DTPw-HBV/Hib regimens as compared to the control regimen. In  the  uncontrolled  study  Hib-081,  the  objective  was  to  demonstrate  non-inferiority  in  terms  of antibody response to the PRP antigen elicited by the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g regimen following a birth  dose  of  hepatitis  B  vaccine  (HBV)  as  compared  to  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  regimen without previous priming with HBV. In study Hib-079, a non-inferiority approach was used to evaluate antibody response to the PRP and the rDNA hepatitis B surface antigens elicited by the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g regimen versus the control (DTPw-HBV/Hiberix™). Assays for antibody response to other vaccine antigens were not performed in this study. Consistency of vaccine manufacturing was evaluated in study Hib-078 using an equivalence approach in terms of seropositivity/seroprotection rates for anti-PRP, anti-diphtheria, anti-tetanus, anti-HBsAg, vaccine response for anti-BPT and GMT ratios for all vaccine antibodies. The primary objective of study Hib-091 was to demonstrate non-inferiority of Tritanrix™-HepB low thio /Hib 2.5 vaccine (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix) as compared to Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ with respect to the immunogenicity of the PRP antigen after the first three vaccine doses. Outcomes/endpoints The primary endpoint in all studies was the percentage of subjects with anti-PRP antibody titre ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml one month after completion of the three-dose primary vaccination course/administration of the booster, with the exception of Hib-064 in which post-booster blood sample was taken 42 days after vaccination. In each study report the descriptive analysis included for each treatment group the calculation of the following variables with their corresponding 95% CI: · seroprotection rates, i.e. the percentages of subjects with antibody titre (anti-PRP, anti-diphtheria, anti-tetanus,  anti-HBs) ≥ the  defined  protective  level.  In  addition,  for  anti-PRP  antibodies,  this also included the percentage of subjects with titres ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml. · vaccine  response  rates  for  the Bordetella  pertussis (BPT)  antigen  since  no  protective  antibody level has been defined.

Antibody  titres  against  all  vaccine  antigens  were  summarized  using  geometric  mean  titres  (GMT), calculated  by  taking  the  anti-log  of  the  mean  of  the  log  transformed  titres,  with  their  95%  CI.  For GMT calculation, titres below the assay cut-off were given the arbitrary value of one-half the assay cut-off.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Several criteria have been proposed as immunological surrogates of efficacy for registration of new Hib conjugate vaccines, in the absence of efficacy data. These criteria include adequate priming in infants  similar  to  that  with  licensed  vaccines,  antibody  persistence  up  to  the  age  of  booster vaccination,  demonstration  of  immune  memory  and  the  functional  capacity  of  the  antibodies  (i.e. opsonic or bactericidal activity). Antibody avidity increases over time following primary vaccination. Memory  responses  are  also  characterised  by  the  production  of  high-avidity  antibodies.  Therefore, avidity  has  been  considered  by  the  applicant  as  a  surrogate  marker  for  successful  priming,  and  has been investigated in the booster study Hib-064.

| Marker          | Assay method   | Test Kit/ Manufacturer   | longer Assay unit   |   Cut-off |
|-----------------|----------------|--------------------------|---------------------|-----------|
| anti-PRP        | ELISA          | na                       | µ g/ml              |     0.15  |
| anti-HBsAg      | RIA            | AUSAB, Abbott            | mIU/ml              |    10     |
| anti-diphtheria | ELISA          | na                       | IU/ml               |     0.1   |
| anti-diphtheria | Neutralization | na                       | IU/ml               |     0.016 |
| anti-tetanus    | ELISA          | na                       | IU/ml               |     0.1   |
| anti-BPT        | ELISA          | Labsystems               | EL.U/ml             |    15     |
| anti-mumps      | ELISA          | Behring                  | U/ml                |   231     |
| anti-measles    | ELISA          | Behring                  | mIU/ml              |   150     |
| anti-rubella    | ELISA          | Behring                  | IU/ml               |     4     |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Methods used to evaluate the immunogenicity Serum  samples  were  collected  immediately  before  the  first  vaccine  dose  and  one  month  after completion  of  the  primary  vaccination  course.  To  evaluate  the  persistence  of  antibodies  and  the response to a booster dose, samples were also collected before and after booster vaccination. All  assays  were  performed  blinded  to  vaccine  treatment,  using  validated  procedures  with  adequate controls. Table 3: Overview of serological assays and cut-offs Marker anti-PRP anti-HBsAg anti-diphtheria anti-diphtheria anti-tetanus anti-BPT anti-mumps anti-measles anti-rubella na = not applicable as commercial kit was not available or not used. Anti-PRP antibodies were measured by ELISA and expressed in µ g/ml (assay cut-off 0.15 µ g/ml). For anti-PRP, titres ≥ 0.15 were considered indicative of protection; however titres ≥ 0.15 and ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml were  taken  into  consideration.  These  cut-offs  have  been  estimated  from  age  specific  data  among unvaccinated populations and children vaccinated with the polysaccharide vaccine, as well as from antibody  measurements  in  children  receiving  hyperimmune  globulin.  On  this  basis,  0.15 µ g/ml  was regarded as protective on the individual level at the time of the assay, whereas 1.0 µ g/ml measured at the  peak response to vaccination was regarded in the past as 'predictive of protection', allowing for antibody decay in the next few years. However, these values may be less relevant to Hib conjugate vaccines,  which  also  elicit  immunologic  memory  and  thus  prime  for  a  rapid  response  upon  an encounter with Hib. Therefore Hib conjugate vaccines are likely to protect even when the subject's anti-PRP  titres  fall  below  0.15 µ g/ml.  In  order  to  further  evaluate  the  quality  of  the  Hib  response induced by the candidate vaccine with reduced PRP content, the maturation of the Hib response from post-primary to post-booster was also documented. Seropositivity/seroprotection rates were calculated per group with 95%CIs, for antibodies against all vaccine antigen components at each blood sampling time point. Geometric mean antibody titres (GMTs) with 95%CI were calculated by taking the anti-log of the mean of the log titre transformations. Antibody titres below cut-off level were given an arbitrary value of half the cut-off value for the purpose of GMT calculation. Randomisation and Blinding (masking) Studies were performed in an open fashion if the number of injections differed between groups (open randomised, Hib-052, Hib-081; open, Hib-064). All other studies were conducted in a blinded fashion (randomised double-blinded, Hib-079, Hib-080) as well as the lot-to-lot consistency (Hib-078, randomised, controlled, blinded)

Statistical methods

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  all  studies,  two  cohorts  were  defined  for  analyses:  the  total  cohort  which  included  all  enrolled subjects  for  whom  data  were  available  and  the  according-to-protocol  (ATP),  i.e.,  protocol  defined, cohorts.  The  ATP  cohort  included  vaccinees  who  complied  with  all  eligibility  criteria  and  all procedures defined in the protocol. Primary analyses of safety and immunogenicity were performed on the ATP cohorts. The purpose of the analyses of the Total cohorts was to ensure that deviations from the protocol were not treatment-related. Unless otherwise specified, all the data presented within this summary are analyses performed on ATP cohorts.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Subjects  excluded  from  the  ATP  cohorts  were  identified  before  data  analyses  after  a  review  of  the individual subject data blinded to treatment group allocation. As defined in the study protocol, non-inferiority was demonstrated when the upper/lower limit of the 90% CI for the difference between groups was below the pre-specified clinical limit of non-inferiority (one-sided equivalence test; alpha=5%). Likewise  lot-to-lot  consistency  was  demonstrated  in  study  Hib-078  when  the  90%  CI  for  the difference  between  lots  was  included  in  the  pre-specified  limit  of  clinical  equivalence  (two-sided equivalence test; alpha = 5%).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

## Feasibility study (Hib-052)

The feasibility Study Hib-052 demonstrated that the immunogenicity of all components of the DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine was not inferior to the reference vaccines. Since the reactogenicity of the  candidate  vaccine  showed  a  similar  profile,  further  testing  of  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  was justified.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Main studies (Hib-078, 079, 080, 081, 064) When compared to the licensed vaccines, the candidate vaccine was not inferior with respect to the percentage of subjects showing anti-PRP antibody titres of ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml one month after completion of the  primary  vaccination  schedule.  One  month  after  completing  the  primary  vaccination  course, virtually all subjects (&gt;99.4%) had anti-PRP antibody titres ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml and the majority of subjects (&gt;94.8%) had anti-PRP antibody titres ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml. Comparison of post vaccination GMTs showed no differences between groups, except for the antiPRP  antibody  GMTs.  Statistically  significantly  higher  anti-PRP  antibody  titres  were  observed following  Tritanrix™-HepB  and  Hiberix™  vaccination  in  study  Hib-078,  whereas  the  candidate vaccine induced significantly higher titres in study Hib-079 and titres similar to those in the control group in study Hib-080. Conflicting results were observed in trials Hib-078 and Hib079 with respect to the titre of anti-PRP antibodies following immunization with the candidate and reference vaccines. However no differences were observed between the candidate and control vaccines in studies Hib-080 and Hib-081 and the seroprotection rates were comparable among all studies. The applicant argues that the anti-PRP response after primary vaccination is known to be highly variable and that the cause appears  to  be  complex  and  multifactorial.  The  anti-PRP  response  observed  following  priming  with 2.5 µ g  of  PRP  as  presented  in  the  Quintanrix  dossier  is  claimed  to  be  within  the  range  previously observed and accepted for 10 µ g PRP vaccines. Furthermore there appears to be no evidence to suggest that this variability is due to instability of the laboratory assays used during the studies or is there any consistent evidence to show that this was due to differences in pre-vaccination anti-PRP concentrations. Although the applicant did not address the lot-to-lot fluctuations to speculate on their findings,  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  range  of  variation  found  for  the  anti-PRP  antibodies  in  the Quintanrix  file  remains  within  the  limits  already  accepted  for  other  combinations  from  the  same manufacturer using the same conjugate. The  immune  response  of  subjects  who  received  the  candidate  vaccine  after  having  received  a monovalent hepatitis B vaccine at birth was comparable with the response of subjects who received the candidate vaccine without a prior dose of hepatitis B, except for hepatitis B. This illustrates that hepatitis B vaccination at birth did not have a negative impact on the subsequent immune responses induced by the candidate vaccine. Immune responses are presented in the following Tables 4 &amp; 5 .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                    | HBs ≥ 10 mIU/ml   | [97.6 , 99.6]                                                             | 96.5 98.7]                                                                | [92.5 , 100.0            | [97.2 , 100.0] 99.3 [96.9 , 100.0]   | 95.3 [89.4 , 98.5]       | 97.2 [92.1 , 99.4]       | 92.8 [85.7 , 97.0]       | 99.0 [94.4 , 100.0]                                       |
|--------------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
|                    | BPT VR*           | [98.4 , 99.9]                                                             | 99.4 [96.9 , 100.0]                                                       | -                        | -                                    | 98.0 [93.1 , 99.8]       | 94.2 [87.9 , 97.9]       | 100.0 [96.2 , 100.0]     | 99.0 [94.3 , 100.0]                                       |
| rates (%, [95%CI]) | T ≥ 0.1 IU/ml     | [99.3 , 100.0]                                                            | 97.2 [93.6 , 99.1]                                                        | -                        | -                                    | 99.1 [94.9 , 100.0]      | 98.1 [93.5 , 99.8]       | 100.0 [96.3 , 100.0]     | 100.0 [96.3 , 100.0]                                      |
| vaccine response   | D ≥ 0.1 IU/ml     | [94.4 , 97.7]                                                             | 93.8 [89.2 , 96.9]                                                        | -                        | -                                    | 99.1 [94.9 , 100.0]      | 98.1 [93.5 , 99.8]       | 94.8 [88.4 , 98.3]       | 94.8 [88.4 , 98.3]                                        |
| and pertussis      | PRP ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml  | [96.6 , 99.1]                                                             | 97.2 [93.6 , 99.1]                                                        | 98.4 [94.5 , 99.8]       | 95.2 [90.3 , 98.0]                   | 95.3 [89.4 , 98.5]       | 94.4 [88.3 , 97.9]       | 97.9 [92.7 , 99.7]       | 94.8 [88.4 , 98.3]                                        |
| Seroprotection     | PRP ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml | [98.4 , 99.9]                                                             | 98.9 [96.0 , 99.9]                                                        | 100.0 [97.2 , 100.0]     | 99.3 [96.2 , 100.0]                  | 100.0 [96.6 , 100.0]     | no 100.0 [96.6 , 100.0]  | 100.0 [96.3 , 100.0]     | 100.0 [96.3 , 100.0]                                      |
| N                  | N                 | 543                                                                       | 543                                                                       | 178 129                  | 145                                  | 107                      | 108                      | 97                       | 97                                                        |
| Vaccine            |                   | Product DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g (pooled lots) Tritanrix™-HepB + Hiberix™ | Product DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g (pooled lots) Tritanrix™-HepB + Hiberix™ | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™             | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g following a dose of HBV at birth |
| Study (country)    | Study (country)   | Hib-078‡ (Nicaragua) (Panama)                                             | Hib-078‡ (Nicaragua) (Panama)                                             | Hib-079                  | (Turkey)                             | Hib-080                  | (Belgium)                | Hib-081                  | (Philippines)                                             |
| Schedule           | Schedule          | 2-4-6 Months                                                              | 2-4-6 Months                                                              |                          | 2-4-6 Months                         | 3-4-5                    | Months                   | 6-10-14                  | Weeks                                                     |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 4: Seroprotection and pertussis vaccine response rates one month after the third primary vaccination dose of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and comparator vaccines (ATP cohort) N = Number of subjects included in the ATP cohort for immunogenicity analysis (the actual number analysed may be different for each antigen, depending on whether serological results were available for all subjects) VR: Pertussis vaccine response defined as appearance of antibodies ( ≥ 15 El.U/ml) in initially seronegative subjects or at least maintenance of pre-vaccination antibody titres in initially seropositive subjects

‡ In study Hib-078 all anti-HBs responses were calculated on initially seronegative subjects only.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

cohort)

| Anti-HBs (mIU/ml)   | 1717.1                                 | [1537.8 , 1917.3] 1549.3 [1206.8 , 1989.1]   | 2109.0 [1715.7 , 2592.5]   | 2158.7 [1739.3 , 2679.3]   | 455.6 [335.7 , 618.3]            | 470.9 [352.3 , 629.3]    | 128.8 [94.0 , 176.6]     | 257.5 [196.8 , 337.0]                                     |
|---------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Anti-BPT (El.U/ml)  | 115.2 [108.5 , 122.3]                  | 120.9 [109.1 , 134.0]                        | -                          | -                          | 66.4 [57.6 , 76.5]               | 62.7 [52.9 , 74.3]       | 111.2 [99.3 , 124.6]     | 112.4 [98.8 , 127.8]                                      |
| Anti-T (IU/ml)      | 3.716 [3.413 , 4.046]                  | 2.092 [1.746 , 2.507]                        | -                          | -                          | 2.246 [1.858 , 2.716]            | 1.821 [1.463 , 2.267]    | 6.261 [5.185 , 7.561]    | 5.867 [4.695 , 7.332]                                     |
| Anti-D (IU/ml)      | 1.515 [1.363 , 1.684]                  | 1.392 [1.132 , 1.712]                        | -                          | -                          | 1.535 [1.303 , 1.808]            | 1.200 [1.007 , 1.429]    | 0.699 [0.562 , 0.870]    | 0.626 [0.514 , 0.762]                                     |
| Anti-PRP ( µ g/ml)  | 32.843 [29.662 , 36.366]               | 47.686 [38.126 , 59.641]                     | 18.805 [15.480 , 22.845]   | 11.219 [9.000 , 13.986]    | 11.065 [8.790 , 13.930]          | 12.573 [9.563 , 16.532]  | 9.274 [7.539 , 11.409]   | 8.770 [6.883 , 11.175]                                    |
| N                   | 543                                    | 178                                          | 129                        | 145                        | 107                              | 108                      | 97                       | 97                                                        |
| Vaccine             | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g (pooled lots) | Tritanrix™-HepB + Hiberix™                   | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g   | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™   | Product DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g | Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g following a dose of HBV at birth |
| Study (country)     | Hib-078‡ (Nicaragua)                   | (Panama)                                     | Hib-079                    | (Turkey)                   | Hib-080                          | (Belgium)                | Hib-081                  | (Philippines)                                             |
| Schedule            | 2-4-6                                  | months                                       | 2-4-6                      | months                     | 3-4-5                            | months                   | 6-10-14                  | weeks                                                     |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 5: Antibody GMTs one month after the third primary vaccination dose of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and comparator vaccines (ATP N = Number of subjects included in the ATP cohort for immunogenicity analysis (the actual number analysed may be different for each antigen, depending on whether serological results were available for all subjects). ‡ In study Hib078 all anti-HBs responses were calculated on initially seronegative subjects only.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table  6:    Hib-091:  Anti-PRP  seroprotection  rates  and  antibody  GMCs  (ATP  cohort  for immunogenicity)

| Group   | Timing       | N     | ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml   | ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml   | ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml   | ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml   | ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml   | ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml   | ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml   | ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml   | GMC          | GMC          | GMC          |
|---------|--------------|-------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
|         |              |       |                 |                 | 95% CI          | 95% CI          | n              | %              | 95% CI         | 95% CI         | Value        | 95% CI       | 95% CI       |
|         |              |       | n               | %               | LL              | UL              |                |                | LL             | UL             |              | LL           | UL           |
| 1       | PRE PIII(M3) | 95 95 | 62 95           | 65.3 100.0      | 54.8 96.2       | 74.7 100.0      | 18 89          | 18.9 93.7      | 11.6 86.8      | 28.3 97.6      | 0.285 15.285 | 0.219 11.624 | 0.371 20.100 |
| 2       | PRE PIII(M3) | 93 94 | 60 94           | 64.5 100.0      | 53.9 96.2       | 74.2 100.0      | 19 89          | 20.4 94.7      | 12.8 88.0      | 30.1 98.3      | 0.318 13.868 | 0.240 10.816 | 0.420 17.780 |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Study Hib-091 100% of subjects in both groups showed seroprotective anti-PRP antibodies. There was no difference between groups in terms of post-vaccination GMC, or in the proportion of subjects reaching the higher cut-off of 1.0 µ g/ml (&gt;93% in both groups) (See Table 6 above). Non-inferiority of the reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix was demonstrated since, in terms of the anti-PRP response, the upper limit of the 95% CI for the difference in the proportion of subjects with anti-PRP antibody concentration ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml was below the pre-defined limit of 10%. Consistency of the immune response of  the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine (Study Hib-078) With respect to the primary endpoint, pairwise comparison of the percentage of subjects with anti-PRP antibody titres ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml for the three Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine lots, met the pre-defined criteria for clinical equivalence. Study Hib-078 therefore demonstrated lot-to-lot consistency in terms of antibody response to the PRP antigen. Persistence of antibodies following primary vaccination with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine and immunogenicity of a booster dose in the second year of life (Study Hib-064) In  study  Hib-052  subjects  received  a  booster  dose  of  the  same  vaccine  they  received  for  primary vaccination,  co-administered  with  MMR  vaccine  at  15-24  months  of  age.  Only  the  groups  boosted with  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  or  the  licensed  Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™  are discussed here. Prior to booster vaccination, seroprotection rates and antibody GMTs were similar in both groups, as shown by the overlapping 95%CIs. All subjects primed with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine had anti-PRP antibodies ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml. Forty-two  days  after  booster  vaccination,  similar  responses  were  seen  among  subjects  receiving  a fourth  dose  of  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  and  those  receiving  a  fourth  dose  of Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™. All subjects had anti-PRP antibody titres ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml (See Table 7 ). When the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g  vaccine  was  given  as  a  fourth  consecutive  dose  at  14  to  19 months  of  age,  substantial  increases  in  anti-PRP  antibody  titres  were  induced  (post  vaccination antibody GMT was 25-fold higher compared to the pre-booster titre). This substantial increase in antiPRP antibodies (similar to that induced by a fourth consecutive dose of Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ and resulting in similar post booster vaccination antibody GMTs) is suggestive of effective priming and induction of immune memory, regardless of the quantity of PRP and the formulation of the Hib component used for priming. Group.1: Tritanrix™-HepB low thio/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix); Group.2: Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ N = number of subjects with available results n/% = number/percentage of subjects with Anti-PRP concentration greater than 0.15 &amp; greater than 1mcg/ml 95% CI = 95% confidence interval; LL = Lower Limit; UL = Upper Limit PRE =Blood sampling time point prior to vaccination (visit 1) PIII(M3) = blood sampling time point one month after the third dose (visit 4)

The avidity and bactericidal activity was measured one month post primary and again one month after booster  vaccination  in  sera  from  25  subjects  who  received  the  candidate  vaccine  and  25  who  had

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

received the Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ control vaccines in studies Hib-052 and Hib-064. A subset representative  of  the  range  of  titres  observed  after  primary  vaccination  was  selected.  The  antibody avidity and bactericidal activity was similar between groups and showed also similar increases from post  primary  to  post  booster,  in  both  groups.  These  data  are  evidence  of  the  existence  of  anti-PRP memory  and  demonstrate  the  functional  capacity  of  the  anti-PRP  antibodies  in  subjects  who  have received the candidate vaccine as a primary vaccination course.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The available data demonstrate immunogenicity and antibody persistence following primary immunisation  with  the  candidate  vaccine,  the  induction  of  immune  memory  as  evidenced  by  the booster  response  and  the  maturation  of  the  antibodies  induced,  similar  to  that  observed  with  the licensed Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ vaccine. However, when comparing the seroprotection rates of the different groups in studies Hib064, Hib085 and Hib008, the number of children receiving the 2.5 µg  vaccine  was  very  small  (n=63;  Group  4  of  study  Hib  064)  when  compared  to  the  number  of children receiving the 5 µg or 10 µg vaccines. As a consequence, the need for booster vaccination has not been established as the total number of infants seen during follow-up was too small to assess the persistence of antibodies following primary vaccination and to evaluate the protective effect of booster vaccination. The applicant has committed to provide additional data as soon as they are available.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7: Seroprotection/seropositivity/pertussis vaccine response rates and antibody GMTs prior to and one month after booster vaccination in study Hib-064

Cohort)

(ATP

| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | GMT [95%CI]            | 57.898 [43.991 , 76.200]   | -                    | 1.942 [1.413 , 2.669]   | -                       | 7.561 [6.420 , 8.905]               | 113.0 [98.1 , 130.1] -             | 1215.1 [708.1 , 2085.3]   |
|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | Post booster % [95%CI] | 100.0 [94.8 , 100.0]       | 100.0 [94.8 , 100.0] | 97.1 [89.9 , 99.6]      | - 100.0                 | [94.8 , 100.0] 100.0 [94.8 , 100.0] | 97.1 [89.9 ; 99.6]                 | 92.8 [83.9 , 97.6]        |
| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | GMT [95%CI]            | 3.414 [2.278 , 5.117]      | -                    | 0.087 [0.071 , 0.107]   | - 0.364                 | [0.297 , 0.445] 12.3 [10.2 , 14.7]  | -                                  | 27.9 [19.7 , 39.5]        |
| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | % [95%CI]              | 97.1 [89.9 , 99.6]         | 76.8 [65.1 , 86.1]   | 37.7 [26.3 , 50.2]      | 89.9 [80.2 , 95.8]      | 95.7 [87.8 , 99.1] 36.2             | [25.0 , 48.7] -                    | 71.0 [58.8 , 81.3]        |
| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | GMT [95%CI]            | 52.459 [38.463 , 71.549]   | -                    | 2.821 [2.065 , 3.854]   | -                       | 6.930 [5.936 , 8.092] 142.06        | no [120.9 , 168.2] -               | 2695.3 [1701.3 , 4270.1]  |
| Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ (N = 69) Pre-booster   | Post booster % [95%CI] | 100.0 [94.3 , 100.0]       | 100.0 [94.3 , 100.0] | 98.4 [91.5 , 100.0]     | -                       | Product 100.0 [94.3 , 100.0] 100.0  | [94.1 , 100.0] 98.4 [91.2 ; 100.0] | 98.4 [91.5 , 100.0]       |
|                                                 | GMT [95%CI]            | 2.095 [1.472 , 2.983]      | -                    | 0.101 [0.081 , 0.126]   | - 0.331                 | [0.260 , 0.423] 12.6 [10.6 , 14.9]  | -                                  | 48.4 [33.3 , 70.4]        |
|                                                 | Pre-booster % [95%CI]  | 100.0 [94.3 , 100.0]       | 66.7 [53.7 , 78.0]   | 49.2 [36.4 , 62.1]      | 90.5 [80.4 , 96.4] 88.9 | [78.4 , 95.4] 41.3 [29.0 , 54.4]    | -                                  | 82.5 [70.9 , 90.9]        |
|                                                 | Antibody               | Anti-PRP ≥ 0.15 †          | Anti-PRP ≥ 1.0 ‡     | Anti-D ELISA            | Anti-T                  | Vero-cell assay Anti-BPT            | Vaccine response*                  | Anti-HBs                  |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised % percentage of subjects with titres ≥ assay cut-off ( ≥ 0.15 µ g/ml (†) and ≥ 1.0 µ g/ml (‡) for anti-PRP, ≥ 0.1 IU/ml for anti-diphtheria by ELISA and ≥ 0.016 IU/ml for Vero-cell assay pre-booster, ≥ 0.1 IU/ml for anti-tetanus, ≥ 15 El.U/ml for anti-BPT and ≥ 10 mIU/ml for anti-HBs); Units for GMTs: µ g/ml for anti-PRP, IU/ml for anti-D and anti-T, El.U/ml for anti-BPT and mIU/ml for anti-HBs *Pertussis vaccine response defined as appearance of antibodies ( ≥ 15 El.U/ml) in initially seronegative subjects or at least 2-fold increase of pre-booster antibody titres in initially seropositive subjects

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Protective efficacy of the remaining vaccine components; immunogenicity following primary vaccination

| Group       | Timing       | N     | %seroprotected/VR   | %seroprotected/VR   | %seroprotected/VR   | %seroprotected/VR   | GMC         | GMC         | GMC         |
|-------------|--------------|-------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
|             |              |       |                     |                     | 95% CI              | 95% CI              | Value       | 95% CI      | 95% CI      |
|             |              |       | n                   | %                   | LL                  | UL                  |             | LL          | UL          |
| Diphtheria  |              |       |                     | % ≥ 0.1 IU/ml       |                     |                     | IU/ml       |             |             |
| 1           | PRE PIII(M3) | 94 94 | 27 84               | 28.7 89.4           | 19.9 81.3           | longer 39.0 94.8    | 0.075 0.767 | 0.064 0.588 | 0.087 1.001 |
| 2           | PRE PIII(M3) | 94 94 | 29 82               | 30.9 87.2           | 21.7 78.8           | 41.2 93.2           | 0.081 0.576 | 0.068 0.439 | 0.096 0.757 |
| Tetanus     |              |       |                     | % ≥ 0.1 IU/ml       |                     |                     | IU/ml       |             |             |
| 1           | PRE PIII(M3) | 95 95 | 85 95               | 89.5 100.0          | 81.5 96.2           | 94.8 100.0          | 2.136 3.198 | 1.509 2.636 | 3.024 3.880 |
| 2           | PRE PIII(M3) | 94 94 | 84 94               | 89.4 100.0          | 81.3 96.2           | 94.8 100.0          | 1.740 3.565 | 1.216 2.977 | 2.490 4.268 |
| Pertussis   |              |       |                     | %VR                 |                     |                     | EL.U/ml     |             |             |
| 1           | PRE PIII(M3) | 95 94 | 94                  | NA 100              | 96.2                | 100                 | 8.4 118.2   | 7.8 105.0   | 9.1 133.0   |
| 2           | PRE PIII(M3) | 94 92 | 91                  | no NA 98.9          | 94.1                | 100                 | 7.8 79.5    | 7.5 68.8    | 8.2 91.9    |
| Hepatitis B |              |       |                     | % ≥ 10mIU/ml        |                     |                     | mIU/ml      |             |             |
| 1           | PRE PIII(M3) | 93 93 | 25 83               | 26.9 89.2           | 18.2 81.1           | 37.1 94.7           | 12.8 108.9  | 9.0 77.9    | 18.0 152.2  |
| 2           | PRE PIII(M3) | 93 93 | 21 73               | 22.6 78.5           | 14.6 68.8           | 32.4 86.3           | 11.4 67.1   | 8.1 47.0    | 16.2 96.0   |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  immune  response  to  diphtheria,  tetanus,  pertussis  (BPT),  and  Hepatitis  B  components  were evaluated in studies Hib-052, -078, -080 and -081, following the Methods section. In study Hib-079, only the immune response to Hepatitis B component was evaluated. Vaccine  response  rates  and  seroprotection  rates  for  pertussis,  diphtheria,  tetanus  and  hepatitis  B measured  one  month  after  completion  of  the  three-dose  primary  vaccination  course  were  similar between the candidate vaccine and the licensed control groups. Table 8 Hib-091: Seroprotection/vaccine response rates and antibody GMCs for anti-tetanus, diphtheria, pertussis and hepatitis B antibodies (ATP cohort for immunogenicity) Group.1: Tritanrix™-HepB low thio/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg (reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix); Group.2: Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ N = number of subjects with available results n/%seroprotected/VR = number/percentage of subjects with antibody concentration above the level specified/vaccine response for pertussis NA: not applicable 95% CI = 95% confidence interval; LL = Lower Limit; UL = Upper Limit VR: appearance of antibodies in initially seronegative subjects, or post-vaccination concentrations ≥ pre-vaccination concentration in initially seropositive subjects PRE =Blood sampling time point prior to vaccination (visit 1) PIII(M3) = blood sampling time point one month after the third dose (visit 4)

## · Pertussis

The anti-BPT antibody titres and vaccine response rates following vaccination with Tritanrix™-HepB

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were previously shown to be similar to those of Tritanrix™. The data provided here show that the response  to  the  candidate  vaccine  was  not  different  from  that  obtained  following  vaccination  with Tritanrix™-HepB, either injected as such or mixed with Hiberix™.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  Pw  component  of  the  candidate  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  is  identical  to  the  Pw component of the licensed Tritanrix™ and Tritanrix™-HepB vaccines. The same Pw component (in combination with D and T) was used as a comparator group in a household contact study in Germany to determine the vaccine-efficacy against pertussis ( Schmitt et al. J Am Med Assoc. 1996; 275: 37-41 ). The DTPw vaccine was administered at 3, 4 and 5 months of age and the cohort was followed for a median period of 250 days after completion of the primary vaccination course. Schmitt et al. (J Am Med  Assoc.  1996;  275:  37-41)  reported  that  the  vaccine  efficacy  of  the  acellular  vaccine  was estimated at 88.7%. However since the DTPw receiving subjects were more frequently in contact with patients treated with erythromycin than the DTPw receiving subjects, the authors concluded that the efficacy of the DTPw vaccine may have been overestimated. · Diphtheria Overall, 96.3% of subjects receiving the candidate vaccine had anti-diphtheria antibody titres of ≥ 0.1 IU/ml one month after completion of the primary vaccination course. One month after the booster dose virtually all subjects had protective antibody titres. In study Hib-091, subjects who were seronegative by ELISA testing after vaccination were tested with the more sensitive in vitro neutralisation assay on Vero cells. 96.2% of subjects in both groups had seroprotective antibody concentrations by either method (ELISA or Vero). · Tetanus One month after  completion  of  the  primary  vaccination  course  the  candidate  vaccine  induced  antitetanus antibody titres of ≥ 0.1 IU/ml in virtually all subjects, no difference being observed among the different vaccines. In  study  Hib-078,  the  reference  vaccine  generated  lower  tetanus  antibody  titres  than  the  candidate vaccine.  Only  97.2%  of  subjects  in  the  reference  group  showed  seroprotection  to  tetanus  and  the confidence limits of the GMTs were not overlapping although the same lot of the DTPw-HBV vaccine was  used.  Since  consistency  of  lot  production  was  demonstrated  in  terms  of  anti-tetanus  antibody response and given the high rates of seroprotective antibody concentrations achieved by subjects in all studies, it is unlikely that these differences are of clinical relevance. · Hepatitis B Compiled data from studies with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine confirm that the majority (&gt;95%) of subjects reached anti-HBsAg antibody titres ≥ 10mIU/ml one month after completing the primary vaccination. The candidate vaccine therefore meets the WHO recommendation for hepatitis B vaccination. As shown in study Hib-081, the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine can be safely administered according to the EPI schedule at 6, 10 and 14 weeks of age, after a birth dose of HBV vaccine. In these circumstances, the candidate vaccine elicited a high hepatitis B seroprotection rate of 99.0%, without interference on the immune responses to the other vaccine antigens. Although the same lot of the DTPw-HBV (15762A2) vaccine was used in studies Hib-78 and Hib-80 the confidence intervals of the mean antibody titres against HBsAg were not overlapping (e.g. in the Philippines the GMT's were significantly lower). The data presented suggest that the variability in the response to hepatitis B after vaccination with the same lot may be explained by the schedule in which the vaccine was used. Although the magnitude of the post-vaccination response differed, Quintanrix was shown to be immunogenic and to induce seroprotective anti-HBs antibody concentrations in the majority of subjects studied, including when administered in the most immunologically challenging schedule.

In study Hib091, the seroconversion rate for antibodies to HBsAg was higher in the group receiving the reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix when compared to the group receiving the full thiomersal vaccine  (89.2%  versus  78.5%),  with  a  comparable  GMC  titre  (157.8  vs.  136.8mIU/ml)  among

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

seroconverting subjects among both groups. This finding indicates that the reduced thiomersal content did not interfere with the immunogenicity of the hepatitis B antigen. Although the post-vaccination anti-HBs  GMC  was  significantly  higher  in  the  group  receiving  the  reduced  thiomeral  form  of Quintanrix vaccine, when only subjects seropositive after vaccination are considered, this difference is no longer observed. Since the hepatitis B seroconversion rates in studies Hib078, Hib079, Hib080 and Hib081  were  strictly  comparable  (all  children  received  the  full  thiomersal  vaccine)  the  lower seroconversion rate observed in study Hib091 with the full thiomersal vaccine is not considered as relevant.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Subjects enrolled into study Hib-091 were born of HBsAg negative mothers as established by prior screening. Even so, approximately 25% of subjects enrolled had detectable anti-HBs antibodies prior to  vaccination,  reflecting  prior  maternal  vaccination  or  previous  maternal  infection  with  viral clearance. There is no evidence that the presence of maternal antibody had an impact on the response to primary vaccination. The anti-HBs antibody GMC and the proportion of subjects who developed seroprotective antibodies after  vaccination  with  the  reduced  thiomersal  form  of  Quintanrix  is  comparable  to  that  observed  in previous  studies  with  Quintanrix  in  the  same  population,  when  no  birth  dose  of  hepatitis  B  was administered. Anti-HBs responses were at least as good as the responses observed with the licensed vaccine without reduced thiomersal content. Protective efficacy of the remaining vaccine components; consistency of the immune response of the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine (Study Hib-078) The 90% CI of the differences in seroprotection rates (diphtheria, tetanus, hepatitis B) and vaccine response rate (pertussis) for all pairwise comparisons were within the preset limits defining clinical equivalence (-10%, 10%). Similarity of post vaccination anti-diphtheria and anti-HBs antibody titres could not formally be concluded since the 90% CIs of the GMT ratios were marginally outside the pre-set limit and one group was not consistently below the others. These differences in antibody titres did  not  result  in  different  seroprotection  rates  between  groups.  The  consistency  of  the  candidate vaccine can thus be concluded. Protective efficacy of the remaining vaccine components; Persistence of antibodies following primary vaccination with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine and immunogenicity of a booster dose in the second year of life (Study Hib-064) Before  booster  vaccination,  82.5%  of  infants  primed  with  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine still had protective antibody titres against hepatitis B and 88.9% against tetanus. Bordetella pertussis antibodies had declined significantly, but were not different from those in the control group. Using an in vitro neutralisation assay on Vero cells with a cut-off of 0.016 IU/ml to retest seronegative serum samples, it was concluded that the majority of subjects (90%) remained protected against diphtheria at the time of booster vaccination. Forty-two  days  after  booster  vaccination,  similar  responses  were  seen  among  subjects  receiving  a fourth  dose  of  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  and  those  receiving  a  fourth  dose  of Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™. All subjects had seroprotective antibody titres against tetanus. More than 98% of the subjects had seroprotective antibody titres against diphtheria or hepatitis B, or showed a booster response for anti-BPT antibodies following the booster dose of the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine. In both groups, the booster dose induced a 10 to 55-fold increase in mean antibody titres compared to the pre-booster levels for all vaccine components. Co-administration of other vaccines · Co-administration of oral polio vaccine (OPV) and Bacille-Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine Both  OPV  and  BCG  vaccines  are  routinely  administered  during  the  first  months  of  life  in  Latin America and Asia where the majority of clinical trials were conducted. Therefore, the administration of  these  vaccines  according  to  local  practices  was  not  considered  to  be  an  exclusion  or  elimination criterion in the clinical trials conducted with the candidate vaccine.

In trial Hib-052, OPV was provided by GSK and was co-administered to all subjects during the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  the  other  trials,  approximately  85%  of  the  candidate  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  doses were co-administered with OPV, with similar rates of OPV co-administration in the control groups.

In  order  to  provide  data  on  the  immune  response  to  OPV  following  co-administration  with  DTPwHepB/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g, the following studies were selected for additional testing of Polio antibodies: Hib-079 Hib-081 and Hib-091. The data presented above indicate that co-administration of OPV and Quintanrix  results  in  anti-polio  seroconversion  rates  and  GMTs  similar  to  those  observed  after  coadministration  of  OPV  and  the  licensed  Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM .    In  a  developing  country,  coadministration  of  OPV  and  Quintanrix  produces  seroconversion  rates  at  least  as  high  as  those previously reported in the literature.

In  study  Hib-078,  the  reference  vaccine  elicited  a  smaller  immune  response  to  tetanus  one  month following  primary  vaccination  than  the  candidate  vaccine.  Since  neither  the  persistence  of  tetanus antibodies  following  primary vaccination, nor the effect of booster vaccination was studied in Hib078, the significance of these findings remains unknown.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised With regard to BCG vaccine, 25% of the subjects in study Hib-052 and 45% of the subjects in study Hib-079 received one dose of BCG concomitantly with one of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine doses, with similar rates of BCG co-administration in the control groups. The Mantoux or Tuberculin  test  remains  the  most  frequently  used  test  to  measure  the  delayed-type  hypersensitivity reaction  to  tuberculin  as  an  indication  of  immunity  induced  by  BCG  vaccination.  However  the tuberculin  test  was  not  performed  during  clinical  trials  of  DTPw-HepB/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g.  Currently there  is  no  in-vitro  test  available  to  assess  the  immunogenicity  of  BCG.    Therefore  no  serological testing  of  the  response  to  BCG  when  co-administered  with  DTPw-HepB/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g could  be performed. As  this  co-administration  did  not  lead  to  any  obvious  impact  on  the  overall  immunogenicity  and reactogenicity  profiles  of  the  vaccine,  it  can  be  concluded  that  when  needed,  the  candidate  DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  can  be  co-administered  with  BCG  vaccine,  according  to  medical practices in place. · Co-administration of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccines in the second year of life In the booster study Hib-064 the candidate vaccine was co-administered with GSK's licensed MMR vaccine (Priorix™) at 15-24 months of age. The specific MMR reactogenicity and immunogenicity data  observed  in  this  study  was  similar  to  GSK's  previous  clinical  experience  with  Priorix™. Therefore MMR vaccine can safely and effectively be co-administered with DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g in the second year of life when appropriate. Discussion on clinical efficacy The  3-5-12  month  schedule  that  is  used  in  some  European  countries  was  not  evaluated  in  clinical studies and is reflected in section 4.2 of the SPC. The immune response to the Hib component elicited by the candidate vaccine following primary and booster vaccination was statistically not inferior to the reference vaccines. The  variability  in  anti-PRP  antibody  concentrations  observed  during  the  clinical  development  of Quintanrix is consistent with that reported in the literature with Hib vaccines from other manufacturers, and with previous experience in clinical trials performed by GSK. The exact causes of the variation in the magnitude of the anti-PRP response are likely to be complex and multi-factorial. Despite the differences in the magnitude of the response, the proportion of subjects with seroprotective anti-PRP antibody concentrations was high, and there is evidence to show that immune memory was induced. These observations emphasise that the anti-PRP response following priming with 2.5 µ g of PRP is similar to that elicited by currently licensed 10 µ g PRP vaccines. Therefore, this variability is likely to be of no clinical significance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Although the same lot of the DTPw-HBV (15762A2)  vaccine was used in studies Hib-78 and Hib-80, the confidence intervals of the mean antibody titres against the Pw as well as the HBsAg component were not overlapping in the two studies. The applicant claims that notwithstanding the variability of the response, the infants were satisfactorily sero-protected when referring to the validated markers and cut off levels for protection. This was indeed the case. However, since the validated surrogate markers demonstrate a high level of sero-protection, the point can be considered as solved.

In  order  to  delineate  an  \"average\"  reactogenicity  profile,  the  incidences  of  solicited  symptoms following primary vaccination with the candidate vaccine in studies Hib-078, Hib-079, Hib-080 and Hib-081, representing a total of 3509 doses, have been pooled and are presented in Table 9 .  These

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  consistency  of  the  immune  response  of  the  different  lots  of  the  candidate  vaccine  was demonstrated for all vaccine components. Study  Hib-091  confirms  the  satisfactory  immunogenicity  of  DTPw-HepB/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g vaccine containing reduced thiomersal.  Non-inferiority of the vaccine was demonstrated in terms of the antiPRP response after vaccination. Seroprotection rates and vaccine response rates for the other vaccine antigens  were  at  least  as  high  as  those  achieved  after  vaccination  with  Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM without reduced thiomersal content. The small number of children seen during follow-up in study Hib-064 precludes a reliable conclusion about the persistence of protective antibodies after primary vaccination and about the immunogenic effect  of  booster  vaccination.  As  a  consequence,  the  need  for  booster  vaccination  has  not  been established. The candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib 2.5 vaccine when used as a booster has been evaluated by the  applicant  in  other  clinical  studies,  namely  DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenAC-TT-002    and  DTPwHBV/Hib-MenC-TT-003. The  applicant  has  committed  to  provide  the  full  study  reports  of  studies DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenAC-002 and DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenC-003, including the booster data, as soon as they are available. In the studies performed with the Quintanrix, no HIV screening took place. Therefore, the applicant commits to perform a clinical trial in an HIV seropositive infant study population. In this exploratory study, infants will be screened for HIV before study entry and approximately 50 infants will receive the  study  vaccine.  The  objective  of  this  study  will  be  to  assess  both  clinical  protection  and reactogenicity  following  primary  vaccination  with  the  Quintanrix  vaccine  containing  2.5 µ g  PRP, compared to the reference vaccine, Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM containing 10 µ g PRP. The results of this study will be submitted when they become available. Clinical safety Patient exposure The  overall  reactogenic  profile  of  the  candidate  vaccine  was  based  upon  data  collected  from  1334 infants  receiving  the  vaccine  as  a  primary  vaccination  during  4  clinical  studies  (Hib-078,  Hib-079, Hib-080 and Hib-081) and from 435 infants who received a booster dose. The incidence per dose of solicited and unsolicited local and general symptoms is presented for each study. Adverse events All  vaccines  administered  in  the  feasibility  study  Hib-052  elicited  similar  reactogenicity  profiles. Grade  3  local  and  general  solicited  symptoms  occurred  infrequently  and  no  vaccine  related  safety concerns were identified. Overall,  incidences  of  solicited  symptoms  were  similar  among  the  groups  receiving  the  DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  and  the  control  groups  receiving  Tritanrix™-HepB  and  Hiberix™ vaccines  in  each  study.  Grade  3  symptoms  were  infrequently  reported  and  were  similar  between groups in the same trial. In study Hib-078, local reactions observed at the Tritanrix™-HepB injection site were similar to those observed at the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g injection site, thus showing that the addition of the Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g component does not affect the local reactogenicity profile of the DTPw-HBV component.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

have  been  used  to  describe  in  the  SPC  the  symptoms  that  most  likely  occur  and  their  respective frequencies.

Table  9:  Pooled  per  dose  incidences  (%)  of  solicited  local  and  general  symptoms  with  a suspected or probable causal relationship to vaccination (any and grade 3) over the four-day follow-up period following primary vaccination with the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg

|                  | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g (Pooled data on 3509 doses)   | DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µ g (Pooled data on 3509 doses)   |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Symptom          | %                                                      | CIOMS frequency categorisation                         |
| Pain             | 49.2                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Redness          | 37.4                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Swelling         | 33.4                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Fever*           | 46.6                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Grade 3 fever*   | 1.4                                                    | Common                                                 |
| Drowsiness       | 28.3                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Irritability     | 47.2                                                   | Very common                                            |
| Loss of appetite | 21.1                                                   | Very common                                            |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised % = percentage of doses followed by a specified symptom *Fever defined by a measurement ≥ 37.5°C (axillary) or ≥ 38.0°C (rectally) Grade 3 fever: temperature measurement &gt;39.0°C (axillary) and &gt; 39.5°C (rectally). Although  incidences  of  symptoms  were  similar  for  the  different  groups  in  the  same  trial,  some variability of the reactogenicity profile was observed between studies: ⇒ Grade 3 pain varies between 3.0% in Belgium and 10.2 % in Nicaragua and Panama. ⇒ Redness &gt;20 mm is 0.6% in Nicaragua and Panama versus 11.4% in the Philippines ⇒ Swelling &gt;20 mm is observed in 1.3 % in Nicaragua an Panama and 15% in the Philippines. The applicant's explanation with respect to the impact of cultural factors on symptom reporting such as  pain  is  satisfactory.  However,  redness  and  swelling  are  signs  observed  by  the  care  provider  and should  not  be  affected  by  cultural  factors.  Nevertheless  the  applicant  stresses  that  the  incidence  of local  symptoms were similar among children receiving Quintanrix and the licensed control in each trial, indicating that the reactogenicity profile of Quintanrix was similar to that of the licensed control vaccine. The applicant's response was considered acceptable. Consistency of reactogenicity of the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg vaccine (Study Hib-078) Incidences of solicited local and general symptoms (any intensity and grade 3) were similar between the  three  groups  in  study  Hib-078  receiving  different  lots  of  the  Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  component, reconstituted  with  the  same  lot  of  Tritanrix™-HepB.  Exact  95%CIs  computed  on  the  ratio  of  the incidences of each solicited symptom did not indicate a significant difference between each pair of DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine lots in terms of proportion of subjects for whom symptoms were reported. A consistent reactogenicity profile of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine was therefore demonstrated. Reactogenicity observed in study Hib-091 Overall, the incidence of any general symptom was high in study Hib-091, but similar to that reported in  the  same  population  previously  (study  Hib-081).  Similarly,  the  incidence  of  grade  3  systemic symptoms  including  fever  &gt;39.0°C  reported  in  study  Hib-091  was  low  (reported  after  &lt;3.0%  of doses), and was comparable with rates reported after vaccination with the high-thiomersal-containing formulation of Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™ in study Hib-081 (Grade 3 symptoms reported after &lt;4% of  doses).  Temperature and irritability were the most frequently reported general symptoms in both groups in study Hib-091. Exploratory comparisons showed significant differences between groups in terms  of  Any  drowsiness,  irritability  and  temperature  (p&lt;0.05),  with  higher  rates  reported  after  the reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix, however there were no significant differences between groups in terms of symptoms of grade 3 intensity.

There were 12 SAEs reported during the study period.  None were considered by the investigator to be related  to  vaccination.  One  subject  experienced  two  seizure  episodes  that  began  18  days  after  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

second dose of Tritanrix™-HepB/Hiberix™. A diagnosis of seizure disorder was made and treatment was commenced. At study end therapy was ongoing and the subject had not returned for follow-up investigations. The subject received the third vaccine dose without complications.

## Reactogenicity associated with booster dose of DTPw-HBV/Hib 2.5 in the second year of life

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The safety of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib 2.5 vaccine when used as a booster has been evaluated by the applicant in several clinical studies, representing 435 vaccine doses administered. Sixty three doses were administered in the Hib-064 study and a total of 370 doses in studies DTPw-HBV/HibMenAC-TT-002 and DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenC-TT-003. The applicant has committed to provide the full study reports of studies DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenAC-002 and DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenC-003, including the immunogenic data, as soon as they are available. Overall, symptoms tended to be reported more frequently following the booster dose as compared to the  primary  course.  This  was  observed  previously  for  other  DTP  vaccines.  Reports  of  grade  3 symptoms remained infrequent even after the fourth consecutive dose. In study Hib-064, the candidate vaccine showed a higher reactogenicity than the licensed control and the  other  experimental  vaccines:  pain,  fever,  irritability/fussiness  and  loss  of  appetite  were  more frequently  reported.  The  rates  of  symptoms  were  not  statistically  different  because  of  the  limited number of vaccines in each subgroup. Although these minor side effects should be interpreted with caution since such events may be affected by local beliefs and practices, the phenomenon does not preclude a real difference in reactogenicity between the candidate vaccine and the Hib and reference vaccines. Data were also available from groups receiving other experimental vaccines with higher amounts of the  reformulated  PRP-T  component  (5  or  10 µ g  of  PRP).  Despite  the  fact  that  these  vaccines  are identical to the candidate vaccine, except for a 2- respectively 4-fold higher PRP antigen content, the reactogenicity  profile  observed  in  these  groups  is  more  in  line  with  that  of  the  licensed  control. However, it should be stressed that only 10 µg PRP containing vaccines are licensed in the EU, not the 5  µg  containing  vaccine.  Any  comparison  with  the  latter  vaccine  in  terms  of  seroprotection  or reactogenicity is strictly spoken not appropriate. The  overall  reactogenicity  profile  of  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  remained  acceptable when given as a booster in the second year of life, even when co-administered with the MMR vaccine. Nevertheless  the  number  of  children  seen  during  follow-up  is  too  small  to  allow  any  reliable conclusion about the safety of the vaccine at booster vaccination. Especially with respect to the risk of febrile  convulsions  (children  at  booster  age  are  especially  prone  to  this  particular  serious  adverse event), the safety data have a very limited value. It should also be stressed that study Hib-064 was an open study, bearing the risk of introducing bias. Unsolicited symptoms One hundred-and-twenty-one primary vaccination doses of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine were followed within 30 days by at least one report of an unsolicited symptom assessed by the investigator  to  be  suspected  or  probably  related  (SU/PB)  to  vaccination.  The vast majority of these symptoms were reports of injection site induration that resolved within 2 to 3 weeks. Symptoms were related to childhood diseases commonly reported in this age group. In  the  four  pivotal  studies  performed  with  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g there  were  37  reports  of bronchitis and 21 reports of cough occurring within 30 days of any dose of vaccine (ATP cohort for safety). Of these cases, six subjects (five from study Hib-078 and one from study Hib-081) reported bronchitis and/or cough were initially considered by the investigators to be suspected/probably related to  vaccination.  In  retrospect,  after  re-assessing  the  cases,  all  investigators  felt  that  there  was  no relationship of the AE with the study vaccination.

No  unsolicited  symptoms  suspected  or  probably  related  to  vaccination  were  reported  following boosting with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine. To further assess the safety of the candidate

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

vaccine, unsolicited symptoms and serious adverse events (SAEs) reported following primary (studies Hib-065 and Hib-071) or booster (study Hib-064), vaccination with the related DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µ g vaccine were also reviewed. This did not reveal any safety concern.

## Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events

| Vaccine                 | Study   |   PID | SAE                 |   Previous dose |   Onset (hours) | Duration (min)   | Outcome   | Relation- ship   |
|-------------------------|---------|-------|---------------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------|------------------|
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg | Hib-078 |   519 | Shock-like syndrome |               1 |             1.5 | 15-20            | Recovered | PR               |
|                         | Hib-078 |   497 | Shock-like syndrome |               1 |             3.5 | 60               | Recovered | PR               |
| DTPw-HBV + Hiberix      | Hib-078 |   632 | Shock-like syndrome |               3 |             1.5 | 30               | Recovered | PR               |

| Vaccine                 | Study   |   PID | SAE                                              |   Previous dose |   Onset (days) | Outcome   | Relation- ship   |
|-------------------------|---------|-------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------|----------------|-----------|------------------|
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg | Hib-052 |   239 | Infantile beri beri, malaria febrile convulsions |               2 |             16 | Recovered | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg | Hib-052 |   404 | Febrile convulsions                              |               3 |              0 | Recovered | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg | Hib-078 |   480 | Viral meningitis, febrile convulsions            |               1 |              8 | Recovered | NR               |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised A total of 58 SAEs were reported for a total of 11,932 doses of any vaccine administered across all trials  included  in  the  dossier.  Twenty-four  SAEs  were  reported among subjects vaccinated with the DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g  vaccine  (23  during  the  primary  vaccination  course  and  1  following  a booster dose) and 18 were reported among subjects vaccinated with the related DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µ g vaccine (16 during the primary vaccination course and 2 following a booster dose). Only 9 SAEs were considered by the investigator to be suspected or probably related to vaccination (all occurred during the primary vaccination course, except one following a booster dose of TritanrixHepB™  and  Hiberix™).  Four  of  these  occurred  in  subjects  receiving  the  candidate  DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine,  two  hypotonic-hyporesponsive  episodes  (HHE)  and  two  cases  of convulsions  ( Table  10  &amp;  11 ).  All  4  subjects  recovered.  Three  events  occurred  following  the administration of Tritanrix™-HepB and Hiberix™ vaccines; one following DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µ g and one following separate administration of Tritanrix™-HepB and Hib\\_ads 10 µ g vaccines. Details are given in the following Tables  . Shock or shock-like state, collapse and hypotonic-hyporesponsive episodes (HHE) Table 10: Cases of Hypotonic-Hyporesponsive Episodes (HHE) reported in trials evaluating DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µg vaccines PR: probably related PID: patient identification Upon review of the unsolicited symptoms reported for the different trials included in the dossier, no other  symptoms  indicative  of  HHE  could  be  identified.  Therefore  the  incidence  of  HHE  with  the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine can be estimated to be 2/3,601 doses or 1/1,800 doses. When taking into account only the 1,828 doses of DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine administered in study Hib-078, the incidence of HHE was still within the range reported in the literature. HHE was  previously  considered  to  be  a  contraindication  to  further  pertussis  immunization.  While most parents and physicians withheld pertussis vaccines after HHE, approximately 25% did not, and this did not result in adverse events following subsequent immunisations. Recent studies also indicated that children are unlikely to have recurrent events after further vaccination. Therefore HHE has been maintained in the SPC as a precaution to further vaccination, and not as an absolute contraindication. This is also in line with the SPC of other licensed pertussis containing vaccines. Convulsions In  addition  to  the  convulsions  discussed  in  connection  with  the  SAEs  having  a  fatal  outcome  (see further),  seizures  were  reported  for  11  other  subjects  ( Table  11 ).  Ten  of  these  subjects  were hospitalised and therefore the convulsions were reported as SAE. Table 11: Convulsions with a favourable outcome reported in clinical trials evaluating DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µg vaccines

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                            | Hib-079   |   70 | Afebrile seizures, cerebral atrophia                                                     |   2 |   0 | Recovered with sequela   | PR   |
|----------------------------|-----------|------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|-----|--------------------------|------|
|                            | Hib-079   |   84 | Purulent meningitis                                                                      |   1 |   7 | Recovered                | NR   |
|                            | Hib-079   |  104 | Fever with generalised seizures                                                          |   2 |   0 | Recovered                | PR   |
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 5 µ g+MMR | Hib-064   |  265 | Acute gastroenteritis, febrile convulsions                                               |   4 |  54 | Recovered                | NR   |
| DTPw-HBV + Hib_ads 10 µ g  | Hib-052   |  489 | Fever, suspected URTI, febrile fits                                                      |   1 |   0 | Recovered                | PR   |
| DTPw-HBV + Hiberix         | Hib-078   |   22 | Seizures (reported in the unsolicited symptoms section because subject not hospitalised) |   3 |   0 | Recovered                | PR   |
| DTPw-HBV/Hiberix + MMR     | Hib-064   |  450 | Febrile convulsion, acute viral infection                                                |   4 |   9 | Recovered                | NR   |
| DTPw-HBV/Hiberix           | Hib-080   |  247 | Benign myoclonies, possibly epilepsy                                                     |   1 |  25 | Recovered                | NR   |

| Vaccine               | Study   |   PID | SAE                          |   Previous dose |   Onset (days) | Outcome                 | Relation- ship   |
|-----------------------|---------|-------|------------------------------|-----------------|----------------|-------------------------|------------------|
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 5 µg | Hib-071 |     1 | Cellulitis at injection site |               2 |              3 | Recovered with sequelae | PR               |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised NR - not related; PR - probably related PID - patient identification URTI - Upper Respiratory Tract Infection Four  events  were  considered  probably  related  to  vaccination  (two  of  which  were  in  the  candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  group).  All  4  probably-related  cases  occurred  on  the  day  of vaccination, as well as one additional case that occurred the day of administration of the 3 rd DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g dose, but was assessed as not related to study vaccination. Six  SAEs  in  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  group  involved  convulsions,  of  which  three occurred  on  the  day  of  vaccination.  The  three  other  cases  of  convulsions,  reported  in  the  DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine group, were considered as not related to vaccination. This is in line with the reported underlying diseases (infantile beri beri and possibly malaria, viral meningitis and purulent meningitis) and the onset of at least 7 days after vaccine administration. Whole-cell pertussis vaccines have been associated with an increased risk of febrile seizures, on the days of vaccination or the first subsequent days. However, as compared to other children with febrile seizures  that  were  not  associated  with  vaccination,  the  children  who  had  febrile  seizures  after vaccination  were  not  found  to  be  at  a  higher  risk  for  subsequent  seizures  or  neuro-developmental disabilities.  With  the  candidate  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine, 3 cases of febrile convulsions without any other concomitant disease were observed on a total of 3,601 doses administered for an incidence  of  0.08%  (95%CI:  0.02-0.24).  This  is  in  line  with  the  incidence  of  febrile  convulsions following DTPw vaccination, as reported previously (9 cases on 15,752 doses. or 0.06% with 95%CI: 0.03-011. In line with these observations, convulsions within 2 to 3 days following vaccination are listed in the Undesirable  Effects  section  of  the  proposed  SPC  for  the  candidate  vaccine.  No  other  neurological safety issues were identified for the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine. Other SAEs considered as being related to the vaccine In addition to the events already discussed, 3 SAEs were assessed by the investigator to be probably related  to  study  vaccination.  None  of  these  occurred  in  the  candidate  vaccine  group.  Two  cases  of injection  site  cellulitis  occurred  3-4  days  post  vaccination,  one  with  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  5 µ g vaccine  in  Argentina  (Study  Hib-085)  the  other  with  the  control  vaccine  in  the  Philippines.  Both resolved, but a scar remained. One subject in study Hib-078 in Nicaragua developed fever on the day of  the  second  dose  of  study  vaccination  with  Tritanrix™-HepB  and  Hiberix™.  A  viral  meningoencephalitis was diagnosed, but the investigator could not exclude a possible causal relationship with study vaccination. Table 12: Other probably or suspected to be related SAEs or SAEs with onset within 3 days after vaccination reported in clinical trials evaluating DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µg vaccines

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| DTPw-HBV + Hiberix   | Hib-078   |   148 | Viral meningoencephalitis    |   2 |   0 | Recovered               | PR   |
|----------------------|-----------|-------|------------------------------|-----|-----|-------------------------|------|
|                      | Hib-085   |   102 | Cellulitis at injection site |   4 |   4 | Recovered with sequelae | PR   |

NR - not related; PR - probably related

PID - patient identification

| Vaccine                   | Study   |   PID | SAE                                          | Previous dose   |   Onset (days) | Outcome   | Relation- ship   |
|---------------------------|---------|-------|----------------------------------------------|-----------------|----------------|-----------|------------------|
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 2.5 µg   | Hib-052 |   153 | no Gastro-enteritis, hypovolemic shock       | 2               |             12 | Death     | NR               |
|                           | Hib-079 |    48 | Diarrhoea, severe dehydration                | 3               |              5 | Death     | NR               |
|                           | Hib-080 |    92 | Myoclonic seizures and subdural hematoma     | 2               |             34 | Death     | NR               |
| (following HepB at birth) | Hib-081 |    57 | SIDS                                         | -               |              2 | Death     | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 5 µ g    | Hib-071 |   854 | Vomiting, diarrhoea, high fever, convulsions | 1               |             52 | Death     | NR               |
|                           | Hib-071 |   914 | Pneumonia, septicaemia, septic shock         | 2               |              8 | Death     | NR               |
| (following HepB at birth) | Hib-065 |   368 | Febrile, drowsy, seizures                    | -               |             53 | Death     | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV/Hib_ads 10 µ g   | Hib-052 |    42 | Convulsions, crying                          | 2               |             17 | Death     | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV + Hib_ads 10 µ g | Hib-052 |   467 | Beri beri with heart failure                 | 1               |             25 | Death     | NR               |
| DTPw-HBV/Hiberix          | Hib-080 |   191 | SIDS                                         | 2               |             25 | Death     | NR               |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Deaths Three  SAEs  with  fatal  outcome  occurred  in  the  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g  vaccine  group.  Two children  died  following  gastro-enteritis  with  severe  dehydration  and  hypovolemic  shock.  The  third death  in  the  candidate  vaccine  group  was  reported  in  a  child  who  developed  a  convulsive  disorder following asphyxia of unknown etiology. A subdural hematoma was also diagnosed. SAEs with fatal outcome are summarised in the following Table, none were considered to be related to vaccination. Two additional fatal cases seem to be linked to an infectious etiology: one case of gastro-enteritis in Nicaragua  and  one  case  of  pneumonia  in  Mexico.  This  is  not  unexpected,  as  infections  are  an important cause of infant mortality in these countries. Two other deaths occurred in Myanmar: one was related to aspiration following a convulsive disorder of unclear origin and the other was diagnosed as beri beri (vitamin B deficiency endemic in south-east Asia) with heart failure. No autopsies were performed. Only limited clinical  information  is  available  for  the  last  SAE  with  fatal  outcome  that  occurred  25 days  after  a  2nd  dose  of  Tritanrix™-HepB  mixed  with  Hiberix™.  The  investigator  considered  the cause of death in this 5 month old boy to be Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Table 13: Deaths reported in clinical trials evaluating DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µg and DTPwHBV/Hib\\_ads 5 µg vaccines NR - not related PID - patient identification SIDS - sudden infant death syndrome Discussion on clinical safety Review of the solicited and unsolicited adverse events reported in the different studies did not reveal any specific safety concerns with respect to the candidate vaccine, the incidence of local and general symptoms being comparable in the groups who received the candidate and reference vaccines as a mix or separate injection during primary vaccination. There  was  no  sign  of  differences  between  the  low  thiomersal  form  of  Quintanrix  and  Tritanrix TM -HepB/Hiberix TM in terms of grade 3 symptoms occurring after vaccination. Overall, the incidence of any general symptoms was high in study Hib-091, but similar to that reported in the same population previously  (study  Hib-081).  Temperature  and  irritability  were  the  most  frequently  reported  general symptoms in both groups in study Hib-091. Although comparison between studies should be made with  caution,  the  incidence  of  local  and  general  symptoms  following  vaccination  with  the  reduced thiomersal form of Quintanrix vaccine was within the range of historical controls.

In  the  booster  study  Hib-064,  symptoms  such  as  pain,  fever  and  irritability/fussiness  and  loss  of appetite were more frequently reported following a booster dose in the candidate vaccine than in the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

other  vaccines.  This  has  been  reflected  in  section  4.8  of  the  SPC.  The  applicant  argues  that  this phenomenon may be due to chance only and that it must be interpreted with caution since such events may be affected by local believes and practices. However it may reflect a real difference, which was 'statistically' not significantly different because the number of children in the 5 subgroups of study Hib-064 was too small.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The safety of the candidate DTPw-HBV/Hib 2.5 vaccine when used as a booster has been evaluated by the applicant in several clinical studies, representing 435 vaccine doses administered. Sixty three doses were administered in the Hib-064 study and a total of 370 doses in studies DTPw-HBV/HibMenAC-TT-002 and DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenC-TT-003. The applicant has committed to provide the full study reports of studies DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenAC-002 and DTPw-HBV/Hib-MenC-003, including the immunogenic data, as soon as they are available. The applicant has committed to perform a robust post-marketing surveillance program in Europe/the countries where the vaccine will be marketed to further elucidate the safety of its vaccine. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  safety  and  batch-to-batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  tests  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Based  on  the  fact  that  the  candidate  vaccine  DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads  2.5 µ g µ g Quintanrix,  can  be considered as a new formulation of existing and licensed antigens, no specific non-clinical toxicity studies were done, neither was a detailed study on the immune response induced in animals conducted. Furthermore the clinical development of the vaccine started, the CPMP 'Note for Guidance on nonclinical  pharmacological and toxicological testing of vaccines' was not yet adopted. However, data generated  during  quality  control  testing  of  the  vaccine  allowed  to  conclude  that  specific  toxicity concerns are not warranted and that the immune response induced by the combined vaccine is similar to the one induced by the two components. The similar immunogenicity and overall acceptable safety profile  were  further  confirmed  in  clinical  studies.  These  are  indeed  the  more  relevant  data  to  be considered in assessing the acceptability of the new DTPw-HBV/Hib\\_ads 2.5 µ g vaccine. Due to the fact that Quintanrix is composed of Tritanrix HepB and the PRP Hib component of Infanrix hexa and Hiberix, vaccines that have been administered in many children, the fact that no additional pre-clinical data were collected was accepted. Immunogenicity and Safety In  conclusion,  although  the  immunogenicity  of  the  vaccine  was  clearly  demonstrated  for  all components,  the  very  limited  number  of  children  for  whom  immunogenicity  data  are  currently available  at  booster  vaccination  hampers  a  reliable  conclusion  on  the  persistence  of  protective antibody following primary vaccination as well as on the protective effect of booster vaccination. The applicant has committed to provide additional booster data by performing longitudinal trials. The applicant has committed to provide further immunogenicity and safety data, among which a study investigating  the  immunogenicity  and  the  reactogenicity  of  this  new  combination  vaccine  in  HIV infected infants and children, since the vaccine is mainly intended to be used in industrialized as well as in and developing countries where the burden of HIV infection is very high.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Benefit/risk assessment

The vaccine was immunogenic for all antigens in all study populations when administered according to a variety of schedules. In those populations, it was shown to be clinically not inferior in terms of immunogenicity with respect to the licensed vaccines Tritanrix™-HepB and Hiberix™, when given either  as  two  separate  injections  or  administered  mixed  in  one  single  injection.  The  overall  rate  of protection  to H.  influenzae type  b  following  primary  vaccination  was  99.7%,  whereas  the  rate  for diphtheria,  tetanus  and  hepatitis  B  was  96.3%,  99.9%  and  98%  respectively.  A  response  to  the pertussis component was observed in 99.4% of vaccinees.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  reactogenicity  profile  of  the  combined  candidate  vaccine  Quintanrix  was  comparable  with  the profile  of  the  Tritanrix™-HepB  and  Hiberix™  vaccines  during  primary  vaccination.  Pain  (49%), redness (37%), swelling (33%), fever ≥ 37.5°C (47%), drowsiness (28%), irritability (47%) and loss of appetite (21%) were very common. The candidate vaccine was administered as a booster dose to 435 infants in the second year of life, although the data submitted and assessed were only from 63 infants (study  Hib-064).  The  booster  dose  is  potentially  associated  with  an  increased  incidence  of  adverse events  such  as  fever  or  local  reactions  when  compared  with  the  primary  vaccination.  However,  at booster  vaccination,  Quintanrix  does  not  seem  to  demonstrate  a  higher  reactogenicity  than  other vaccines having a 5 or 10 µg PRP antigen content: in this contextit should be borne in mind that the candidate vaccine contained only 2.5 µg of PRP. Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered that the benefit/risk ratio of Quintanrix in the treatment of primary immunisation of infants (during the first year  of  life)  against  diphtheria,  tetanus,  pertussis,  hepatitis  B  and  invasive  disease  caused  by Haemophilus influenzae type b and for booster immunisation of young children during the second year of life was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.