---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:47:26
document_pages: 43
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/quixidar-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: quixidar-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 23.9729916
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 11:51:49.052572
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures which  have  been  finalised  before  1  November  2004.  For  scientific  information  on  procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1. Introduction Quixidar  is  indicated  for  the  prevention  of  Venous  Thromboembolic  Events  (VTE)  in  patients undergoing  major  orthopaedic  surgery  of  the  lower  limbs  (MOSLL)  such  as  hip  fracture  surgery (HFS), major knee surgery (MKS) or hip replacement surgery (HRS). The once daily-recommended dose is 2.5 mg administered post-operatively by subcutaneous injection. In  patients  with  impaired  renal  function,  a  1.5  mg  dose  may  be  considered  and  in  severe  cases  is recommended (see \"Removal of the contraindication in severe renal impairment\" section). The initial dose  should  be  given 6  hours  following  surgical  closure  provided  that  haemostasis  has  been established. Timing of the first Quixidar injection requires strict adherence in special populations such as  patients ≥ 75 years,  and/or  with  body  weight  &lt;50  kg  and/or  with  moderate  to  severe  (CLcrea : 2050ml/min) renal impairment. Treatment should  be  continued  until  the  risk  of  venous  thrombo-embolism  has  diminished,  usually until the patient is ambulant, at least 5 to 9 days after surgery. In HFS patients, prophylactic treatment can be extended a further 24 days (see 'Extended prophylaxis' section). Quixidar should not be used in patients with very severe renal impairment (CLcrea &lt; 20 ml/min). The active substance is fondaparinux sodium, which is the sodium salt of a sulphated pentasaccharide molecule.  In  contrast  to  its  animal  sourced  competitors  unfractionated  heparin  (UFH)  and  low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), fondaparinux is manufactured totally by chemical synthesis. Fondaparinux  is  a  synthetic  and  selective  inhibitor  of  activated  Factor  X (Xa).  The  antithrombotic activity  of  fondaparinux  is  the  result  of  antithrombin  III  (ATIII)  mediated  selective  inhibition  of Factor Xa.  By  binding  selectively  to  ATIII,  fondaparinux  potentiates  (about  300  times)  the  innate neutralisation  of  Factor  Xa  by  ATIII.  Neutralisation  of  Factor  Xa  interrupts  the  blood  coagulation cascade  and  inhibits  both  thrombin  formation  and  thrombus  development.  Fondaparinux  does  not inactivate thrombin (activated Factor II) and does not interact with platelet aggregation. At  the  2.5  mg  dose,  Quixidar  does  not  affect  routine  coagulation  tests  such  as  activated  partial thromboplastin  time  (aPTT),  activated  clotting  time  (ACT)  or  prothrombin  time  (PT)/International Normalised Ratio (INR) tests in plasma, or bleeding time. Fondaparinux does not bind to platelet factor 4 (PF4) and does not stimulate serotonin release in the presence of sera from patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopaenia. Several  other  medicinal  products  have  demonstrated  efficacy  for  preventing  acute  VTE  in  postsurgical situations. Amongst these, the efficacy and safety of heparins (including unfractionated and low molecular weight heparins) have been the most documented. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition

The  medicinal  product  is  presented  as  a  solution  for  injection,  2.5mg/0.5ml  or  1.5mg/0.3ml,  in  a prefilled syringe with an automatic needle protection system. The formulation consists of the active ingredient  fondaparinux  sodium  dissolved  in  an  isotonic  solution  of  sodium  chloride  and  water  for injections (sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid are used as pH adjusters if needed).

The primary container is a single dose syringe consisting of a glass barrel with a stainless steel needle and a rubber needle shield, and closed with a plunger stopper.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Solutions with the same excipients but of different concentrations have been used during the clinical trials.  A  bioequivalence  study  comparing high and low concentrations has been carried out, and no significant difference has been observed.

## Active substance

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Fondaparinux sodium is a sulphated pentasaccharide obtained by total chemical synthesis. It is a white to  almost  white  hygroscopic  powderand  is  freely  soluble  in  water,  sodium  chloride  and  sodium hydroxide solutions, and practically insoluble in ethanol. Fondaparinux sodium in the solid state is not light sensitive. The  Applicant  has  confirmed  that  there  is  no  TSE  risk  related  to  the  manufacture  of  the  active substance or the medicinal product. Active Substance Specification The specification includes relevant tests for identity assay, related impurities specific optical rotation, total  viable  microbial  count,  endotoxins,  appearance  of  solution,  pH,  heavy  metals,  water  content, residual  solvents,  etc.  all  performed  by  PhEur  methods  or  by  validated  in-house  methods  where appropriate. Data on 13 batches indicated satisfactory uniformity and compliance with the specification. Stability: In  addition  to  short-term  stress  studies  (including  photostability  studies),  long-term  data  were generated from six batches at 25°C/60%RH, 30°C/60%RH and 40°C/75%RH for 24, 12 and 6 months of  duration  respectively.  No  significant  degradation  was  seen  at  any  of  the  conditions  studied (25°C/60%RH, 30°C/60%RH and 40°C/75%RH). A retest period of two years was accepted at the time of the authorisation. The retest period has been extended from two to three years further to the assessment of a type I variation. Other ingredients The  other  ingredients  of  the  formulation,  hydrochloric  acid,  sodium  hydroxide,  and  water  for injections all comply with PhEur monographs. There are no ingredients of animal origin.. Product development and finished product The aim of the development work has been to obtain an injectable sterile apyrogenic dosage form (for subcutaneous administration) of fondaparinux sodium. The same manufacturing process as the commercial one, except for the terminal sterilisation step, has been used during clinical trials. The drug substance is readily dissolved in sodium chloride and water. Compatibility  between  the  solution  and  the  manufacturing  equipment  has  been  demonstrated.  The documentation on product development is considered acceptable. The manufacturing process with in-process controls was described in detail and a flow chart provided. Both strengths are manufactured using the same process; the only diference is the fill volume. The process comprises compounding, sterile filtration with nitrogen gas as a filtration aid, aseptic filling, stoppering, terminal sterilisation inspection, packaging and labelling. Appropriate in-process controls are performed.

A  total  validation  plan  has  been  provided,  describing  the  confirmatory  validation  studies  for  the manufacturing process and in-process control tests.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Product Specification

The product specification is essentially the same as the active substance specification, with additional tests  for  degradation  products  arising  from  the  manufacturing  process  and  storage  over  time.  In addition, product-related tests include particulate matter, extractable volume and sterility.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Data on 14 batches indicate satisfactory uniformity and compliance with the specification. The development of analytical methods applied to the finished product is fully described; reference is made, where possible, to PhEur methods. Stability of the Product Quixidar 2.5 mg/0.5 ml Photostability studies have been carried out on two batches of the product. There is no evidence that the product is light sensitive and it can be concluded that the product is stable to intense light for 15 days. The product was unaffected by drastic changes in temperature through temperature cycling studies. At the time of initial submission, long term and accelerated studies under ICH conditions had been carried out on a large number of batches for up to 12 months. Updated stability data, up to 24 months from storage at 25°C/60%RH, and up to 24 months at 30°C/60%RH, were subsequently provided. A shelf life of two years was accepted. As a consequence of a type I variation, the shelf life was later extended to 3 years. The storage conditions as defined in the SPC remained the same. Quixidar 1.5mg/03 ml Photostability studies have been performed in accordance with ICH recommendations (1.2 million lux hours during 24 hours) on one drug product batch. The results are consistent with those for the higher strength and show that the drug product is not sensitive to light and no restrictions are needed in the storage conditions with respect to light. Syringes  have  also  been  exposed  to  three  cycles  at  18°C/40°C  (at  least  48  h  at  each  of  the temperatures) and the results indicated that there was no change in the degradation profile or in the other parameters tested. Three batches have been placed on stability studies under ICH conditions. The obtained results are in agreement with those for the higher strength. As suggested by the results of the stability studies and based on the fact that the only difference between the two strengths is the fill volume, the proposed shelf life for the lower strength product under the conditions specified in the SPC is acceptable. The stability studies for the applied lower strength will however continue for up to 36 months. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects The  active  substance  is  notable  for  its  complicated  synthesis  and  the  problems  encountered  in  the detection  and  quantification  of  related  impurities  due  to  the  low  UV-absorbance  of  a  carbohydrate molecule  with  no  aromatic  residues.  Finished  product  manufacture  has  been  evaluated  in  depth, particularly with regard to the validation of the process. Product stability has been established on the basis of a large amount of data and comprehensive statistical analysis. Following a list of questions put to  the  applicant  and  an  assessment  of  the  responses  all  important  quality  issues  were  resolved.  The important quality characteristics of the active substance and product are well-defined and controlled, and the product is formulated, manufactured and controlled in a way that is characteristic of a solution for injection.

A number of minor quality issues were still  outstanding at the time  of the  CPMP opinion,  and the applicant provided a letter of commitments to resolve these within a given timeframe All but one have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

already been resolved and theMAH has planned to submit a type I variation by the end of 2003 to resolve the last commitment.

## 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pharmacodynamics The  primary  pharmacological in  vitro profile  of  fondaparinux  consisted  of  investigations  on  ATIII affinity,  effects  on activity  and  generation  of FXa,  FIIa,  FIXa  and  FVIIa  activity,  and  effects  on platelet aggregation and coagulation time (APTT and PT). Unfractionated heparin (UFH) was used as reference (comparison based on weight) in the studies except for the ATIII affinity experiments, while no  comparison  was  made  with  LMWH.  The  studies  were  conducted  with  buffer  systems  (human ATIII) and with human plasma. On a weight basis and under the study conditions used, fondaparinux was more potent than UFH in the inhibition of FXa, FIXa and FVIIa and less potent in the inhibition of FIIa. Fondaparinux was equally or less potent than UFH in inhibiting the generation of the activated coagulation factors, and relatively less potent in aggregating platelets or prolonging coagulation time. The short-term effect ( ≤ 5 min) of intravenously administered fondaparinux was studied in four pivotal experimental animal models for preventive venous antithrombotic activity (rat, mouse, rabbit), some in  combination  with  experimental  bleeding  (rat  and  mouse).  Fondaparinux  inhibited  thrombus formation dose-dependently up to a maximum lower than that seen with heparin (60-75 versus 100%). The reported potency (ED50) varied (up to 50 fold) with the animal model used In venous and arterial models of thrombosis where fondaparinux was active and where time-response relationships could be studied, there was a clear association between antithrombotic activity and AT III-mediated inhibition of factor Xa. Fondaparinux was 2-4 to 30 fold less potent than heparin on a weight basis, depending on the model used. In one of the venous models, LMWH (enoxaparin) was less potent than both fondaparinux and heparin. Significantly higher levels of anti-FXa activity were needed of fondaparinux efficacy compared with UFH. Other data showed that fondaparinux had similar antithrombotic activity after IV and  SC administration,  if  thrombosis  was  induced  at  time-points  (5-90  min)  of  similar  plasma  anti-FXa activities. The concomitant experimental bleeding data suggested both favourable and unfavourable efficacy/bleeding ratios for fondaparinux compared with UFH, depending on the experimental model used. Pig and the primate Macaca mulatta have been considered as useful preclinical models for the pharmacological  evaluation  of  heparins.  However,  no  evaluations  were  made  in  these  species. Fondaparinux potentiated bleeding in combination with the platelet antiaggregatory drug clopidogrel or with dicumoxane. The antithrombotic activity and the bleeding complications of fondaparinux in man are discussed in the clinical section. The haemorrhagic effect of fondaparinux was neutralised by protamine sulphate in animals, but only at high, saturated and non-relevant exposure of fondaparinux. The potential for prothrombotic activity at treatment cessation was not investigated in animals. The  safety  pharmacology  studies  addressing  potential  effects  on  CNS,  fluid  balance,  GI  tract, respiration, haematology, CV  (+in vitro) and haemodynamic  status, and the special studies investigating effects  related  to  heparin-induced  thrombocytopenia  (HIT)  antibodies  and  lipase induction, showed no untoward findings. Pharmacokinetics

<!-- image -->

At  lower  SC  exposures  (up  to  about  0.5  mg/kg)  fondaparinux  showed  high  bioavailability,  linear pharmacokinetics  and  was  highly  and  almost  completely  bound  to  the  target  ATIII  in  plasma.  At higher and ATIII-saturating exposure (0.4 to 10 mg/kg), the bioavailability decreased, the pharmacokinetics  became  non-linear,  the  plasma  protein  binding  decreased  and  the  clearance increased with the dose. The lack of dose-proportionality in the higher dose range was related to the observed increase in clearance, which, in turn, was considered to be due to increased free fraction of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

fondaparinux,  resulting  from  saturation  of  plasma  protein  (e.g.  ATIII).  The  systemic  exposure  to fondaparinux in rat and monkey significantly increased following repeated administration, similarly to what was observed in man. At upper non-saturating exposure (0.4 mg/kg), drug-related radioactivity in rats receiving [ 35 S]-fondaparinux was detected in many specimensfondaparinux. The samples with the  longest  terminal  half-lives  were  Harder's  gland,  liver,  eye  (vitreous  humor),  bone  marrow  and kidneys with 10-20 h, and cartilage with &gt;40 h. Retention of drug-related radioactivity was considered to take place in kidney cortex and cartilage. Drug-related radioactivity was also detected in rat foetus and in breast milk. No radioactive metabolites could be detected in body fluids (blood and urine) or in in  vitro tests  for  potential  liver  metabolism  after  exposure  to  [ 35 S]-fondaparinux when assayed with HPLC. Evidence of desulphation metabolism was detected in blood, urine, bile and hepatocytes by means of the detection of [ 35 S]-SO4 2ions. Urine secretion data in rat indicated some activity-reducing metabolism.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The elimination of fondaparinux from the circulation was significantly faster in rat, rabbit and monkey compared  with  man.  The  terminal  half-life  did  not  change  with  dose  in  the  animals.  Drug-related radioactivity was mainly excreted via urine, whereas the faecal excretion was low (rat) or negligible (monkey). Toxicology A large  number of  studies  were  performed  in  Sprague  Dawley  and  Wistar  rats  and  in Cynomolgus monkeys  with  maximal  treatment  duration  of  3  months.  The  studies  were  generally  adequately performed  but  inclusion  of  a  comparator  like  a  UFH  or  a  LMWH  would  have  been  useful  in  the outcome  assessment.  At  10  mg/kg/day,  the  exposure  ratios  were  approximately  5  (rat)  and  16 (monkey), compared with the intended clinical exposure. A single dose of fondaparinux was well tolerated in mouse, rat and monkey at doses up to 40 mg/kg. All  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were  performed  with  doses  of  0.4,  2.0  and  10.0  mg/kg/day (approximately 12, 60 and 300 times the proposed therapeutic dose). Few non-haemorrhage related effects were observed. The true toxicity limits of fondaparinux are clearly beyond the chosen doses and probably differ for different animal species and treatment duration. Supporting arguments for dose selection were provided, including dose limiting effects such as adverse haemorrhagic events (AHE) (monkey)  and  saturable  plasma  protein  binding  (mainly  rat).  Thus,  a  significant  increase  in  dose would be required to achieve a moderate increase in total exposure. This would lead to an increase of the free fraction that would be subject to a fast renal clearance. Rat: Haemorrhagic,  not  fully  dose-related  changes  were  localised  mainly  to  the  injection  sites  and occasionally to the draining lymph nodes in the repeated dose toxicity studies. There were no major increases  in  other  haemorrhagic  adverse  events.  Reversible  slight  decreases  in  haemoglobin  levels, reticulocytosis  and  an  increase  of  urine  urobilinogen,  related  to  bleeding/haematoma-associated anaemia and erythropoiesis, were observed in some studies. Slight plasma electrolyte level variations were noted in the 2-week studies and also in the 3-month monkey study. Monkey: The incidences of injection site haemorrhages and other trauma-related haemorrhagic events were  increased  in  a  dose-dependent  manner.  The  reversibility  of  these  findings  after  repeated administration of fondaparinux was assessed in one animal/sex from the control and high-dose groups in the 4-week study, which were followed after treatment. Histopathological treatment-related effects were  not  seen  in  the  kidney,  the  major  route  of  excretion,  or  in  the  liver.  There  were  no,  or  only isolated increases in transaminase activity. Large or very large haematomas with or without associated resolutive inflammation were observed at handling sites, blood puncture sites and self-inflicted trauma sites in some treated animals at all doses. Such AHE were associated with a regenerative anaemia. In  the  3-month  and  in  the  4-week  monkey  studies,  the  male  animals  displayed  changes  to  genital organs which were related to degree of maturity or to health deterioration.

In  the  3-month  study,  a  dose-dependent  increase  in  absolute  (male)  and  relative  (male  and  female) pituitary weights was noted, while the male monkeys had a decrease in T3 hormone at the end of the study. However, the observed variation was within the physiological range as compared to the 2- and 4-week control monkeys.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No analysis specific for bone tissue (e.g. serum bone specific alkaline phosphatase) or morphometric analysis  was  used,  but  conventional  total  alkaline  phosphatase  and  bone  histology  revealed  no negative effects on bone in the rat and monkey.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Impurities During the impurity qualification, an increased incidence of retinal atrophy was observed in the treated rats in two 2-week studies. This was not considered to be due to impurities, but explained as a direct phototoxic effect produced by excessive exposure of incandescent light during the infusion procedure,  when,  to  favour  vasodilatation,  light  was  used  to  warm  the  animal.  This  warming procedure was performed only at the site where the atrophies were found and yielded energies that were within the reported levels that may induce retinal atrophy. From a toxicological point of view, all impurities are considered qualified. Reproductive and development toxicity All reproduction toxicity studies were performed with doses up to  10  mg/kg.  In  the  rabbit  studies,  at  the  high-dose  level,  an  exposure  ratio  of  12.6  was  achieved compared to the human. Fondaparinux did not show any major effects on mating performance and fertility,  gestation  and  parturition,  lactation,  new-born  viability  and  growth,  F1  behaviour  and reproduction  and  F2  foetal  development.  An  increased  dose-dependent  preimplantation  loss  was observed  in  both  rabbit  studies.  This  was  explained  to  be  within  the  physiological  range  when comparing  in-house  and  external  historical  data.  Such  data  should  be  interpreted  with  caution  and concurrent control animals are considered more relevant. Moreover, a pharmacological effect could not  be  excluded  since  one  action  of  sulphated  polysaccharides  is  to  inhibit  cellular  adhesion,  as described in a number of publications. The clinical relevance of this finding was not clear, but was a cause for concern. The inadequate exposure of the animals (half-life of fondaparinux in human is 17 hours as compared to the 1-2 hours in rabbit) further strengthened this concern. However, data were re-calculated by the Applicant and does with high or low numbers of corpora lutea were excluded, as seems reasonable, since literature supports an increased loss in this population. This resulted in a non dose-related response in preimplantation losses. Further, the Applicant submitted convincing arguments  that  no  effect  of  fondaparinux  was  likely  on  cell  adhesion  and  has  agreed  to  add information regarding a limited exposure in the SPC, section 4.6. Genotoxicity The  mutagenic potential was evaluated in a battery of tests including bacterial reverse gene mutation (Ames) tests, mouse lymphoma gene mutation tests, mammalian in vitro DNA repair test,  human  lymphocytes  chromosome  aberration  tests  and  one in  vivo rat  micronucleus  test. Fondaparinux was not mutagenic or clastogenic. Carcinogenicity No studies were performed since the intended treatment duration in humans is less than  one  month.  The  chemical  structure  of  fondaparinux  does  not  indicate  a  possible  carcinogenic potential. Local tolerance testing was performed during all single, repeated and reproduction toxicity studies. As expected, injection site haemorrhages, occasionally associated with an inflammatory infiltration, were noted. Immunotoxicity Fondaparinux did not induce any active or passive anaphylactic signs in guinea pigs or rats.  No  relevant  effects  were  seen  on  rat  bone  marrow  cellularity  or  monkey  T4,  T8,  NK  and  B peripheral  blood  lymphocyte  counts,  peripheral  blood  lymphoblast  transformation  tests  with  PHA, Con A and PWM, peripheral NK cells cytotoxicity test, mixed lymphocyte reaction and total plasma IgGs and IgMs levels. Ecotoxicity/Environmental  Risk  Assessment A  brief  evaluation  on  the  risk  of  use,  excretion  and disposal of fondaparinux has been conducted. No significant environmental effect is expected.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects

Preclinical data reveal no special risk for  humans  based  on  conventional studies of safety pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, and genotoxicity. Animal studies are insufficient with respect to effects on toxicity to reproduction because of limited exposure.

This information is reflected in the approved Summary of Product Characteristics

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 4. Clinical aspects Clinical pharmacology Pharmacodynamics Fondaparinux binds to human ATIII resulting in a 1:1 molar complex with a Kd of 58 nM. Plasma concentrations  of  4  to  8  mg/l  should  saturate  physiological  concentrations  of  ATIII  (2-4 µ M). Circulating  anti-Xa activity  was  proportional  to  fondaparinux  dose  after  single  or  repeated  q.d.  s.c. dosing  in  healthy  subjects  and  after  repeated  q.d.  s.c.dosing  (0.75  to  8  mg)  in  patients  undergoing major orthopaedic surgery. Fondaparinux  has  no  ATIII-mediated  anti-IIa activity  except  at  concentrations  beyond  ATIII saturation, nor does it show significant anti-IIa activity through heparin cofactor II (HCII) activation. No circulating anti-IIa activity was detected after 0.7-18 mg s.c. or 2-16 mg i.v. Inhibition of thrombin generation  is  mediated  by  the  anti-Xa  activity.  Indirect  evidence  of in  vivo inhibition  of  thrombin generation was obtained by assessing thrombin-antithrombin complexes, prothrombin fragments 1+2 and D-dimers in healthy volunteers, and in different patient groups. The reduction of thrombin generation also reduces the pro-coagulative feedback exerted by thrombin. This probably contributes to the minor inhibitory effects of fondaparinux on factor IXa and on factor X activation observed. Fondaparinux  does  not  alter  prothrombin  time  and  only  slightly  prolongs  aPTT  (maximal  mean prolongation  20%)  after  0.35-30  mg  s.c.,  and  2-20  mg  i.v.  The  aPTT  was  doubled  only  at  plasma concentrations above 73 mg/l, whereas it is doubled at 2.5 mg/l UFH. Activated clotting time (ACT) has been measured only in patients undergoing PTCA after fondaparinux 12 mg IV. Inconsistent ACT increases were observed 2 and 48 hours after dosing, but not at 24 hours. These changes were much smaller than after UFH in this indication. Unlike  UFH,  fondaparinux  does  not  interact  with  ADP  or  collagen-induced  platelet  aggregation  at concentrations up to  150  mg/l,  and  does  not  bind  PF4  or  stimulate  platelet  serotonin  release  in  the presence  of  sera  from  heparin-induced  thrombocytopenia  (HIT)  patients.  This  argues  against  a potential to induce HIT, which results from heparin binding to PF4 followed by antibody interactions and  platelet  activation.  Fondaparinux  showed  no ex  vivo effect  on  platelet  aggregation  induced  by ADP, thrombin, collagen, or arachidonic acid, and did not change in vivo platelet counts after single and repeated dosing. Fondaparinux does not prolong bleeding time up to daily doses of 18 mg s.c. or 20 mg i.v. Single or repeated doses of fondaparinux did not affect the ATIII level, but a decrease in ATIII was observed in patients undergoing total hip replacement (THR). The decrease was not different between the fondaparinux and enoxaparin treated patients.

One issue  that  was  raised  during  the  assessment  was  whether  there  is  a  risk  that  the  fondaparinux concentrations  exceed  the  binding  capacity  of  ATIII  in  the  postoperative  phase.  The  mean  ATIII reductions seen postoperatively after orthopaedic surgery were 10-15% and they were independent of treatment (fondaparinux or enoxaparin). It can be calculated that variations in ATIII levels within a wide  range  affect  concentrations  of  bound  fondaparinux  only  to  a  small  extent.  The  changes  of unbound  fondaparinux  with  varying  ATIII  levels  can  be  expected  to  be  relatively  larger.  The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

concentrations of free fondaparinux that can be expected with the recommended dose, even with very low ATIII levels, are of no major safety concern according to the preclinical and clinical experience.

The small and transient aPTT prolongation after 10 mg sc fondaparinux was not affected by the coadministration of aspirin (single oral 975 mg dose). The lack of interaction with warfarin on PT and aPTT was documented by a single cross-over study involving 12 subjects. Whether a pharmacodynamic  interaction  between  fondaparinux  and  vitamin  K  antagonists  could  result  in  an unexpected  bleeding  tendency  was  discussed.  Based  on  clinical  experience  and  on  what  is  known about the pharmacodynamic interactions it was concluded that the expected bleeding tendency should not  be  significantly  different  with  the  combination  fondaparinux/warfarin  from  what  is  seen  with heparin/warfarin.

In  a  single  dose  study,  impaired renal function resulted in a considerable reduction in CL/F (5-fold reduction in severe renal impairment), no change in distribution volume and, consequently, prolonged half-life.  In  Phase  III  trials,  average  CL/F  was  1.3-1.6  fold  lower  in  patients  with  mild  renal impairment and 1.6-2.3 fold lower in patients with moderate renal impairment, compared with patients with normal renal function. Quixidar is contraindicated in patients with very severe renal impairment (CLcrea&lt;  20  ml/min)  and  the  use  of  a  lower  dose  is  recommended  in  patients  with  severe  renal impairment (CLcrea between 20 and 30 ml/min) and may be considered in patients with moderate renal impairment (CLcrea between 30 and 50 ml/min) . No pharmacokinetic evaluation was performed with respect to hepatic impairment, since the contribution of hepatic elimination to the overall elimination

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetics The human pharmacokinetics was evaluated in 27 clinical trials, including 6 Phase I studies in healthy subjects, 5 studies in special populations, 5 studies assessing specific drug interactions, and 8 studies in  patients  for  the  current  indication.  Generally,  the  pharmacokinetics  of  fondaparinux  were  well characterised.  The  plasma  and  urine  fondaparinux  concentrations  in  humans  were  assessed  by validated biological assays (bioassays).  These methods  utilised the ATIII-mediated  factor-Xa inhibitory  activity  of  the  drug  with  spectrophotometric  detection  of  a  specific  factor-Xa  substrate. Pharmacokinetic parameters were obtained following non-compartmental and compartmental (population) analysis. Fondaparinux was rapidly absorbed following s.c injection (2.5mg) and Cmax of 0.34 ± 0.04 mg/l was reached after 1.7 ± 0.4h in young healthy volunteers. The mean absolute bioavailability estimate was 107%  (90%  CI:  102%,  112%).  The  volume  of  distribution  was  approximately  8.2 ± 1.1l  after  s.c injections  of  2.5mg.  Fondaparinux is  highly bound to ATIII (97.0-98.6%) and in  vitro studies  have shown  that  the  binding  becomes  saturated  at  concentrations  above  2  mg/l.  The  fondaparinux concentration-time  profile  is  described  by  a  bi-exponential  decline.  The  terminal  half-life  estimates varied between 13 and 21h and the CL/F ranged from 5.1 - 7.9 ml/min, with renal excretion being the major  elimination  pathway.  The  renal  CL  exceeds  the  filtration  CL  and,  thus,  it  is  postulated  that fondaparinux is actively secreted in the kidney. In healthy volunteers, steady-state was reached after 34 days, which is consistent with the half-life estimation. The accumulation ratio at steady-state was 1.3.  The  exposure  is  decreased  non-proportionally  at  higher  doses,  due  to  saturation  of  protein binding, but the total concentrations are fairly linear within the therapeutic range. However, there are indications of saturability in vivo at lower concentrations than shown in in vitro studies. Similar  pharmacokinetic  characteristics  were  observed  for  the  healthy  elderly  and  the  patient populations. The inter-patient variability in CL/F and in V/F in the target population was 30-40% and 20%, respectively.  The  influence  of  various  covariates  was  assessed  in  the  population  analysis  and only weight  was subsequently included in the final model  as linearly increasing CL/F  by approximately  9.3%/10kg.  The  lower  plasma  clearance  leading  to  higher  plasma  levels  with decreasing body weight was associated with a trend to higher major bleeding rates in patients less than 50  kg.  Although  highly  correlated  with  total  CL,  renal  function  was  not  detected  as  significantly explaining  the  inter-patient  variability  in  drug  levels.  The  influence  of  important  covariates  was evaluated on post-hoc estimates but the predictive capacity of the population model seems limited. Explanation was given in the August 2001 answers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

was  assumed  to  be  limited,  which  is  acceptable.  Studies  in  elderly  patients  showed  an  expected correlation  between  age  and  CL/F  most  likely  explained  by  reduced  renal  function  in  the  elderly. Taking demographic differences into account, the pharmacokinetic profiles were similar in men and women.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The relation between plasma concentrations (Cmax) and VTE or major bleedings (MB) was evaluated in DRI2643 (dose range 0.75mg to 8mg). Patients with MB tended to have higher mean Cmaxss plasma concentration than patients without events, and patients with VTE tended to have lower mean Cmaxss plasma concentration than patients without events, confirming the dose-response data. There  was  a  consistent  trend  to  higher  MB  rate  with  increasing  degree  of  renal  impairment,  with increasing age, and with decreasing body weight. It was demonstrated that the incidence of MB was higher in patients receiving the first  post-operative dose early (&lt;6 h after surgical closure) and that incidence  of  MB  could  be  reduced  by  giving  the  first  dose ≥ 6  h  after  dose.  The  difference  was especially evident in the 'fragile' population (age ≥ 75 years and/or weight &lt; 50 kg and/or Clcr &lt;50 ml/min). Interaction studies: From in  vitro studies  in  human  microsomes  using  relevant  fondaparinux  concentrations,  it  was concluded  that  fondaparinux  did  not  significantly  inhibit  any  drug  metabolising  CYP-isoenzyme. Single  dose  warfarin  and  aspirin  and  steady-state  piroxicam  and  digoxin  did  not  influence  the fondaparinux  pharmacokinetics  at  steady-state.  The  effect  of  forced  diuresis  on  fondaparinux elimination  was  limited.  However,  the  Quixidar  dose  (10  mg)  in  the  interaction  studies  was  higher than the dose recommended for the present indication. Quixidar neither influenced the INR activity of warfarin,  nor  the  bleeding  time  under  acetyl  salicylic  acid  or  piroxicam  treatment.  Bleeding  risk  is increased  with  concomitant  administration  of  Quixidar  and  agents  that  may  enhance  the  risk  of hemorrhage. If  prophylactic treatment is to be continued with heparin or LMWH, the first injection should, as a general rule, be given one day after the last Quixidar injection. If follow up treatment with a Vitamin K antagonist is required, treatment with fondaparinux should be continued until the target INR value has been reached. Bioequivalence studies: A bioequivalence study was performed between the marketing formulation fondaparinux injection, 2.5 mg/0.5  ml  (Ref  2B2)  and  the  clinical  formulation  of  2.5mg/0.25  ml.  The  two  formulations  were considered bioequivalent. Discussion on pharmacokinetic aspects The  pharmacokinetics  of  fondaparinux  haves  been  well  characterised.  A  main  concern  during  the assessment was the posology in patients with renal impairment. The initial recommendation from the MAH for strong adherence to the dosing schedule in patients with renal impairment was accepted, whereas fondaparinux was contraindicated in patients with severe impairment (Clcr &lt;30 ml/min). The dosing recommendations for renally impaired patients have subsequently been revised following the adoption of a line extension to introduce a lower 1.5 mg dose (see \"Removal of the contraindication in patients with severe renal impairment\"). Clinical efficacy in MOSLL The  clinical  trials  were  performed  according  to  GCP  standards  and  agreed  international  ethical principles.

## Dose response studies

The two dose-ranging studies of prophylaxis in orthopaedic surgery are summarised in Table 1.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1

| Title, Country of co- ordinating centre, Number of centres and of Randomized patients   | Type of surgery                                         | Doses given of fondaparinux Comparator Efficacy assessment                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DRI2643 Canada, 70 centres N=950                                                        | Total hip replacement (THR) Double blind Assessor blind | 0.75, 1.5, 3, 6, 8 mg s.c. started 6 ± 2 h postoperatively Comparator: Enoxaparin 30mg x 2 Venography day 5-10 |
| 95001 USA 19 centres N=318                                                              | Total knee replacement (TKR) Open Assessor blind        | 0.75, 1.5, 3, 6, 8 mg s.c. started 6 ± 2 h postoperatively noncontrolled Venography day 5-10                   |

|                  |       | FONDAPARINUX              | FONDAPARINUX     | FONDAPARINUX     | FONDAPARINUX    | FONDAPARINUX    | Enoxaparin   |
|------------------|-------|---------------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------|-----------------|--------------|
| DVT              | DVT   | Product 0.75 mg (N = 102) | 1.5 mg (N = 101) | 3.0 mg (N = 101) | 6.0 mg (N = 44) | 8.0 mg (N = 22) | (N = 150)    |
| Any DVT          | n (%) | 11 (10.8)                 | 6 (5.9)          | 2 (2.0)          | 2 (4.5)         | 0 (0.0)         | 14 (9.3)     |
| Any proximal DVT | n (%) | 3 (2.9)                   | 5 (5.0)          | 1 (1.0)          | 1 (2.3)         | 0 (0.0)         | 5 (3.3)      |
| Distal only DVT  | n (%) | 8 (7.8)                   | 1 (1.0)          | 1 (1.0)          | 1 (2.3)         | 0 (0.0)         | 9 (6.0)      |

|                  |       | FONDAPARINUX          | FONDAPARINUX         | FONDAPARINUX         | FONDAPARINUX         | FONDAPARINUX         |
|------------------|-------|-----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| DVT              |       | 0.75 mg o.d. (N = 22) | 1.5 mg o.d. (N = 44) | 3.0 mg o.d. (N = 44) | 6.0 mg o.d. (N = 18) | 8.0 mg o.d. (N = 13) |
| Any DVT          | n (%) | 13 (59.1)             | 15 (34.1)            | 6 (13.6)             | 2 (11.1)             | 2 (15.4)             |
| Any proximal DVT | n (%) | 1 (4.5)               | 2 (4.5)              | 0 (0.0)              | 1 (5.6)              | 0 (0.0)              |
| Distal only DVT  | n (%) | 12 (54.5)             | 13 (29.5)            | 6 (13.6)             | 1 (5.6)              | 2 (15.4)             |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The number of patients with DVT found at the venographic assessment is given in tables 2 and 3. Table 2  -Number  (%)  of  Patients  with  any  DVT,  any  Proximal  DVT,  and  Distal  only  DVT During the Treatment Period in DRI2643 Table 3  -  Number  (%)  of  Patients  with  any  DVT,  any  Proximal  DVT,  and  Distal  only  DVT During the Treatment Period in 95001

The number of MB is given in Table  4. An adjudication  committee  blindly classified  the  bleeding reports.  The  definition  of  MB  was  essentially  the  same  as  used  in  the  phase  III  studies.  Due  to increased bleeding the study arms of 6 and 8 mg were discontinued prematurely.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4 - Number (%) of Patients Experiencing a Bleeding Event and/or With Bleeding-Related Criteria During the Treatment Period by fondaparinux Dose - Dose-Ranging Studies (DRI2643 and 95001)

|                           |                              | FONDAPARINUX   | FONDAPARINUX   | FONDAPARINUX   | FONDAPARINUX   | FONDAPARINUX   |
|---------------------------|------------------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| Patients With             | Patients With                | 0.75 mg        | 1.5 mg         | 3 mg           | 6 mg           | 8 mg           |
| All Dose Ranging Studies  | All Dose Ranging Studies     | (N = 238)      | (N = 279)      | (N = 265)      | (N = 121)      | (N = 86)       |
| Bleeding event            | Major bleeding               | 1 (0.4%)       | 2 (0.7%)       | 11 (4.2%)      | 18 (14.9%)     | 12 (14.0%)     |
| Bleeding event            | Minor bleeding only          | 4 (1.7%)       | 7 (2.5%)       | 12 (4.5%)      | 7 (5.8%)       | 3 (3.5%)       |
| Bleeding event            | Any bleeding                 | 5 (2.1%)       | 9 (3.2%)       | 23 (8.7%)      | 25 (20.7%)     | 15 (17.4%)     |
| Bleeding-related criteria | Re-operation due to bleeding | 0 (0.0%)       | 0 (0.0%)       | 2 (0.8%)       | 3 (2.5%)       | 3 (3.5%)       |
| Bleeding-related criteria | Transfused patients          | 97 (40.8%)     | 117 (41.9%)    | 127 (47.9%)    | 66 (54.5%)     | 53 (61.6%)     |

| Title                   | Type of surgery                    | Comparator, Timing of randomisation   | Number of patients randomised fondaparinux/enoxaparin   |
|-------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| 63118 Ephesus           | Total hip replacement (THR)        | Enoxap. 40 mgx1 Preoperative          | 1155/1154                                               |
| EFC2442 Pentathlon 2000 | Total hip replacement (THR)        | Enoxap. 30 mgx2 Postoperative         | 1138/1137                                               |
| EFC2698 Penthifra       | Product Hip fracture surgery (HFS) | Enoxap. 40 mgx1 Preoperative          | 849/862                                                 |
| 095-002 Pentamaks       | Major knee surgery (MKS)           | Enoxap. 30 mgx2 Postoperative         | 526/523                                                 |

The base-line characteristics of the patients in the different treatment groups were well matched. The population  studied  can  be  regarded  as  representative  of  the  typical  clinical  population  in  the indications  applied  for  with  respect  to  age,  concomitant  diseases  and  other  demographic  factors including known risk-factors for VTE. Some of the exclusion criteria are listed below

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The results demonstrated a dose-response relation for DVT as well as for bleeding events. Based on the  evaluation  of  the  dose-response  curves,  the  dose  (2.5  mg)  chosen  for  further  evaluation  in  the phase III studies was considered reasonable. Main studies (phase III = therapeutic confirmatory trials) Four  pivotal  phase  III  studies  were  designed  to  show  superior  efficacy  of  fondaparinux  over enoxaparin for prophylaxis in patients undergoing MOSLL. The four main studies are summarised in Table 6. Table 6. Pivotal studies in MOSLL All  studies  were  standardised  for  inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  dosing  schedules  (apart  from  the  two different enoxaparin regimens used, see below), dose of fondaparinux (2.5 mg o.d., s.c), duration of treatment (5-9 days), efficacy end-point definitions and safety end-point definitions. Enoxaparin  was  administered  according  to  2  different  regimens,  the  once-daily  40  mg  regimen authorised in the European countries, and the twice-daily 30 mg regimen authorised in North America.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- age less than 18 years
- known bleeding tendency
- serum creatinine level over 180 µ mol/l (2.0 mg/dl)
- recent stroke

Medicinal Product no longer authorised · more than 24 hours delay between trauma and hospital admission (this exclusion criteria refers to Penthifra only) According to the study protocol every patient was to undergo a bilateral venography between day 5 (day 1=the day of surgery) and the end of the treatment period (by day 11), if a suspected symptomatic VTE  was  not  confirmed  first.  An  independent  committee  made  a  blinded  assessment  of  all venographies and other objective tests. The overall ratio of evaluable patients, i.e. randomised patients that had undergone surgery, treatment and an evaluable venogram was 73% with a slight variation between studies (69-79%). The fraction of patients  who  had  a  venography  performed  can  be  considered  to  be  acceptable  in  all  the  phase  III studies. The  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  the  rate of adjudicated VTE  up  to  day  11,  defined  as symptomatic/asymptomatic  DVT  and/or  pulmonary  embolism  (PE)  documented  by  objective  tests. The variables constituting the primary efficacy endpoint can be divided into asymptomatic proximal DVT, asymptomatic distal DVT and symptomatic VTE. The results for the primary efficacy endpoint are presented in Table 7. Table 7. Primary efficacy endpoint (incidence of asymptomatic/symptomatic DVT and/or PE). The  majority  of  end-point  events  were  distal  asymptomatic  DVT.  The  rate  of  proximal  DVT (thrombosis  engaging  the  venous  segments  above  the  trifurcation  of  the  calf)  up  to  day  11  was significantly reduced in the fondaparinux group in the Ephesus and Penthifra studies and there was a clear  trend  for  a  reduced  rate  also  in  the  Pentamaks  study.  In  the  Pentathlon  2000  study,  however, there was no difference in the rates of proximal thrombi between the two treatment groups. The rates of proximal DVT are given in Table 8. Table 8. The incidence of all proximal DVT. It can be concluded that fondaparinux 2.5 mg is more effective than the enoxaparin dosage regimens used for the prevention of venographic DVT in the early phase after lower limb orthopaedic surgery.

<!-- image -->

| Study, surgery       | no FONDAPARINUX   | ENOXAPARIN      | 95% CI for diff. (%)   |
|----------------------|-------------------|-----------------|------------------------|
| Ephesus, THR         | 37/908 (4.1%)     | 85/919 (9.2%)   | -8.1;-2.7;             |
| Pentathlon 2000, THR | 48/787 (6.1%)     | 66/797 (8.3%)   | -5.5;0.6               |
| Penthifra, HFS       | 52/626 (8.3%)     | 119/624 (19.1%) | -15.3;-6.6             |
| Pentamaks, MKS       | 45/361 (12.5%)    | 101/363 (27.8%) | -22.3;-9.3;            |

| Study, surgery       | FONDAPARINUX   | ENOXAPARIN    | 95% CI for diff. in%   |
|----------------------|----------------|---------------|------------------------|
| Ephesus, THR         | 6/922 (0.7%)   | 23/927 (2.5%) | -3.7;-0.5              |
| Pentathlon 2000, THR | 14/816 (1.7%)  | 10/830 (1.2%) | -1.0;2.6               |
| Penthifra, HFS       | 6/650 (0.9%)   | 28/646 (4.3%) | -6.1;-1.3;             |
| Pentamaks, MKS       | 9/368 (2.4%)   | 20/372 (5.4%) | -7.6;0.4               |

The incidence of symptomatic VTE until day 11 was low and did not significantly differ between the treatment  groups,  with  22  (0.6%)  and  15  (0.4%)  cases  in  the  pooled  fondaparinux  and  enoxaparin treated groups, respectively. There was a trend for an increased accumulated rate of symptomatic VTE by  day  49  in  the  fondaparinux  group  as  compared  with  the  enoxaparin  group [ 63/3603  (1.7%)  vs.

- thrombocytopenia or a history of thrombocytopenia (&lt;100 x 10 9 /l)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

45/3608  (1.2%) ] .  Thus,  no  apparent  reduction  of  symptomatic  VTE  by  fondaparinux  treatment corresponding to the reduction of asymtomatic DVT could be seen.

The CPMP accepted that a reasonable explanation for the nominal difference regarding incidence of symptomatic VTE was the following: About 6.2 % of the evaluable patients in the fondaparinux group received  curative  treatment  after  the  primary  endpoint  evaluation  (phlebography)  as  compared  with 11.9 % in the enoxaparin group. This type of difference would be expected in a situation when the compared  products  have  different  activity  for  prevention  of  DVT  and  when  the  large  majority  of endpoint  events  consists  of  venographically  diagnosed,  asymptomatic  DVT,  which,  nevertheless, trigger  curative  treatment  in  a  large  proportion  of  patients.  The  bias  introduced  by  leaving  a  larger fraction of patients at some continuing risk for VTE in the fondaparinux group without anticoagulant therapy for the remainder of the study period would also be expected to result in a somewhat higher incidence of symptomatic VTE in the fondaparinux group after the venographic evaluation.

| Preoperative randomisation*   | Preoperative randomisation*   | Preoperative randomisation*   | Preoperative randomisation*   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Study, surgery                | N                             | Major Bleedings               | Minor bleedings only          |
| Ephesus, THR                  | 1140/1133                     | 47(4.1%)/32(2.8%)             | 44(3.9%)/38(3.4%)             |
| Penthifra, HFS                | 831/842                       | 18(2.2%)/19(2.3%)             | 34(4.1%)/18(2.1%)             |
| Pooled Results                | 1971/1975                     | 65(3.3%)/51(2.6%)             | 78(4.0%)/56(2.8%)             |

| Postoperative randomisation*   | Postoperative randomisation*   | Postoperative randomisation*   | Postoperative randomisation*   |
|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Study, surgery                 | N                              | Major Bleedings                | Minor bleedings only           |
| Pentathlon 2000, THR           | 1128/1129                      | 20(1.8%)/11(1.0%)              | 17(1.5%)/24(2.1%)              |
| Pentamaks, MKS                 | 517/517                        | 11(2.1%)/1(0.2%)               | 14(2.7%)/19(3.7%)              |
| Pooled Results                 | 1645/1646                      | 31(1.9%)/12(0.7%)              | 31(1.9%)/43(2.6%)              |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised For  patients  treated  with  fondaparinux  or  enoxaparin  but  not  evaluable  concerning  the  primary efficacy end-point (no venography performed), the incidences of symptomatic VTE between day 12 and day 49 did not differ between treatment groups (fondaparinux 1.3%, enoxaparin 1.0%). The composite endpoint chosen is somewhat different from the endpoint recommended in the 'Points to consider' document (CPMP/EWP/707/98) that includes all-cause mortality. However, the endpoint was chosen in accordance with scientific advice given by the CPMP in 1997. The overall conclusions regarding  efficacy  and  safety  remained  unchanged  after  a  reanalysis  made  retrospectively  and including all-cause mortality. An ITT analysis (a 'best case scenario') including all patients that went through surgery and had any study  medication  administered  gave  additional  support  for  the  conclusions  made  on  the  overall efficacy of fondaparinux. Clinical safety in MOSLL Bleeding Most bleedings occurred at the surgical sites. No fatal, CNS or retroperitoneal bleedings were reported in the fondaparinux 2.5 mg group. In  the  two  dose-ranging  studies  there  was  a  significant  dose  response  for  MB  as  well  as  for  all bleeding events and the percentage of transfused patients. An adjudication  committee  blindly  classified  the  bleeding  reports  in  all  the  phase  III  studies.  Only studies  from  the  same  randomisation  type  were  pooled  for  integrated  analyses  since  intraoperative bleeding  was  included  only  in  the  studies  with  preoperative  randomisation.  The  frequencies  of bleedings are given in Table 9. Table 9. Number (%) of patients (Fondaparinux/ Enoxaparin) experiencing Bleedings up to day 11. * enoxaparin European dosing regimen = 40 mg q.d Postoperative randomisation*

* enoxaparin North- American dosing regimen = 30 mg bid

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

An  overall  tendency,  although  not  significant,  for  higher  major  bleeding  rates  in  the  fondaparinux groups can be seen. Only a fraction of all minor bleedings can be expected to have been reported.

The  percentage  of  patients  that  had  a  decrease  in  haemoglobin  concentrations ≥ 2  g/dl  during  the treatment period was higher in the fondaparinux treated group as compared with the enoxaparin group, both  in  studies  with  preoperative  randomisation  (22.0%  vs.16.0%)  and  postoperative  randomisation (55.5%  vs.  49.6%).  The  rates  of  bleedings  related  to  some  of  the  base-line  covariates  are  given  in Table 10.

|                                                 | fondaparinux 2.5 mg (N = 3595   |
|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Type of surgery                                 |                                 |
| Total Hip Replacement                           | 51/2249 (2.3%)                  |
| Hip Fracture                                    | 18/829 (2.2%)                   |
| Total Knee Replacement                          | 11/517 (2.1%)                   |
| Gender                                          |                                 |
| Male                                            | 34/1429 (2.4%)                  |
| Female                                          | 46/2166 (2.1%)                  |
| Age (years)                                     | longer                          |
| Missing                                         | 0/4 (0.0%)                      |
| <65                                             | 23/1253 (1.8%)                  |
| [65-75[                                         | 24/1111 (2.2%)                  |
| ≥ 75                                            | 33/1227 (2.7%)                  |
| Weight (kg) [n (%)]                             |                                 |
| Missing                                         | 1/37 (2.7%)                     |
| <50                                             | 7/130 (5.4%)                    |
| [50,100[                                        | no 63/3030 (2.1%)               |
| ≥ 100                                           | 9/398 (2.3%)                    |
| Product Creatinine clearance (mL/min) [n (%)]   |                                 |
| Missing                                         | 1/155 (0.6%)                    |
| <30                                             | 4/83 (4.8%)                     |
| [30,50[                                         | 19/504 (3.8%)                   |
| [50,80[                                         | 31/1288 (2.4%)                  |
| ≥ 80                                            | 25/1565 (1.6%)                  |
| Timing of first post-operative active injection | (hours)                         |
| Missing                                         | 2/28 (7.1%)                     |
| <4                                              | 5/106 (4.7%)                    |
| [4, 5]                                          | 14/489 (2.9%)                   |
| [5, 6]                                          | 16/742 (2.2%)                   |
| [6, 7]                                          | 28/1403 (2.0%)                  |
| [7, 8]                                          | 13/609 (2.1%)                   |
| [8, 9]                                          | 0/107 (0.0%)                    |
| [9,10]                                          | 0/23 (0.0%)                     |
| >10                                             | 2/88 (2.3%)                     |

The rate of MB was inversely related to renal function and a tendency for an inverse relation was also seen with body weight. It tended to increase with age. For all patients treated with fondaparinux 2.5 mg in the phase III studies the incidence of MB was 2.8 % in a 'fragile' population (age ≥ 75 years and/or weight &lt; 50 kg and/or Clcr &lt;50 ml/min) as compared to 1.9% for 'non-fragile' patients.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 10. Number  (%) of Patients Experiencing Major Bleeding Events From First Fondaparinux Injection up to Day 11 by Baseline Covariates - All fondaparinux 2.5 mg Treated Patients in Orthopaedic Surgery Studies NOTE: includes studies Pentathlon 2000, Ephesus, Penthifra and Pentamaks a Per covariate, only non missing observations were taken into account

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

More bleedings were seen in patients that got the first fondaparinux injection soon after surgery (&lt; 6 hours). Again, this tendency was more pronounced in patients of increased age, with low body-weight and with impaired renal function. Strict adherence to the recommended timing of the first Quixidar injection reduced the risk of MB among the 'fragile' patients to the same level as 'normal' patients . For patients treated according to the finally proposed regimen (first dose ≥ 6 hours following surgical closure in all types of major orthopedic surgeries of the lower limbs), the incidences of MB were 2.8% and 2.6% in the fondaparinux and enoxaparin 40 mg groups, respectively and this was reflected in the SPC section 5.1.

|                                     | Deaths until day 11   | Deaths until day 11   | Deaths until day 49   | Deaths until day 49   |
|-------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
|                                     | fondaparinux          | Enoxaparin            | fondaparinux          | Enoxaparin            |
| Preoperative randomisation          | 11/1971               | 18/2051               | 40/1971               | 46/2051               |
| Postoperative randomisation         | 4/1645                | 3/1906                | 8/1645                | 7/1906                |
| Deaths due to bleeding, all studies | 0                     | 1                     | 0                     | 2                     |
| Deaths due to PE, all studies       | 2                     | 3                     | 11                    | 11                    |

Thrombocytopenia  cases  will  be  carefully  monitored  and  reported  by  the  Marketing  Authorisation Holder in the Periodic Safety Update Reports.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Concerning race  no  conclusions  were  possible  due  to  the  low  number  of  non-Caucasians  included. There was no effect of surgery type or of type of anaesthesia on MB rates. Other adverse events and serious adverse events/deaths The mortality rates were low and did not differ between the treatment groups (Table 11). Table 11. Number of deaths during treatment (until day 11) and study (until day 49) periods. Apart from the deaths caused by bleeding or PE, none of the deaths was suspected to be associated with  the  treatment  by  the  investigators.  The  higher  mortality  rates  in  the  studies  with  preoperative randomisation are due to the higher mortality in the HFS study (Penthifra), including elderly, acutely ill patients. Concerning other adverse events such as surgical site reactions, myocardial infarctions, cardiac failure, cerebrovascular  disorders,  no  differences  between  treatment  groups  were  seen  in  the  4  phase  III studies. The rate and spectrum of reported adverse events not related to bleeding did not deviate from what could be expected. No specific suspected drug-related other adverse events were reported. Laboratory findings In the clinical studies the percentages of patients experiencing a decrease in platelet count to &lt; 100 x 10 9 /l  were  not  related  to  fondaparinux  dose  and  were  similar  to  those  observed  in  the  enoxaparin group. In the orthopaedic surgery studies a slightly higher rate of patients developed positive ELISA tests in the preoperatively than the postoperatively randomised studied. No differences were seen between the treatment groups. The higher number of positive tests associated with positive serotonin release tests in the preoperatively randomised studies cannot be explained. The development of a positive test did not appear to be predictive of thrombocytopenia or of thrombotic event. No thrombocytopenias with suspected immunoallergic pathophysiology (HIT, type II) were documented in the clinical development program. Taking in to account that · fondaparinux lacks PF4 binding capacity · fondaparinux did not elicit any 14 C-serotonin release in the presence of sera from HIT patients and platelets from healthy subjects the risk of thrombocytopenia of immunoallergic origin (HIT type II) induced by fondaparinux can be expected  to  be  low  from  available  documentation.  However,  until  further  experience  is  gained,  a warning has been included in the SPC that fondaparinux should not be used in patients with a history of HIT type II.

A  transitory  increase  in  transaminases  is  observed  during  treatment  with  heparins.  In  the  DVT treatment  study  (DRI2440)  no  significant  mean  increase  in  AST  or  ALT  was  observed  under fondaparinux in contrast  to  dalteparin,  with  consistent  observations  of  larger  percentage  of  patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

experiencing increases above the ULN. No increases were seen after fondaparinux in patients undergoing PTCA or hemodialysis (studies ACT2445, 63113).

There  was  no  difference  in  transaminase  levels  between  fondaparinux  and  placebo  in  the  phase  I studies and no dose response in the phase II studies. As compared with the enoxaparin treated group in the  pooled  patient  material  in  orthopaedic  surgery  the  mean  increase  in  AST,  ALT  levels  was significantly less pronounced among the fondaparinux-treated patients and significantly fewer patients experienced elevations above ULN or 3xULN. The increases seen in the fondaparinux treated patients may  be  related  to  surgery  and  physiological  reactions  in  the  post-operative  phase  rather  than  to fondaparinux .

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Safety in special populations The rate of MB was inversely related to renal function and a tendency for an inverse relation was also seen with body weight. The rate of MB tended to be increased with age. The safety in 'fragile'  patients  (elderly,  low  body  weight,  impaired  renal  function)  was  a  concern. Bleeding tendency in these patients may to a large extent be explained by co-morbid factors, but it remains that, with the proposed posology, there will, inevitably, be accumulation of fondaparinux and exposure considerably in excess of that seen in patients with normal excretory capacity. By the strict adherence to the recommended timing of the first Quixidar injection, as emphasised by the applicant, the risk for MB may be reduced. Renal  failure  should  be  expected  to  be  associated  with  prolonged  exposure  to  higher  plasma concentrations of fondaparinux apart from the haemostatic disturbances caused by the kidney failure per  se .  Fondaparinux  concentrations  are  significantly  increased  in  severe  renal  impairment  (CLcr: &lt;30ml/min), but also in moderate impairment (CLcr: 30-50ml/min). The pharmacokinetics in patients with severe renal impairment have not been sufficiently characterised as severe renal impairment was an exclusion criterion in the Phase III studies: therefore fondaparinux  is  contraindicated  in  this  population  (this  contraindicaton  has  been  addressed  in  a subsequent  type  II  variation  -  see  \"Removal  of  the  contraindication  in  patients  with  severe  renal impairment\"). In patients with moderate renal impairment caution should be used when administering Quixidar. It is emphasized in the SPC that the first Quixidar administration should not be given earlier than 6 hours following surgical closure. The injection should not be given unless haemostasis has been established. As shown in the Figure 1,  the  influence  of  the  timing  of  the  first  dose  on  the  risk  of  MB  is  most apparent in a 'fragile' population defined as patients &gt;75 years old, &lt;50 kg and/or CLcr &lt;50 ml/min. It  can  be  concluded  that  within  the  fragile  population,  adherence  to  the  timing  of  the  first  postoperative  dose  is  of  most  importance  with  respect  to  major  bleeding  risk.  Consistently,  all  major bleedings among the 83 fondaparinux 2.5  mg patients with severe renal failure (CLcr  &lt;30  ml/min) (protocol  violators)  occurred  among  patients  whose  first  post-operative  dose  was  &lt;6  hrs  following surgical closure (4/36).

Figure 1. Major Bleeding from First Active Dose by Time of First Active Post-operative Dose and Fragileness -All Fondaparinux  2.5 mg Treated Patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation for the use of Quixidar in patients undergoing MOSLL

## Quality

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  important  quality  characteristics  of  the  active  substance  and  product  are  well-defined  and controlled, and the product is formulated, manufactured and controlled in a way that is characteristic of a solution for injection. The specifications and batch analytical results indicate a consistent product and these in turn should guarantee a uniform clinical performance from batch to batch. There are no unresolved quality issues that have a negative impact on the benefit/risk balance. A number of minor quality points were still outstanding at the  time of the CPMP opinion, and the applicant provided a letter of undertaking to resolve them within a given timeframe. To date, all but one has been resolved. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Overall,  the  toxicology  programme  was  adequate  to  support  the  development  of  the  product  in  the sought therapeutic indication. There were no data generated by exposure in pregnant animals and this information is included in the SPC. Pharmacokinetics The  pharmacokinetics  were  well  characterised and  supportive of the  claimed  posology.  The elimination of fondaparinux is highly dependent on the renal function, which is reflected in the SPC as contraindication of fondaparinux in patients with very severe renal impairment (CLcrea &lt; 20 ml /min). Efficacy Approximately 94% of the patients treated with fondaparinux, 2.5 mg/day, in the orthopaedic surgery studies  completed  treatment according  to  the  protocol.  The  completion  rate  was  the  same  as  in  the pooled control group. As expected with the study design employed, the actually demonstrated benefit on thromboembolic events is  mainly restricted to  a  decrease in the incidence of  venographic thromboses (proximal and distal). There is  scientific  evidence  beyond  reasonable  doubt  that  there  is  a  direct  relationship  between  the different  clinical  manifestations  of  venous  thromboembolic  disease.  A  relationship  between  distal, proximal  and  nonfatal/fatal  PE  is  accepted  and  it  is  considered  that  there  is  little  relevance  of  an endpoint  consisting  of  only  symptomatic  DVT  in  the  early  post-operative  phase.  The  composite endpoint recommended in the CPMP Points to Consider document also implies an acceptance of this concept. Therefore an indication text including 'prevention of VTE' was considered acceptable. The  dose,  dose  regimen  and  duration  of  treatment  have  been  substantiated  both  in  the  general population  and  in  the  fragile  patients  groups  (low  body  weight,  elderly,  moderate  and  severe  renal failure). The information is reflected in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Guidance for patients that need prolonged prophylaxis (beyond 9 days) was discussed in depth by the CPMP. Prolonged prophylaxis,  beyond  9  days  after  surgery,  was  not  tested  in  the  pivotal  trials  of MOSLL  hitherto  assessed.  Thus,  a  benefit/risk  assessment  for  such  prolonged  treatment  with fondaparinux could not be made at the time of the initial MA. Therefore, guidance on how to switch to prophylaxis with heparin, LMW-heparin or to treatment with a vitamin K antagonist (VKA) in case follow-up  therapy  was  deemed  necessary  beyond  the  peri-operative  period  was  included  in  the Summary  of  Product  Characteristics.  This  guidance  has  subsequently  been  deleted  further  to  the assessment of the Penthifra Plus study data (see 'prolonged prophylaxis' section) ., .

Fondaparinux  did  not  affect  the  prothrombin  time  in  healthy  volunteers  also  given  warfarin  (study 63108).    Warfarin  did  not  affect  the  pharmacokinetics  of  fondaparinux.  In  study  DRI2440  (dose ranging DVT treatment study) over 300 patients have been treated concomitantly with fondaparinux

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(doses 5, 7.5 or 10 mg) and oral anticoagulants. As compared with dalteparin and oral anticoagulants, the  same  time  of  combined  treatment  was  required  to  reach  therapeutic  INR  values.  There  was  no increased  bleeding  tendency  in  the  fondaparinux  group  as  compared  to  the  dalteparin  group.  In conclusion there is no suggestion that fondaparinux when combined with oral anticoagulants should lead  to  a  higher  and  unexpected  bleeding  frequency  in  comparison  with  heparin  or  LMWH.  The information is included in the Summary of Product Characteristics.

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Quixidar  in  Prevention  of  Venous  Thromboembolic Events (VTE) in patients  undergoing  major  orthopaedic  surgery  of  the  lower  limbs  such  as  hip  fracture,  major  knee surgery  or  hip  replacement  surgery  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the  granting  of  the marketing authorisation.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Safety The three main areas of concern discussed by the CPMP were the bleeding risk (particularly in fragile populations), the potential for interaction with other medicinal products used in prolonged prophylaxis, and the occurrence of thrombocytopenia. These points have been addressed with appropriate additional analyses of the phase II and phase III extensive studies submitted. The SPC has been amended as necessary with contraindication of the use of Quixidar in very severe renal failure patients and introducing the necessary warning and precaution for  use  in  other  populations.  The  assessment  of  the  pharmacokinetic,  interaction  and  dose  response studies, as well as a specific pooled analysis of all patients treated with other medicinal products for prolonged  prophylaxis  during  the  Phase  III  program  has  provided  reassurance  that  there  are  no obvious indications of an unexpected synergistic effect on bleeding tendency following the combined treatment of fondaparinux and oral anticoagulants. The same incidence of thrombocytopenia was observed in the two treatment groups across the phase III studies. Taking into account that no documented cases of immunoallergic thrombocytopenia have been reported across the whole clinical experience accrued so far with Quixidar, and considering that fondaparinux lacks PF4 binding capacity, the risk of thrombocytopenia of immunoallergic origin (HIT type II) induced by fondaparinux can be expected to be low. However, the CPMP recommended as follow-up  measure  that  until  further  experience  is  gathered,  thrombocytopenia  cases  be  carefully monitored and reported by the Marketing Authorisation Holder in the Periodic Safety Update Reports. Benefit/risk assessment The Applicant has provided substantial evidence documenting the efficacy and safety of fondaparinux when  used  as  directed  in  the  Prevention  of  Venous  Thromboembolic  Events  (VTE)  in  patients undergoing major orthopaedic surgery of the lower limbs such as hip fracture, major knee surgery or hip replacement surgery. Appropriate  contra-indication  in  patients  with  very  severe  renal  failure,  recommendation  for  the duration  of  treatment  as  well  as  clarifications  and  undertaking  of  follow-up  on  the  cases  of thrombocytopenia which might occur during treatment with fondaparinux were subjects of in-depth discussion with the applicant in the course of an oral explanation with the CPMP. Outstanding issues relevant to the complex manufacturing and quality control process of fondaparinux have  been  extensively  addressed  in  the  information  and  clarifications  provided  by  the  applicant.  A number  of  minor  quality  points will be further  addressed by the applicant after  Marketing Authorisation is granted, with the generation of additional analytical data. The over-all benefit/risk balance for Quixidar, used as recommended in the SPC, is considered to be favourable. Recommendation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## EXTENDED PROPHYLAXIS IN HIP FRACTURE SURGERY

## Rationale

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The request for extended prophylaxis is based on the results of the Penthifra Plus study (EFC4582) in patients undergoing Hip Fracture Surgery (HFS). No similar studies appear to have been performed in HFS prior to this pivotal study but long term  prophylaxis experience was reported with LMWH in HRS.  Indeed,  since  1996  at  least  6  placebo-controlled  studies  with  LMWHs  have  demonstrated  a reduction of venographically detected DVT approximately 1 month after elective HRS if prolonged prophylaxis (additional prophylaxis for approximately 3 weeks after the first post-operative week) is utilised. In summary, the results from these 6 studies demonstrate a reduction of  DVT (venographically detected and symptomatic) from 22.5% in the pooled placebo group to 8.5% in the LMWH group. Proximal DVTs are also reduced from 11.2 to 3.0% and symptomatic VTE from 4.4 to 1.4%  in  the  placebo  and  LMWH  groups,  respectively.  Nevertheless,  prolonged  prophylaxis  with LMWH has not been generally accepted for routine use in patients undergoing HRS. The labelling in several  countries  does,  however,  allow  prolonged prophylaxis  in  patients  deemed  to  suffer  from  an increased thrombotic risk. Penthifra plus Trial Design A multicentre,  international,  randomised,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial  of  fondaparinux  2.5 mg qd for 21 ± 2 days following an initial open-label prophylaxis of 7 ± 1 days, for the prophylaxis of VTE in  patients  undergoing  HFS.  Patients  without  evidence  of  symptomatic  VTE  or  disqualifying bleeding  during  the  initial  week  of  prophylaxis  and  without  study exclusion  criteria could  be randomised into the double-blind study. The primary efficacy outcome was the rate of VTE (defined as DVT detected by mandatory bilateral venography, or documented symptomatic DVT, or fatal/non-fatal PE) during the randomised, doubleblind extended prophylaxis period. The mandatory venography was to be performed at the end of the extended  prophylaxis  period  (Day  21 ± 2).  The  same  composite  efficacy  and  safety  endpoints  and adjudication  ('Hamilton')  used  in  all  confirmatory  studies  of  the  original  marketing  authorisation application (MAA) were chosen, facilitating cross-study comparisons. The evaluable population for the primary efficacy analysis was defined as all treated patients with a VTE assessment up to Day 24 included. Patients were to be analysed in the group to which they were randomised. In order to explore possible effects of a missing VTE assessment on the interpretation of the efficacy results, the same sensitivity analyses (best case, realistic case and worst case) as those included in the original MAA were specified in the protocol. The safety population was the 'as treated' population, with a patient being  considered  in  the  fondaparinux  group  as  soon  as  (s)he  received  at  least  one  dose  after randomisation. The main safety analysis considered all events observed up to Day 25, i.e., 2 additional days after the end of treatment. A sample  size of  210  patients  per  group  was  estimated  assuming  a  rate  of  VTE  after  3  weeks  of extended thromboprophylaxis of 11.5%, a risk reduction of 50%, an expected incidence of VTE in the placebo group of 23% and a power of 85%. Assuming 10% of patients would not enter the doubleblind period and 30% would be non-evaluable for primary efficacy, the target number of patients in the pre-randomised period was 670 in order to reach a total of 600 randomised patients (300/group). Results

A total of 737 patients were enrolled, 81 (11%) of which were not subsequently randomised into the extended prophylaxis study. The most common reasons for subsequent non-randomisation were: 39 (S)AEs  (serious  adverse  event)  or  efficacy  failure  [including  5  investigator-identified  DVT/PE,  8 bleedings and 34 (S)AE], and 42 neither efficacy failure nor (S)AE [including 11 withdrawn informed consents  and  31  other  exclusion  criteria/reasons].  The  exposure  of  patients  to  fondaparinux  before randomisation  was  7.0 ± 0.8  days  (mean ± SD).  Thus,  656  patients  were  randomised  to  either fondaparinux  or  placebo.  By  Day  21  ±  2  (end  of  randomised  double-blind  period)  428  patients (65.2%) were included in the primary efficacy analysis. The 'as treated' population and the evaluable population for efficacy were evenly distributed between the 2 treatment groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The demographic characteristics of patients are consistent with those of the peri-operative HFS study (EFC2698) in the original MAA. As expected for patients randomised into HFS studies they tended to be older, lighter, female, and the incidence of impaired kidney function tended to be higher than in patients randomised into the studies of other types of MOSLL .

| Efficacy Endpoint                                              | Fondaparinux 2.5 mg qd       | Placebo                                                              | p-Value    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| VTE (Primary efficacy analysis)                                | 3/208 (1.4)                  | 77/220 (35.0)                                                        | 4 X 10 -22 |
| DVT                                                            | 3/208 (1.4)                  | 74/218 (33.9)                                                        | 4 X 10 -21 |
| Proximal DVT                                                   | 2/221 (0.9)                  | 35/222 (15.8)                                                        | 3 X 10 -9  |
| Symptomatic VTE                                                | 1/326 (0.3) (1 proximal DVT) | 9/330 (2.7) (1 fatal PE, 2 non-fatal PE, proximal DVT, 1 distal DVT) | 0.021      |
| Patients with curative treatment (primary efficacy population) | 5/208 (2.4)                  | 50/220 (22.7)                                                        | 5 X 10 -11 |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Efficacy There  was  a  highly  significant  reduction  of  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  in  the  fondaparinux treatment arm as compared to the placebo group (Table 1). Table 1 - Summary of efficacy results and subsequent curative treatment Patients [n/N (%)] evaluable for the relevant endpoint The VTE rate observed in the fondaparinux treatment group was low (1.4%), lower than that observed in study EFC2698 (8.3%) following peri-operative prophylaxis with fondaparinux in the same patient population.  In  this  respect,  the  MAH  suggests  that  prolonged  prophylaxis  not  only  prevents  the development  of  new  thrombi,  but  also  may  provide  an  environment  that  allows  lysis  of  thrombi existing  at  the  end  of  the  peri-operative  prophylaxis  period.  When  the  overall  HFS  population  was subgrouped according to whether or not the patient received a hip replacement (either partial or total prosthesis)  the  observed  VTE  rates  [fondaparinux:  1/56  (1.8%)  vs.  placebo:  25/70  (35.7%)]  were consistent with the overall study results. The results of all 3 pre-specified sensitivity analyses of the primary  analysis  were  also  consistent  and  statistically  significant  (best  case:  RRR  =  96%;  95%CI [88%; 100%]; realistic case: RRR = 60%; 95%CI [45%; 73%]; worst case: RRR = 35%; 95%CI [21%; 47%]). The secondary efficacy analyses were consistent with the primary analysis; there was a statistically significant  reduction  in  the  rate  of  symptomatic  VTE  and  a  significant  reduction  of  the  combined endpoint of proximal DVT and/or PE (fondaparinux: 2/221 vs. placebo: 38/224). Table 1 also shows that considerably fewer patients received curative treatment than those classified as having VTE (50 vs. 77 in the placebo group). Further to a request from CPMP, the MAH provided data showing that, unexpectedly, antithrombotic therapy was initiated by the investigators in only a small minority (3%) of the patients without any centrally adjudicated VTE. Even more unexpectedly, antithrombotic treatment was not initiated by the investigators in 12/37 patients with proximal DVT and in 22/40 with distal DVT (according to central reading). This point is addressed in the discussion. The  symptomatic  events  observed  in  the  placebo  group  tended  to  present  a  week  or  more  after randomisation, suggesting that it might take some time for symptomatic VTE to develop (Figure 1).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1 -Day of symptomatic VTE after randomisation

<!-- image -->

| Product Premature Treatment Discontinuation/Reason for Stopping   | Fondaparinux (N=326)   | Placebo (N=330)   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| Patients who discontinued study drug prematurely                  | 40 (12.3%)             | 46 (13.9%)        |
| Reason(s) for discontinuation a                                   |                        |                   |
| Lack of efficacy                                                  | 2 ( 0.6%)              | 12 ( 3.6%)        |
| DVT a                                                             | 1 ( 0.3%)              | 9 ( 2.7%)         |
| PE a                                                              | 1 ( 0.3%)              | 3 ( 0.9%)         |
| AE/SAE b                                                          | 20 ( 6.1%)             | 14 ( 4.2%)        |
| Bleeding AE/SAE                                                   | 5 ( 1.5%)              | 1 ( 0.3%)         |
| Repeated surgery                                                  | 1 ( 0.3%)              | 3 ( 0.9%)         |
| Suspicion of drug-induced decrease of platelet count              | 0 ( 0.0%)              | 0 ( 0.0%)         |
| Other AE/SAE                                                      | 14 ( 4.3%)             | 10 ( 3.0%)        |
| Subject withdrawn consent                                         | 12 ( 3.7%)             | 16 ( 4.8%)        |
| Other reason                                                      | 6 ( 1.8%)              | 4 ( 1.2%)         |

<!-- image -->

There were numerical increases in bleedings (Table 3) and bleeding-related criteria (i.e., transfusion, decrease  in  haemoglobin  plasma  level)  under  fondaparinux  as  compared  to  placebo  treatment.  The numerical  difference  in  major  bleedings  (MB)  was  not  statistically  significant  and  was  due  to  an increase in bleeding index (BI) ≥ 2 (i.e., a need for transfusion and/or a decrease in haemoglobin level). All of the MB occurred at the surgical site.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Fondaparinux Fondaparinux Fondaparinux The trend for a delay in the occurrence of symptomatic VTE in the placebo group contributes to the impression of a considerable efficacy of fondaparinux prophylaxis in the early post-operative phase. A consistent trend for effect of fondaparinux was observed in several patient subgroups. The very low number  of  VTE  in  fondaparinux-treated  patients  does  not  allow  identification  of  covariates  by treatment interactions. However, in the placebo group gender, age, and increased kidney dysfunction appear  to  be  associated  with  an  increased  VTE  risk  -  age  and  female  gender  have  previously  been reported as VTE risk factors in HS, but not RI. The relationship of VTE risk with RI may be related to age and/or may be a marker of underlying concomitant morbidities that are actually responsible for the increased risk . Generally, ill patients are prone both to VTE and RI and thus, conclusions on a direct causal  relationship  between  RI  and  VTE  are  difficult  to  draw.  Hence,  the  observed  increased thrombotic tendency has to be weighed against the well known increased bleeding risk in a benefit/risk evaluation of antithrombotic prophylaxis in RI patients. Safety The number of patients who discontinued study drug by reason is given in table 2. Table  2  -  Number  (%)  of  patients  who  discontinued  study  drug  prematurely  by  primary  reason  for discontinuation - All treated patients (as randomised groups) Premature Treatment Discontinuation/Reason for Stopping Patients who discontinued study drug prematurely Reason(s) for discontinuation Lack of efficacy AE/SAE b Subject withdrawn consent Other reason NOTE: Patients are considered in the treatment group in which they were randomised. a According to the Investigator's judgment. b Including AEs recorded before the first double-blind study drug injection (based on the data collected in the 'end of treatment' form).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3 - % of patients with adjudicated bleeding events during EFC2698 and EFC4582 by adjudication criterion -'As treated' patients

|                                          | Peri-Operative Prophylaxis EFC2698 (Penthifra) a   | Peri-Operative Prophylaxis EFC2698 (Penthifra) a   | Extended Prophylaxis EFC4582 (Penthifra Plus) b   | Extended Prophylaxis EFC4582 (Penthifra Plus) b   |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Patients With                            | Fondaparinux 2.5 mg qd (N=831)                     | Enoxaparin 40 mg qd (N=842)                        | Fondaparinux 2.5 mg qd (N=327)                    | Placebo (N=329)                                   |
| Major bleeding                           | 18 (2.2%)                                          | 19 (2.3%)                                          | 8 (2.4%)                                          | 2 (0.6%)                                          |
| Fatal bleeding                           | 0 (0.0%)                                           | 1 (0.1%)                                           | 0 (0.0%)                                          | 0 (0.0%)                                          |
| Non-fatal critical bleeding              | 0 (0.0%)                                           | 0 (0.0%)                                           | 0 (0.0%)                                          | 0 (0.0%)                                          |
| Other non-fatal major bleeding           | 18 (2.2%)                                          | 18 (2.1%)                                          | 8 (2.4%)                                          | 2 (0.6%)                                          |
| At surgical site leading to re-operation | 3 (0.4%)                                           | 2 (0.2%)                                           | 2 (0.6%)                                          | 2 (0.6%)                                          |
| Only bleeding index (BI) ≥ 2             | 15 (1.8%)                                          | 16 (1.9%)                                          | 6 (1.8%)                                          | 0 (0.0%)                                          |
| Minor bleeding only                      | 34 (4.1%)                                          | 18 (2.1%)                                          | 5 (1.5%)                                          | 2 (0.6%)                                          |
| Any bleeding                             | 52 (6.3%)                                          | 37 (4.4%)                                          | 13 (4.0%)                                         | 4 (1.2%)                                          |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised a From first double-blind injection up to Day 11 (Day 1 is the day of surgery). b From first double-blind injection up to Day 25 (Day 1 is the day of first double-blind injection). There  was  a  temporal  trend  for  MB,  with  bleedings  more  frequently  observed  immediately  after randomisation  (Figure  2),  although  5  (4  fondaparinux  vs  1  placebo)  of  the  10  MB  reported  after randomisation started before randomisation. Figure 2 - Day of MB from the first study drug administration in EFC4582 'as treated' patients Placebo Fondaparinux a : patients with MB started before randomization and worsening after randomization 1 : Patient 22050019 : MB only related to BI ≥ 2 which only led to study drug temporary discontinuation for 48 hours 2 : Patient 10020004 : MB started before randomization which led to re-operation on D15 after randomization Placebo Fondaparinux a : patients with MB started before randomization and worsening after randomization 1 : Patient 22050019 : MB only related to BI ≥ 2 which only led to study drug temporary discontinuation for 48 hours 2 : Patient 10020004 : MB started before randomization which led to re-operation on D15 after randomization Because of the overall low number of MB, particularly in the placebo group, it was not possible to evaluate  either  the  patient  characteristics  that  might  correlate  with  increased  bleeding  risk  or  the interaction of fondaparinux with any concomitant diseases or treatments (Table 4). Nevertheless, the tendency for increased MB rates with decreasing body weight and renal function are consistent with those  observed  during  peri-operative  prophylaxis  in  the  original  MAA.  The  safety  concerns  for patients with RI remain and must be carefully considered (see Removal of contraindication in severe renal impairment).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4 - Number (%) [95% CI] of patients with MB by selected covariate - 'as treated' population

|                      | Fondaparinux 2.5 mg qd (N=327)   | Placebo (N=329)         |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Gender               |                                  |                         |
| Male                 | 2/92 (2.2) ; [0.3;7.6]           | 1/98 (1.0) ; [0.0;5.6]  |
| Female               | 6/235 (2.6) ; [0.9;5.5]          | 1/231 (0.4) ; [0.0;2.4] |
| Age (years)          |                                  |                         |
| <65                  | 1/52 (1.9) ; [0.0;10.3]          | 1/56 (1.8) ; [0.0;9.6]  |
| [65 - 75[            | 1/71 (1.4) ; [0.0;7.6]           | 1/58 (1.7) ; [0.0;9.2]  |
| ≥ 75                 | 6/204 (2.9) ; [1.1;6.3]          | 0/215 (0.0) ; [0.0;1.7] |
| Weight (Kg)          |                                  |                         |
| <50                  | 2/28 (7.1) ; [0.9;23.5]          | 0/25 (0.0) ; [0.0;13.7] |
| [50 - 100]           | 6/292 (2.1) ; [0.8;4.4]          | 2/301 (0.7) ; [0.1;2.4] |
| >100                 | 0/5 (0.0) ; [0.0;52.2]           | 0/2 (0.0) ; [0.0;84.2]  |
| Creatinine clearance | (ml/min)                         | longer                  |
| <30                  | 1/28 (3.6); [0.1;18.3]           | 0/25 (0.0) ; [0.0;13.7] |
| 30 - 50              | 3/104 (2.9); [0.6;8.2]           | 0/84 (0.0) ; [0.0;4.3]  |
| 50 - 80              | 3/125 (2.4); [0.5;6.9]           | 1/131 (0.8) ; [0.0;4.2] |
| ≥ 80                 | 1/68 (1.5); [0.0;7.9]            | 1/88 (1.1) ; [0.0;6.2]  |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Gender Male 2/92 (2.2) ; [0.3;7.6] Female 6/235 (2.6) ; [0.9;5.5] Age (years) &lt;65 1/52 (1.9) ; [0.0;10.3] [65 - 75[ 1/71 (1.4) ; [0.0;7.6] ≥ 75 6/204 (2.9) ; [1.1;6.3] Weight (Kg) &lt;50 2/28 (7.1) ; [0.9;23.5] [50 - 100] 6/292 (2.1) ; [0.8;4.4] &gt;100 0/5 (0.0) ; [0.0;52.2] Creatinine clearance (ml/min) &lt;30 1/28 (3.6); [0.1;18.3] 30 - 50 3/104 (2.9); [0.6;8.2] 50 - 80 3/125 (2.4); [0.5;6.9] ≥ 80 1/68 (1.5); [0.0;7.9] Regarding other  adverse  events ,  overall  there  was  no  evidence  of  any  differences  between  patients who received fondaparinux and those who received placebo. There were 2 fatal pulmonary embolisms (PE) in the placebo treatment group. Immune thrombocytopenia and an increase in transaminases are ADRs often associated with heparins. Clinical laboratory evaluations revealed that no patient experienced a platelet count &lt;100 x 10 9 /l  in either treatment group, and changes in liver enzymes were equally common in both treatment groups. The  possibility  of  a thrombotic  rebound  phenomenon induced  by  fondaparinux  has  also  been addressed by the MAH, who concluded that the VTE rate following treatment discontinuation (in the placebo  group)  did  not  exceed  the  historical  norm  for  a  non-prophylaxed  patient  (i.e.:  ~50%). Furthermore,  there  was  no  significant  excess  in  AE  rates  in  the  placebo  group  after  treatment discontinuation compared with patients who continued the treatment. Consequently, the VTE events observed after discontinuation of prophylactic therapy following the peri-operative period suggest a persisting VTE risk that should be prevented, rather than a rebound. The CPMP concur that the VTE events  recorded  probably  represent  a  persisting  risk  rather  than  a  rebound  phenomenon.  The  high incidence  of  venographically  detected  DVT  in  the  placebo  group  is  not  unexpectedly  high  when compared to the incidences recorded in similar studies with other prophylactic agents. Nevertheless, considering  the  new  pharmacodynamic  principle  that  fondaparinux  represents,  with  an  intense  and selective  inhibition  of  Factor  Xa  mediated  via  AT,  there  could  be  some  concern  for  decreased  AT levels  during  prolonged  treatment,  which  in  turn  could  lead  to  an  increased  thrombotic  tendency. Further to a request from the CPMP, the MAH confirmed that AT levels had not been recorded at the end  of  the  4  weeks  of  fondaparinux  treatment  nor  was  there  any  external  support  for  a  lack  of  a clinically relevant reduction of AT activity during prolonged fondaparinux treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion

The over-all design of the study is acceptable for the intended primary objective, although the followup  period  after  treatment  ended  is  short  and,  thus,  the  incidences  of  symptomatic  VTE  or  bleeding occurring after day 25 are unknown. The number of patients excluded before randomisation from the extended  prophylaxis  period  and  the  number  of  patients  not  undergoing  venography  at  the  end  of treatment  corresponds  to  what  could  be  expected.  The  population  included  is  judged  to  reflect  the target  population.  It  should  be  noted  that,  as  observed  in  the  pivotal  studies  in  the  original  MAA, patients with severe RI (CLcrea &lt;30 ml/min) were not to be included in this study. In violation of this exclusion criterion a fairly large proportion (8.6%) of the patients was included, possibly reflecting the confidence treating physicians today feel for the safety of pharmacological prophylaxis of VTE.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Efficacy Not surprisingly, the statistically significant reduction in the primary endpoint is largely driven by the reduction in venographically detected, non-symptomatic DVTs. The reduction of symptomatic VTE also  reaches  statistical  significance,  although  this  is  based  on  very  few  events.  A  study  aiming  to demonstrate an overall clinical benefit from prolonged prophylaxis would have to be of considerably greater size and would have to be designed differently, with a longer follow-up time and possibly with a third arm of patients not being treated and not undergoing venography after treatment. The  most  important  objection  to  routinely  applied  prolonged  prophylaxis  regimens  in  HRS  has probably  been  the  uncertainty  on  the  clinical  importance  of  the  non-symptomatic  venographically detected  DVTs.  The  relationship  between  non-symptomatic  DVT  and  symptomatic  VTE  probably differs in different clinical situations and could be suspected to change with time elapsed after surgery. The  clinical  importance  of  venographically  detected  DVTs  4  weeks  after  HFS  is  to  a  large  extent unknown.  Indeed,  the  lower  number  of  patients  receiving  curative  treatment  relative  to  patients classified  as  having  VTE  (50  vs.  77  in  the  placebo  group)  raises  the  question  as  to  whether  these thrombi were small and difficult to diagnose, or whether they were detected locally but judged to be clinically  irrelevant.  These  findings,  together  with  the  short  observational  follow-up  period  after treatment  cessation,  further  contribute  to  the  uncertainty  concerning  the  clinical  relevance  of  nonsymptomatic venographically detected DVT 28 days after HFS. Despite this uncertainty, it is accepted that in a specific clinical situation there is a relationship between venographically detected DVTs and symptomatic DVTs and this assumption could be utilised in a direct comparison between different AT agents,  as  was  done  in  the  original  MAA.  It  is  also  well  understood  that  once  a  DVT  has  been diagnosed at a prescheduled venography it cannot be left untreated in the majority of cases. However, this generally applied rule for clinical decision-making cannot be regarded as scientific proof for the clinical importance of non-symptomatic DVTs 4 weeks after HFS. As regards extrapolating the Penthifra trial results to HRS patients, the MAH argues that given the already  documented  persistence  of  VTE  risk  in  patients  undergoing  HRS  and  the  demonstrated efficacy of a less effective agent (enoxaparin), the efficacy of fondaparinux in preventing persisting VTE risk in both types of hip surgery (HRS and HFS) is unquestionable. While the CPMP concur that prolonged prophylaxis in HRS can be expected to be effective to an extent that is similar (although not necessarily identical) to the demonstrated efficacy in HFS, the mean incidence of symptomatic VTE after day 11 was, in relative terms, 27% lower in HRS as compared to HFS. The extrapolation is thus not endorsed, as reflected in the adopted SPC. Based  on  the  above  reasoning,  the  CPMP  does  not  believe  that  a  general  recommendation  for routinely applied prolonged prophylaxis in all patients undergoing HFS is justified. Nevertheless, the results of this study support a change in the labelling allowing prolonged prophylaxis in patients who are deemed by the treating physician to suffer from an increased thrombotic risk. This is reflected in the SPC.

## Safety:

The number of patients who discontinued treatment prematurely was similar in both treatment groups, with more symptomatic VTE in the placebo group and a tendency for more bleedings in the actively

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treated group. As suggested from the results of the studies of perioperative prohylaxis in the original MAA, a temporal association between time of surgery and the incidence of MB was also observed in the Penthifra plus trial, although no trend for increased bleeding with increased treatment time is seen, which is interpreted by the MAH as an indication of a lack of a clinically relevant accumulation of fondaparinuxin  plasma  during  the  3  weeks  extended  treatment.  However,  considering  i)  the  wellknown difficulties in evaluating bleeding tendency in clinical studies, ii) the limited size of the study, iii) the lack of external support for the safety of fondaparinux prophylaxis longer than 9 days, iv) the exclusion of patients with increased bleeding risk and severe RI and v) the avoidance of concomitant medication interfering  with the  haemostatic  mechanisms in  the  clinical  trial  setting  which  seems  to have been well controlled, it is difficult to conclude from these findings on the risk of bleedings in clinical  routine  and  on  the  claimed  lack  of  clinical  relevance  of  possible  plasma  accumulation  of fondaparinux (plasma levels were not measured in this study). Plasma concentrations can be viewed as a relevant marker for the safety (and efficacy) of fondaparinux.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised REMOVAL OF THE CONTRAINDICATION IN SEVERE RENAL IMPAIRMENT Scientific background Quixidar was initially  contraindicated  in  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  (CLcrea&lt;30  ml/min). The elimination of  Quixidar is  highly  dependent  on  renal  function  and  there  is  a  clear  relationship between  fondaparinux  CL  and  CLcrea.  In  a  RI  study  from  the  original  application,  CL  was approximately 5-fold lower in severely impaired subjects compared with normal subjects The MAH requested the deletion of the contraindication for patients with severe renal impairment (RI) and instead proposed treatment with a lower dose (1.5 mg q.d.). No new pharmacokinetic (PK) data have been submitted and the proposed changes are mainly based on new analyses of the original MAA data and Penthifra Plus results using PK modelling and simulation. Modelling and Simulations Population modelling was initially conducted using data from the moderate and severe RI groups in the RI-study (P-pharm), rendering population estimates and individual Bayesian parameter estimates. The 2 groups were analysed separately using a two-compartment model, thus not taking advantage of the information that arises from the other group, e.g. with respect to the CL- CLcrea relationship. Mild and normal RI were not included in the analysis and data from the Phase II/III studies were not used, although they included many patients with moderate RI and a few patients with CLcrea 20 - 30 ml/min. Further to a request from CPMP, the population analysis was redone. A population pharmacokinetic (POPPK) model using all available sparse data by SC route from the phase II/III studies was built with NONMEM  software  (FOCE  interaction)  and  implemented  on  Pharsight  Trial  Simulator  (TS2) software. The objective of this new analysis was to build a POPPK model including at least CLcrea as covariate  of  fondaparinux  CL  in  patients  undergoing  MOSLL.  A  total  of  756   patients  (3413 time points) with an available CLcrea ranging from 23.5 to 231.5 ml/min (550 from study DRI2643, 65 from study ECF2442 and 141 from study EFC2698) were used to develop this model. A 2-compartment model with a first order absorption and elimination from the central compartment best fitted available data. Two covariates were included in the final model: CLcrea on CL, and the body weight (WGT) on central compartment volume (V2).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5 - Description of final population pharmacokinetic model

| Parameter                                           | Population Estimate                                 | Standard Error                                      | Coefficient of Variation (%)                        | Interindividual Variability (%)                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| CL (L/h)                                            | 0.0409                                              | 0.0160                                              | 39                                                  | 24                                                  |
| CL cr (CL)                                          | 0.320                                               | 0.0169                                              | 5                                                   | -                                                   |
| CL(CLcr) = 0.0409 + 0.320 * (CLcr / Median CLcr)    | CL(CLcr) = 0.0409 + 0.320 * (CLcr / Median CLcr)    | CL(CLcr) = 0.0409 + 0.320 * (CLcr / Median CLcr)    | CL(CLcr) = 0.0409 + 0.320 * (CLcr / Median CLcr)    | CL(CLcr) = 0.0409 + 0.320 * (CLcr / Median CLcr)    |
| V2 (L)                                              | 7.21                                                | 0.123                                               | 2                                                   | 14                                                  |
| WGT(V2)                                             | 0.0996                                              | 0.00626                                             | 6                                                   | -                                                   |
| V2 (WGT) = 7.21 + 0.0996 * (Weight - Median Weight) | V2 (WGT) = 7.21 + 0.0996 * (Weight - Median Weight) | V2 (WGT) = 7.21 + 0.0996 * (Weight - Median Weight) | V2 (WGT) = 7.21 + 0.0996 * (Weight - Median Weight) | V2 (WGT) = 7.21 + 0.0996 * (Weight - Median Weight) |
| k a (1/h)                                           | 1.58                                                | 0.184                                               | 12                                                  | 71                                                  |
| Q (L/h)                                             | 0.145                                               | 0.0143                                              | 10                                                  | -                                                   |
| V3 (L)                                              | 17.8                                                | 3.78                                                | 21                                                  | 138                                                 |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The  model  shows  that  increasing  the  CLcrea  cut-off  to  a  value  above  30ml/min  (i.e.  50ml/min) decreases  the  variability  in  the  population  and  generates  more  comparable  exposure  in  RI  and 'normal' patients for a switch between 1.5 and 2.5 mg dose.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Residual variability 5.78 10 -3 mg/l. CL: Clearance from first compartment; Q: Inter-compartmental Clearance; V2: Distribution Volume of first (central) compartment; V3: Distribution Volume of second (peripheral) compartment; ka: Rate of absorption. The covariance of η CL and η V2 within the omega block was 0.0276, correlation=0.84. Results A total of 20,000 patients were simulated to receive fondaparinux 2.5 mg for 28 days with samples 'collected'  at  appropriate  time  points  on  Day 7  and  Day 28.  No  specific  simulation  was  run  at  the 1.5 mg  dose  level:  same  Cmax  and  AUC  values  obtained  at  2.5  mg  dose  level  were  normalised  to 1.5 mg. Empirical 5th, 50th and 95th percentiles were computed for a unit of CLcrea every 10 ml/min from 20 to 150 ml/min. In order to provide reasonable estimates of the distribution of simulated Cmax and AUC0-24 for a given CLcrea  value,  empirical  5th,  50th  and  95th  percentiles  were  computed  for  a  unit  of  CL crea every  10 m/min.  For  graphic  representations,  exponential  decay  regression  curves  (y=y0  +  a*e -bx )  were estimated for each percentile (Fig 3). Figure 3 -Individual predicted AUC0-24 (mg/l) and corresponding 5 th , 50 th and 95 th percentiles on Day 28 at 1.5 mg or 2.5mg once daily with cut-off at Clcrea 30 and 50 l/min in patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 6- Descriptive statistics on predicted Cmax (mg/l) and AUC0-24 (mg.h/l) on Day 28 at 1.5 mg and 2.5 mg q.d. for a CLcrea value at 20, 30, 40, 50 and 80 ml/min.

|                   | Creatinine clearance value   | Creatinine clearance value   | Creatinine clearance value   | Creatinine clearance value           | Creatinine clearance value   |
|-------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| Dose              | 20 ml/min                    | 30 mL/min                    | 40 ml/min                    | 50 ml/min                            | 80 ml/min                    |
| C max (mg/l)      |                              |                              |                              |                                      |                              |
| 2.5 mg n          | 30 0.760 (30)                | 56 0.612 (26) 0.403          | 86 0.530 (25) 0.325          | 112 0.456 (23) 0.299 0.459 0.630 112 | 235 0.359 (22) 0.250         |
| Mean (CV%)        |                              |                              |                              |                                      |                              |
| 5 th percentile   | 0.464                        |                              |                              |                                      |                              |
| Median            | 0.714                        | 0.600                        | 0.508                        |                                      | 0.347                        |
| 95 th percentile  | 1.149                        | 0.905                        | 0.747                        |                                      | 0.506                        |
| 1.5 mg n          | 30                           | 56                           | 86                           |                                      | 235                          |
| Mean (CV%) th     | 0.456 (30)                   | 0.367 (26)                   | 0.318 (25)                   | 0.274 (23)                           | 0.215 (22)                   |
| 5 percentile      | 0.278                        | 0.242                        | 0.195                        | 0.179                                | 0.150                        |
| Median            | 0.428                        | 0.360                        | 0.305                        | 0.275                                | 0.208                        |
| 95 th percentile  | 0.689                        | 0.543                        | 0.448                        | 0.378                                | 0.304                        |
| AUC 0-24 (mg.h/l) |                              |                              | longer                       |                                      |                              |
| 2.5 mg n          | 30                           | 56                           | 86                           | 112                                  | 235                          |
| Mean (CV%)        | 14.51 (33)                   | no 11.18 (31)                | 9.35 (27)                    | 7.73 (24)                            | 5.43 (25)                    |
| 5 th percentile   | 8.62                         | 6.57                         | 5.76                         | 4.85                                 | 3.54                         |
| Median            | 13.95                        | 10.88                        | 8.91                         | 7.81                                 | 5.22                         |
| 95 th percentile  | 21.92                        | 17.96                        | 14.28                        | 10.62                                | 7.89                         |
| 1.5 mg            |                              |                              |                              |                                      |                              |
| n                 | 30                           | 56                           | 86                           | 112                                  | 235                          |
| Mean (CV%)        | Product 8.71 (33)            | 6.71 (31)                    | 5.61 (27)                    | 4.64 (24)                            | 3.26 (25)                    |
| 5 th percentile   | 5.17                         | 3.94                         | 3.46                         | 2.91                                 | 2.13                         |
| Median            | 8.37                         | 6.53                         | 5.35                         | 4.68                                 | 3.13                         |
| 95 th percentile  | 13.15                        | 10.77                        | 8.57                         | 6.37                                 | 4.73                         |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The MAH has also looked at controlled MB data from the original MAA and from Penthifra Plus in order to help establish a cut-off value (Table 7).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7- MB [number (%) of patients] by CLcrea and study categories in fondaparinux MOSLL studies - patients actively treated with fondaparinux

|                | Pre-Operative Studies (ACT2545, 63118, EFC2698)   | Pre-Operative Studies (ACT2545, 63118, EFC2698)   | Post-Operative Studies (DRI2643, EFC2442, 095-002)   | Post-Operative Studies (DRI2643, EFC2442, 095-002)   | Extended Prophylaxis (EFC4582)   | Extended Prophylaxis (EFC4582)   |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| CL crea        | Fonda 2.5 mg qd                                   | Enox 40 mg qd                                     | Fonda 2.5 mg qd                                      | Enox 30 q12hr                                        | Fonda 2.5 mg qd                  | Placebo                          |
| <30 ml/min     | 4/72 (5.6)                                        | 1/75 (1.3)                                        | 0/11 (0.0)                                           | 1/12 (8.3)                                           | 1/28 (3.6)                       | 0/25 (0.0)                       |
| 30 - 40 ml/min | 5/151 (3.3)                                       | 6/164 (3.7)                                       | 0/31 (0.0)                                           | 1/42 (2.4)                                           | 0/35 (0.0)                       | 0/44 (0.0)                       |
| 40 - 50 ml/min | 15/235 (6.4)                                      | 9/277 (3.2)                                       | 0/90 (0.0)                                           | 2/103 (1.9)                                          | 3/69 (4.3)                       | 0/40 (0.0)                       |
| 50 - 80 ml/min | 26/788 (3.3)                                      | 24/789 (3.0)                                      | 14/502 (2.8)                                         | 5/658 (0.8)                                          | 3/125 (2.4) 1/131 (0.8)          | 3/125 (2.4) 1/131 (0.8)          |
| ≥ 80 ml/min    | 14/647 (2.2)                                      | 14/664 (2.1)                                      | 17/932 (1.8)                                         | 11/992 (1.1)                                         | 1/68 (1.5) 1/88 (1.1)            | 1/68 (1.5) 1/88 (1.1)            |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Fonda=fondaparinux. Enox=enoxaparin The limited number of events greatly hinders the interpretation of the above results. However, it should be remembered that an increased bleeding tendency has been observed in patients with reduced renal function. This is confounded by the observation that patients with renal impairment may be at higher risk of VTE. Discussion Due to limited data (1 subject with CLcrea of 8 ml/min), the lower CLcrea cut-off for treatment with fondaparinux has been set to 20ml/min and thus Quixidar should remain contraindicated in patients with  CLcrea  below  this  value.  Given  the  comparable  AUC  and  Cmax  estimates  in  the  severe  and moderate group, the 1.5mg dose is approvable in severe renal impairment (&gt;20ml/min). The CPMP believes that, in the absence of clinical data to the contrary, it is preferable to opt for a dosing regimen that will  give  similar  exposure  in  RI  as  in  non-impaired  patients,  especially  during prolonged prophylaxis, as reflected in the adopted SPC. This is relevant since patients with RI in the lower  moderate  range  may  not  have  achieved  steady  state  with  the  2.5  mg  dose  at  the  end  of  the previously approved 9-day treatment period. The fact that patients with renal impairment may be at higher  risk  for  VTE  and  in  special  need  of  prophylaxis  does  not  justify  a  higher  exposure  in  this population.  It  is  more  reasonable  that  the  VTE  risk  is  a  reflection  of  overall  morbidity  rather  than related to renal impairment per se . Moreover, the safety data available for prolonged prohylaxis in RI stem from study EFC4582 and are not extensive. NEW INDICATION IN THE TREATMENT OF VTE (new pre-filled syringes of 5mg/0.4ml, 7.5mg/0.6ml and 10mg/0.8ml) Rationale for New Indication VTE disease is the usual terminology for referring to DVT and PE, two clinical expressions of the same underlying pathophysiology. The mean annual reported incidence of DVT ranges between 48180  per  100,000  population.  Whereas  a  lower  annual  incidence  of  23/100,000  is  reported  for symptomatic PE, asymptomatic defect of pulmonary perfusion is reported in up to 80% of patients suffering  from  DVT,  especially  proximal  DVT.  Conversely,  the  presence  of  DVT  could  be documented in up to 93% of PE patients. In addition, the reported rates of VTE recurrences in patients with only symptoms of DVT associated or not to asymptomatic PE or in patients with symptoms of PE are similar. These data emphasise the intimate relationship between DVT and PE.

DVT and PE are  treated  with  the  same  therapeutic  approach  aiming  to  prevent  further  thrombotic extension with increased risk for post-thrombotic syndrome and pulmonary embolisation that may be life-threatening or lead to restriction of pulmonary function and/or chronic pulmonary hypertension. Current  management  of  patients  with  acute  VTE  requires  initial  treatment  with  an  anticoagulant

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

exhibiting  rapid  onset  of  action,  such  as  Unfractionated  Heparin  (UFH)  or  Low  Molecular  Weight Heparin  (LMWH), followed by chronic anticoagulation  with  oral  anti-vitamin  K  agents  (AVK)  for secondary  prevention.  The  approved  UFH  regimen  for  this  initial  treatment  of  patients  with  DVT and/or  PE  requires  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  (aPTT)  monitoring  due  to  inter-individual differences  in  dose-response  relationship.  LMWHs,  such  as  bodyweight-adjusted  dose  enoxaparin sodium represent therapeutic alternatives for DVT patients with superior or equal efficacy, with some suggestions for decreased bleeding complications and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) type II, which is a serious complication of heparin therapy. This therapeutic alternative, consisting of once or twice daily sc administration, allows home treatment for suitable patients.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Unlike fondapanirux, which is chemically synthesised, both UFHs and LMWHs are animal-sourced products with potential for contamination and exposure of patients to immunoallergic reactions and to other  non-haemorrhagic  adverse  drug  reactions.  There  is,  therefore,  a  need  to  improve  the  initial anticoagulant therapy of patients with VTE. This application concerns 3 new product strengths (pre-filled syringes of 5mg/0.4ml, 7.5mg/0.6ml and 10mg/0.8ml)  developed  for  a  new  indication  in  the  treatment  of  DVT  and  PE.  Various  health authorities were consulted prior to the finalisation of the clinical development plan. The studies follow the  main  recommendations  made  in  CHMP  Note  for  guidance  (NfG)  on  clinical  investigation  of medicinal  products  for  the  treatment  of  VTE  disease  (CHMP/EWP/563/98)  and  CHMP  scientific advice provided in September 1999. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Quixidar  5mg/0.4ml,  7.5mg/0.6ml  and  10mg/0.8ml  contain  fondaparinux  sodium  as  the  active ingredient  in  a  concentration  of  12.5  mg/ml.  The  medicinal  product  is  presented  as  a  solution  for injection in a prefilled syringe with an automatic needle protection system. Other  ingredients  include  an  isotonic  solution  of  sodium  chloride  and  water  for  injections.  Sodium hydroxide  and  hydrochloric  acid  are  used  as  pH  adjusters  and  sterile  nitrogen  is  used  as  an  aid  to filtration, but is not present in the finished product. The product  is  packaged  in  a  single  dose  syringe  consisting  of  a  glass  barrel  with  a  stainless  steel needle  and  a  rubber  needle  shield  and  closed  with  a  plunger  stopper.  To  differentiate  between  the different doses available, the plunger rod and the automatic needle protection system have different colours for each strength. Active substance The drug substance is identical to the one used in the already approved strengths. Other ingredients The same excipients are used as in the already approved strengths. All materials are of non-animal origin and comply with Ph. Eur. requirements. Product development and finished product Quixidar 5mg/0.4ml, 7.5mg/0.6ml and 10mg/0.8ml have been developed using the same qualitative composition,  manufacturing  process  and  primary  packaging  material  as  the  already  approved strengths.  Since  the  proposed  indication  requires  a  higher  dose  compared  to  the  approved  ones,  a higher concentration was needed in order to keep the injection volume below 1 ml. For this reason the concentration of the solution has been increased to 12.5 mg/ml as compared to the already authorised 5  mg/ml  and  the  sodium  chloride  concentration  has  been  changed  from  0.84  to  0.76%  in  order  to obtain similar osmolality (284-285 mOsm/kg) for both fondaparinux sodium solutions.

The manufacturing process is the same as the one employed in the already approved strengths. It is a standard  process  that  involves  the  following  steps:  compounding,  sterile  filtration,  aseptic  filling, terminal  sterilisation,  inspection  and  secondary  packaging.  Filtration  and  terminal  sterilisation  have

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

been identified as the critical steps of the manufacturing process and have been appropriately validated together  with  the  proposed  holding  times.  From  the  results  presented  it  can  be  concluded  that  the manufacturing process is reproducible and can consistently produce a product that meets the proposed specifications.

## Product specification

As  explained  in  the  Toxico-Pharmacological  Critical  Assessment  of  the  original  application,  a combination  of  safety,  pharmacokinetic  and  ethical  considerations  justified  why  studies  with  doses higher  than  those  used  cannot  be  performed;  consequently,  no  additional  toxicological  studies  with higher  doses  have  been  performed.  The  Applicant  refers  to  this  justification  and  argues  that  the animal/human exposure ratios obtained for the recommended therapeutic treatment dose of 7.5 mg are adequate and sufficient to support the safety of Quixidar for the intended indication, and concludes that no changes in the preclinical safety sections of the SmPC are necessary.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  specifications  include  tests  for  the  appearance,  identification  (LC),  particulate  matter,  pH, extractable volume, degradation products (LC), sterility, bacterial endotoxins and assay by validated analytical  methods.  They  have  been  kept  identical  with  the  ones  for  the  approved  strenghts  except from some minor changes concerning the colour, extractable volume and assay. Stability of the product Stability data from 3 batches of the 5mg/0.4ml strength, 1 batch of the 7.5mg/0.6ml strength and 3 batches of the 10mg/0.8ml strength stored at 25°C/60%RH and 30°C/60%RH for 12 months and at 40°C/75%RH for 6 months have been presented. The samples were tested for appearance, particulate matter, pH, extractable volume, degradation products, free sulfates, sterility, bacterial endotoxins and assay,  by  validated  stability  indicating  methods.  In  all  cases  the  batch  analysis  results  met  the proposed specification. Data from photostability and temperature cycling studies conducted according to ICH guidelines have also been provided. All results remained within the acceptance criteria. The  stability  data  provided  indicate  that  the  medicinal  product  is  stable  for  the  proposed  shelf  life when stored under the conditions specified in the SPC. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects. The  quality  of  Quixidar  5mg/0.4ml,  7.5mg/0.6ml  and  10mg/0.8ml  is  adequately  established.  In general, satisfactory chemical  and  pharmaceutical documentation  has  been  submitted  for the marketing authorization. There are no major deviations from EU and ICH requirements. The proposed new strengths are similar to the already approved ones. They have the same qualitative composition and only differ slightly in quantitative composition. The same manufacturing process and primary packaging material are used as in the approved strengths and stability tests indicate that the product under ICH guidelines conditions is chemically stable for the proposed shelf life. Non-clinical aspects Toxicology The  mean  maximum  human  exposure  is  about  three-fold  higher  with  the  new  proposed  dosage regimen  than  with  the  hitherto  approved  posology.  No  new  preclinical  information  has  been  made available since the product was originally approved. Further to a request from CHMP, the Applicant has  submitted  a  non  clinical  overview  including  animal/human  AUC-exposure  ratios  with  the  new proposed  posology,  together  with  a  justification  as  to  why  the  available  preclinical  information  is sufficient to support the safety of the product at the higher proposed doses. Thus, the exposure ratios between the highest dosed animals of the pivotal repeat dose toxicity studies and patients with normal renal function ( ∼ 20 µ gxh/ml) have decreased from 5 to 1.75 in rat, 13 to 4.25 in rabbit, and from 16 to 5.3 in monkey. In renally impaired patients the exposure ratios will be even lower (1, 2.4 and 3 with the applicant's dose-adjustment proposal given ∼ 35 µ gxh/ml).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on the non-clinical aspects

The investigated  margins of toxicity  are  generally  low.  The  question  arises  if  more  can  be  done  to cover  the  new  higher  exposure  scenario.  In  the  earlier  submitted  repeat  dose/reproduction  toxicity studies (max dose 10 mg/kg/day in all species), the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) appears not to have been reached in the rat and rabbit (mostly minor injection site haemorrhage reported) in contrast to the more exposed monkeys (up to 3-month iv treatment), where a relatively more severe toxicity profile  of  primary  bleeding  and  secondary  associated  events  was  reported.  Hence,  the  full  feasible toxicity  profile  of  fondaparinux  appears  to  have  been  explored  in  a  species  considered  relevant regarding the pharmacological effects of heparins on the coagulation system. There were no apparent indications  of  other  toxic  events  in  the  monkey,  considered  unrelated  to  effects  on  the  coagulation system,  up  to  3-5  fold  the  clinical  exposure  level.  The  monkey  data  indicate  that,  upon  short-term treatment,  unacceptable  bleeding  would  arise  before  any  other  potential  harmful  reaction  occurs. Given the MTD studies available in monkeys, the CHMP concurs that it is not necessary to collect further  data  in  the  rodent  species.  Nonetheless,  in  contrast  to  the  applicant's  view,  the  CHMP considers that the toxicological profile of fondaparinux is not fully characterised for this higher dose indication. Hence, the fact that the repeated dose and reproduction toxicity studies are insufficient due to the limited exposure has been appropriately reflected in section 5.3 of the SPC.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Clinical aspects Introduction The  efficacy  and  safety  of  Quixidar  5mg/0.4  ml,  7.5  mg/0.6  ml,  and  10  mg/0.8  ml  solution  for injection in the treatment of Venous Thromboembolic Events was investigated in 3 multicentre studies conducted  in  Europe,  North  America  and  Australia,  and  additional  pharmacokinetic  (PK)  and pharmacodynamic  (PD)  data  were  collected.  The  phase  II  REMBRANDT  study  (DRI2440)  was  a dose-response study conducted in patients with a bodyweight of 50-100 kg and tested 5 mg, 7.5 mg and  10  mg  once  daily  sc  fondaparinux  versus  q12h  sc  dalteparin  in  the  initial  treatment  of symptomatic proximal DVT. Two pivotal phase III non-inferiority studies using the proposed weight adjusted dosing scheme (5mg &lt;50kg, 7.5mg in 50-100kg, 10mg &gt;100kg) were performed: one doubleblind  enoxaparin-controlled  study  in  the  curative  treatment  of  DVT  (MATISSE-DVT-  study EFC2441) and one open-label UFH-controlled study in the curative treatment of PE (MATISSE-PEstudy 63121). All studies were performed in compliance with the GCP regulations effective in Europe, North  America  and  Australia.  In  addition,  clinical  protocols,  amendments  to  the  protocols,  patient informed  consents  were  reviewed  and  approved  by  independent  Ethics  Committee  or  Institutional Review Board. Overall, the development program randomised 4,874 patients, as follows.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetics Bioequivalence The clinical formulation employed in the phase II and phase III Matisse-DVT study was identical to that used for the clinical trials presented in the original prophylaxis dossier. In the formulation used for the other phase III study (Matisse-PE), the fondaparinux sodium concentration was increased to 12.5 mg/ml in anticipation of the market formulation. The bioequivalence of the new formulation and the reference formulation has been shown with respect to both rate and extent of absorption. Pharmacokinetics in target population The pharmacokinetics were evaluated on Days 1 and 5. The results show a tendency towards a nonproportional  dose-concentration  relationship  (AUC  is  increased  by  50%  when  doubling  the  dose) indicating  that  a  non-linear  process  is  occurring.  It  has  been  previously  shown in  vitro that  protein binding is saturated above 2 mg/l. Since the effect and bleeding events of fondaparinux are related to drug bound to antithrombin, saturated binding could hypothetically result in approaching the maximal effect.  Further  to  a  request  from  CHMP,  the  Applicant  has  provided  data  showing  that,  within  the concentration range achieved with 5-10 mg fondaparinux once daily (up to 3 mg/l), AT III binding is not saturated. Increasing the dose further may result in a saturation of AT III binding. A comparison of steady state plasma concentrations observed in patients with DVT at a regimen of 10 mg  fondaparinux  (study  DRI2440) with  data  obtained  in  healthy  volunteer  studies  (previous dossier) indicates a close similarity in the PK of fondaparinux in the 2 populations, suggesting that the PK observations in previous studies in healthy volunteers hold true for the patient population under discussion. In addition, a detailed NONMEM population PK analysis was conducted pooling all PK data obtained in  studies  DRI2440,  EFC2441  and  63121  investigating  numerous  possible  covariate  relationships (gender, age, body weight, renal function, etc) and their effect on the kinetics of fondaparinux. Renal function  was  identified  as  the  most  important  covariate  affecting  clearance,  and  the  simulations demonstrated  that  with  dosage  adjusted  to  renal  function,  variability  in  exposure  can  be  reduced. Hence, for fondaparinux, dosage primarily according to renal function would be the optimal posology. However, given the data available, the CHMP did not find that a change from the weight-based dosage used in clinical trials to renal function-based dosage would be possible in the present application.

Having identified renal function as the most important variable affecting exposure to fondaparinux, the CHMP raised several questions to better understand the kinetic and dynamic findings in patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with  moderate  or  severe  renal  impairment.  As  seen  from  the  applicant's  response,  the  numbers  of subjects  with  CLcr  30-40  and  40-50  ml/min  are  fairly  large  (129  and  189,  respectively).  Although there is a clear trend to increased incidence of VTE and bleedings in severe renal impairment (CLcr 20-30 ml/min) - see below, the data for patients with  moderate  renal impairment do not  raise new concerns and do not reveal any clear differences between patients with CLcr 30-40 and 40-50 ml/min. It should be noted, however, that the majority of patients with moderate renal impairment had a body weight of 50-100 kg and that there is truly limited information in patients with low body weight and moderate renal impairment, and no information in patients with high body weight and moderate renal impairment.

Two additional pharmacodynamic studies have been submitted in support of the present application. The first is the investigation of the dose-response relationship within the phase II Rembrandt study with respect to PD markers such as the thrombin-antithrombin complex, D-dimer, aPTT - for details of the study design see later. Decreases in D-dimers and TAT levels, the latter somewhat dose-related, were observed on Day 5 ± 1  in  the  4  treatment  groups  (5,  7.5  and  10  mg  fondaparinux  sodium,  and dalteparin  sodium),  without  significant  differences  between  groups.  A  slight  increase  in  aPTT  was observed on Day 7±1 in the 3 fondaparinux treatment groups and in the dalteparin sodium group in the

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Patients with Severe renal impairment (CL cr &lt;30 ml/min) Patients with CLcr 20-30 ml/min treated with fondaparinux is a small subgroup (n=57) which showed an increased rate of major bleeding, an increased rate of 'any bleeding', an increased frequency of transfusion, and an increased frequency of haemoglobin (Hb) decrease ≥ 2 g/dl, compared with both enoxaparin  and  UFH.  This  applies  specifically  in  patients  with  body  weight  between  50-100  kg (n=36).  Almost  no  clinical  information  is  available  in  severe  renally  impaired  patients  with  low  or high body weight. Based on the paucity of clinical experience, the CHMP considers that fondaparinux should  be  contra-indicated  in  patients  with  severe  renal  failure  (CLcr  &lt;30  ml/min),  regardless  of bodyweight. Patients with Moderate renal impairment (CL cr 30-50 ml/min) The phase III data obtained in a large number of 50-100 kg patients with moderate renal failure treated with fondaparinux showed that the safety of fondaparinux was at least similar to that of enoxaparin or UFH, both in fondaparinux patients with either CLcr 40-50 ml/min (n=189) or CLcr 30-40 ml/min (n=129). Thus, in 50-100 kg patients with  moderate renal failure treated with 7.5  mg fondaparinux there was no increase in either 'major bleeding' or 'any bleeding', and no increase in the percentage of patients requiring transfusion nor in the percentage of patients with Hb decrease ≥ 2 g/dl compared with patients on enoxaparin or UFH. The CHMP therefore accept that the study dose regimen of 7.5 mg daily should be the SPC dose regimen in these patients. There is no clinical experience in patients weighing &gt;100 kg with moderate renal impairment. This is reflected in the SPC. As the pharmacokinetics of fondaparinux are more dependent on renal function than on body weight, heavy weight patients with moderate renal impairment are expected to have an increased  exposure  with  the  10  mg  dose  used  in  clinical  trials.  A  lower  dose  might  be  sufficient; indeed, a subsequent pharmacokinetic analysis has shown that this sub-group is expected to have a mean AUC up to 35 mg ⋅ h/l. Reducing the dose to 7.5 mg would reduce the exposure to a mean AUC of  up  to  27  mg ⋅ h/l,  which  would be more in line with the exposure in normal weight patients with moderate  renal  impairment.  If  fondaparinux  administration  is  necessary  in  this  patient  group,  and based on PK simulation data, a reduction of the daily dose to 7.5 mg daily may be considered (after an initial 10 mg dose on Day 1 if renal status is not available at the time of starting treatment). Appropriate warnings in patients of low body weight and patients of high body weight with moderate renal impairment have been added to the SPC. Pharmacodynamics The clinical pharmacology of fondaparinux was reviewed in the original application for prophylactic use  in  MOSLL.  As  a  result  of  its  specific  anti-factor  Xa  activity,  fondaparinux  at  prophylactic concentrations produces minimal changes in aPTT, activated clotting time, INR, or thrombin time.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

presence of concomitant VKA therapy. The changes in aPTT seem dose-dependent but moderate, of similar  amplitude  to  those  observed  with  dalteparin  and  difficult  to  interpret  in  the  presence  of concomitant  VKA  treatment.  Thus,  monitoring  of  the  pharmacodynamic  activity  of  fondaparinux sodium by aPTT does not seem appropriate.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Fondaparinux sodium has been shown in healthy subjects not to interact with the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin. During the VTE treatment studies, the pharmacodynamic activity of VKA (started within 72 hours of randomisation) was assessed by INR. No differences between the treatment groups were recorded in either the mean INR values achieved at the end of the study drug administration  period  or  in  the  time  to  reach  an  INR ≥ 2.0.  Somewhat  more  fondaparinux  treated patients had an INR &gt;3 at the time of study drug discontinuation as compared with the active controls. Unfortunately,  the  mean  doses  of  VKA  at  discontinuation  of  study  drug  in  the  different  treatment groups, requested by CHMP, were not recorded during the studies. The Applicant has subsequently clarified that fondaparinux increases the prothrombin time to a slight extent, an effect judged to be of minor clinical relevance. Age and renal function play a major role on fondaparinux elimination and there is an increased risk of dangerously high levels in these fragile populations. Further to a request from CHMP, the Applicant has addressed the question of whether  indirectly monitoring fondaparinux concentrations by measuring plasma factor Xa levels could be considered in fragile patients. The Applicant refers to the difficulties in defining a therapeutic range and concludes that it is not useful. However, the treating physician  to  have  the  possibility  to  check  the  plasma  levels  achieved  in  fragile  patients,  especially when  treatment  is  prolonged  may  in  selected  cases  regard  it  as  desirable.  The  situation  can  be compared to that of LMWH, where monitoring of plasma levels is seldom part of clinical routine but can  be  easily  determined  by  chromogenic  substrate  tests  in  selected  cases.  Similar  tests  could  be performed for estimation of fondaparinux concentrations. To this effect, and despite the absence of a treatment  target  range,  information  on  the  fondaparinux  plasma  concentrations  obtained  during treatment  with  fondaparinux in the clinical  studies  (as  estimated  by  FXa  inhibition assay)  has  been provided in the SPC. Further to a request from CHMP it has been demonstrated that the concentration of antithrombin is not significantly reduced during short-term treatment with fondaparinux. In addition, an in vitro study of the inhibition rate constants for different coagulation factors seems to demonstrate that fondaparinux inhibits activated factor IX substantially less than UFH  and  LMWH  at  the  typical molar concentrations  achieved  during  treatment.  The  inhibition  of  FVIIa  by  fondaparinux  and  LMWH, however, seems to be comparable at these concentrations. The  other  pharmacodynamic  study  (63128)  was  undertaken  to  address  the  uncertainty  of  how  to clinically  handle  a  major  bleeding  event  during  fondaparinux treatment, considering the rather long half life of the agent and the lack of antidotes with documented efficacy. It was a phase I interaction study to investigate the PK and PD of recombinant factor VIIa (rVIIa; 90 µ g/kg IV) on the inhibition of thrombin generation by Quixidar (10 mg sc) in 16 healthy male volunteers. The results showed that rVIIa  partially reverses the  pharmacological  effect  of  fondaparinux  and  in  fact  activates  the coagulation cascade. However, the observed effect was only partial and some inhibition of factor Xa persisted. Therefore, an increased bleeding tendency may continue that requires additional awareness. There is  not  yet  any  clinical  evidence  available  on  the  translation  of  the  reversal  properties  of  this agent into a rapid cessation of bleeding complications and whether the counteracting pharmacological effect of recombinant factor VIIa would not lead to a procoagulant status. In view of the above, it is premature to include  a  recommendation  in  the  SmPC  to  use  rVIIa  in  case  of  severe  uncontrollable bleeding. Discussion

The main discussion at CHMP has centred around the most appropriate dosing schedule. The 2 main alternatives considered were either according to body weight, as used in the pivotal phase III trials and proposed  by  the  MAH,  or  according  to  renal  function  using  creatinine  clearance  cut-off  values  to recommend particular doses - see clinical efficay discussion for more details.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Unfortunately,  there  are  few  PK  data  in  patients  with  Major  Bleedings  and,  as  discussed  for  the original prophylaxis dossier, it is not possible to determine an exposure (ie. Anti-Xa) cut-off value that would predict a higher risk of bleeding or VTE recurrence.

Finally, the results of a pharmacodynamic study failed to show an effective antiacoagulant profile of rVIIa.  Hence,  to  date,  there  is  no  known  antidote  to  fondaparinux,  and  this  has  been  included  in section 4.9 of the SPC.

|                  | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Dalteparin     |
|------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------------|
| Positive Outcome | 5 mg (N=84)           | 7.5 mg (N=99)         | 10 mg (N=106)         | Total (N=289)         | Sodium (N=107) |
| n (%)            | 39 (46.4%)            | 49 (49.5%)            | 46 (43.4%)            | 134 (46.4%)           | 50 (46.7%)     |
| 95% CI           | [35.47; 57.65]        | [39.29; 59.73]        | [33.80; 53.37]        | [40.51; 52.30]        | [37.02; 56.62] |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Clinical efficacy Dose response studies Study DRI2440 is the basis for the dose selection for the pivotal studies. This study was a multicentre, randomised, double-blind study testing in parallel 5, 7,5 and 10 mg of fondaparinux once daily by sc injections  versus  dalteparin  in  the  initial  treatment  of  DVT  without  symptomatic  PE.  Fondaparinux was  administered  for  a  minimum  of  5  days  and  until  the  INR  was ≥ 2.0  at  two  consecutive measurements and up to a maximum of 10 days. An oral AVK, adjusted for INR between 2 and 3, was initiated on day 1 or day 2 and continued for 3 months. Males or females (of non-childbearing potential or with negative pregnancy tests and contraceptive protection)  of  18  years  or  older  with  a  compression  ultrasonography  (US)-confirmed  symptomatic proximal DVT were included. Main exclusion criteria were symptomatic PE, body weight &lt;50 kg or &gt;100 kg and known renal insufficiency. The intention to treat (ITT) population included 438 patients, of which 396 were included in the per protocol (PP) population. The primary efficacy endpoint was  the  change  (improvement, no change or worsening of thrombus mass) between baseline and Day 7±1 in the composite of US of the venous bed of the lower limbs and perfusion  lung  scan  (PLS).  A  positive  outcome  was  defined  as  an  improvement  in  US  and/or  PLS results  without  deterioration  of  either  test,  and  a  negative  outcome  resulted  in  all  other  instances, including  death  occurring  less  than  24  hours  following  the  last  day  of  study  drug  administration. Secondary efficacy criteria were the incidence of patients with symptomatic recurrence or extension of VTE during the entire study (including the study drug period from day 1 up to 48 hours after the last administration and a follow-up up to day 90), and the US and PLS results analysed separately. The primary  safety  endpoint was  the  incidence  of  major  and  minor  bleeding  events.  Related  bleeding criteria were assessed by haemoglobin (Hb) levels and transfusions. Primary and secondary efficacy endpoints,  the  primary  safety  endpoint  and  death  were  evaluated  blindly  by  an  independent adjudication committee (IAC). Results The  following  tables  present  the  PP  population  results;  similar  results  were  observed  for  the  ITT population. Table 1 Primary endpoint: Number (%) of patients with a positive outcome Positive Outcome n (%) 95% CI No dose effect was observed for the primary endpoint. Pairwise comparisons between the different dose groups or between these groups and the dalteparin sodium group did not show any significant differences. Similarly, the comparison of the pooled fondaparinux results with the dalteparin group did not show a significant difference [relative risk of 0.992 (95% CI: 0.76; 1.34)].

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2 - Number (%) of patients with worsening, no change or improvement in US

|                     | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Dalteparin     |
|---------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------------|
| Outcome (Day 7±1)   | 5 mg (N=84)           | 7.5 mg (N=99)         | 10 mg (N=106)         | Total (N=289)         | Sodium (N=107) |
| Improvement         | 29 (34.9%)            | 25 (25.3%)            | 32 (30.5%)            | 86 (30.0%)            | 33 (30.8%)     |
| No change           | 49 (59.0%)            | 70 (70.7%)            | 67 (63.8%)            | 186 (64.8%)           | 70 (65.4%)     |
| Worsening           | 5 (6.0%)              | 4 (4.0%)              | 6 (5.7%)              | 15 (5.2%)             | 4 (3.7%)       |
| Inadequate/not done | 1                     | 0                     | 1                     | 2                     | 0              |

|                            |                                 | Fondaparinux Sodium              | Fondaparinux Sodium            | Fondaparinux Sodium            | Fondaparinux Sodium              | Dalteparin Sodium                |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| Conclusion on Baseline PLS | Outcome (Day 7±1)               | 5 mg (N=84)                      | 7.5 mg (N=99)                  | 10 mg (N=106)                  | Total (N=289)                    | (N=107)                          |
| No perfusion defect        | Unchanged Worsening             | 13 (15.5%) 1 (1.2%)              | 10 (10.1%) 1 (1.0%)            | 29 (27.4%) 1 (0.9%)            | 52 (18.0%) 3 (1.0%)              | 14 (13.1%) 0 (0.0%)              |
| Perfusion defect           | Improvement Unchanged Worsening | 23 (27.4%) 37 (44.0%) 10 (11.9%) | 45 (45.5%) 36 (36.4%) 7 (7.1%) | 31 (29.2%) 37 (34.9%) 8 (7.5%) | 99 (34.3%) 110 (38.1%) 25 (8.7%) | 31 (29.0%) 49 (45.8%) 13 (12.1%) |
| Whatever the baseline      | Improvement Unchanged Worsening | 23 (27.4%) 50 (59.5%) 11 (13.1%) | 45 (45.5%) 46 (46.5%) 8 (8.1%) | 31 (29.2%) 66 (62.3%) 9 (8.5%) | 99 (34.3%) 162 (56.1%) 28 (9.7%) | 31 (29.0%) 63 (58.9%) 13 (12.1%) |

|                  | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Dalteparin Sodium   |
|------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|
| Symptomatic VTEs | 5 mg (N=103)          | 7.5 mg (N=111)        | no 10 mg (N=120)      | Total (N=334)         | (N=119)             |
| DVT alone        | 2 (1.9%)              | 2 (1.8%)              | 1 (0.8%)              | 5 (1.5%)              | 3 (2.5%)            |
| Non-fatal PE     | 0 (0.0%)              | 0 (0.0%)              | 3 (2.5%)              | 3 (0.9%)              | 3 (2.5%)            |
| Total VTE        | 2 (1.9%)              | 2 (1.8%)              | 4 (3.3%)              | 8 (2.4%)              | 6 (5.0%)            |
| 95% CI           | [0.24; 6.84]          | [0.22; 6.36]          | [0.92; 8.31]          | [1.04; 4.66]          | [1.87; 10.65]       |

|                     | Fondaparinux           | Fondaparinux            | Fondaparinux           | Fondaparinux               | Dalteparin               |
|---------------------|------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------|
| Patients With       | 5 mg (N=103)           | 7.5 mg (N=111)          | 10 mg (N=120)          | Total Fondaparinux (N=334) | (N=119)                  |
| Major Bleeding (MB) | 3 (2.91) [0.60; 8.28]  | 2 (1.80) [0.22 ; 6.36 ] | 1 (0.83) [0.02; 4.56 ] | 6 (1.80) [0.66; 3.87]      | 0 (0.00) [0.00; 3.05]    |
| Minor bleeding only | 5 (4.85) [1.59; 10.97] | 7 (6.31) [2.57; 12.56]  | 5 (4.17) [1.37; 9.46]  | 17 (5.09) [2.99; 8.02]     | 13 (10.92) [5.95; 17.96] |
| All bleedings       | 8 (7.77) [3.41; 14.73] | 9 (8.11) [3.77; 14.83]  | 6 (5.00) [1.86; 10.57] | 23 (6.89) [4.42; 10.15]    | 13 (10.92) [5.95; 17.96] |

No fatal  bleeding  and  no  bleeding  into  a  critical  organ  were  adjudicated.  Four  of  the  6  MB  events occurred  at  the  site  of  a  cancer  lesion  (two  each  in  the  5  mg  and  7.5  mg  groups),  one  (thigh haematoma in  the  5  mg  group)  occurred  in  the  presence  of  a  high  INR  (4.7  and  4.4)  on  the  days preceding the day of the symptom, and one was an abdominal wall haematoma at the injection site reported in the 10 mg group.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 3 - Number (%) of patients with worsening, no change or improvement in PLS results While there was no obvious dose effect for the US evaluation, fewer patients in the 7.5 mg or 10 mg dose groups tended to experience a worsening of pulmonary perfusion defects compared with either the 5 mg fondaparinux group or the dalteparin group. Table 4 -Symptomatic adjudicated recurrent VTE occurring during the entire study - All treated patients No significant differences between the different groups were observed. However, it is worth noting that the 2 clinical recurrences in the 5 mg group occurred during the study drug treatment period. Regarding the safety endpoints , no dose effects were observed for either 'all bleedings' or major bleedings (MB) alone. Table 5. The number (%) [95% CI] of patients with a bleeding event during the treatment period.

In  summary,  despite  the  failure  of  study  DRI2440  to  demonstrate  a  clear  dose  relationship,  the selection  of  the  dose  for  the  phase  III  studies  was  made  based  on  the  following  considerations:  i)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treatment with fondaparinux sodium 7.5 or 10 mg doses was associated with less frequent worsening of the perfusion lung scan than treatment with fondaparinux sodium 5 mg or dalteparin sodium, ii) the only clearly product-related MB with no mitigating circumstances occurred in the 10 mg group, iii) two clinical recurrences occurred in the 5 mg group during study drug treatment and iv) the thrombinantithrombin complex (TAT) levels were higher in the 5 mg dose group.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Main studies Methods The  two  multinational,  multicentre,  randomised,  parallel-group  phase  III  studies  were  of  similar design. Matisse DVT (study EFC2441) was double-blind  and included patients with confirmed (US or venography) DVT in the trifurcation of the calf veins, or more proximally. Matisse PE (study 63123) was  open-label  and  enrolled  patients  with  confirmed  (ventilation/perfusion  lung  scan,  pulmonary angiography, spiral CT) PE. Body weight-adjusted doses of fondaparinux given qd subcutaneously (5 mg &lt;50 kg, 7.5 mg for 50-100 kg, and 10 mg for &gt;100 kg) were compared with 1mg/kg enoxaparin sodium q12h in the DVT study and with an iv infusion of UFH, adjusted to aPTT (target of 1.5-2.5 x control),  in  the  PE  study.  In  both  studies,  study  drugs  were  to  be  administered  for  at  least  5 consecutive  days  and  could  be  stopped  when  the  INR  was  above  2.0  on  two  consecutive  days. Concomitant AVK therapy was to be initiated as soon as possible and usually within 72 hours after the first study drug administration (on Day 1), with dose adjustments to achieve a target INR of 2.5 (range 2.0 to 3.0), and was to be continued up to Day 90. Treatment with study drugs had to be started within 6 hours after randomisation. In Matisse PE, randomised patients could have been pre-treated with UFH during the screening phase, but  patients  that  had  been  on  anticoagulant  treatment  for  more  than  24  hours  before  randomisation were  excluded.  Other exclusion  criteria were  a  serum  creatinine  level  &gt;2.0  mg/dl  (180  µmol/l, uncontrolled hypertension, and patients requiring thrombolyis or embolectomy or vena cava filter. The primary  efficacy  endpoint for  both  studies  was  recurrent  VTE  recorded  up  to  the  end  of  the follow-up period (Day 97), as adjudicated by a blinded Central Independent Adjudication Committee (CIAC) and composed of i) symptomatic non-fatal VTE (DVT and/or PE) and ii) fatal VTE (death related to VTE or for which VTE could not be ruled out). The secondary efficacy endpoints included the individual components of the primary efficacy endpoint, investigator-suspected VTE recurrences up to Day 97, and the primary endpoint at the end of the study drug treatment period. The  primary efficacy  analysis included  all  randomised  patients.  A  secondary  efficacy  analysis  was performed on the PP population. The primary analysis of both studies computed the difference in the crude VTE rates between the two treatment groups (fondaparinux minus enoxaparin or UFH) with its 2-sided 95% CI. The pre-specified non-inferiority margin for both studies was 3.5%. Results The baseline demographics and risk factors were essentially similar in both pivotal studies (EFC2441, 63123) and the dose finding study (DRI2440). Diagnostic measures and treatment compliance The duration of study drug treatment was very similar in the treatment groups in all 3 trials (mean of 7 days). The DVT diagnosis (EFC2441 study) was confirmed by US in 95%, by venography in 4% or by both in 1% of cases. The PE diagnosis (study 63123) was confirmed by either a high probability lung scan or a positive spiral CT scan (in approximately equal numbers) in the majority of cases, or by a pulmonary angiogram in 50 cases. Inclusion in study 63123 was based on a non-high probability lung scan combined with a confirmed DVT in approximately 8% of cases.

AVK was introduced on day 1 or earlier in 56% of EFC2441 patients and 60 % of 63123 patients, and the large majority of patients (98-99%) started the AVK treatment within the first 3 study days.

The main efficacy results are displayed in the tables below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 6. Study EFC2441 Summary of efficacy results up to Day 97. - Number (%) of patients,

| Endpoint     | Fondaparinux Sodium (N=1098)   | Enoxaparin Sodium (N=1107)   | 95% CI for Difference   |
|--------------|--------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Total VTE    | 43 (3.9%)                      | 45 (4.1%)                    | -1.8%; 1.5%             |
| DVT only     | 18 (1.6%)                      | 28 (2.5%)                    |                         |
| Non-fatal PE | 20 (1.8%)                      | 12 (1.1%)                    |                         |
| Fatal VTE    | 5 (0.5%)                       | 5 (0.5%)                     |                         |
| PP analysis  |                                |                              |                         |
|              | (N=988)                        | (N=976)                      |                         |
| Total VTE    | 34 (3.4%)                      | 42 (4.3%)                    | -2.6%; 0.8%             |

| Endpoint                          | Fondaparinux sodium               | UFH                               | 95% CI for difference             |
|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Primary analysis (all randomised) | Primary analysis (all randomised) | Primary analysis (all randomised) | Primary analysis (all randomised) |
| ti t )                            | N=1103                            | N=1110                            |                                   |
| Total VTE                         | 42 (3.8 %)                        | 56 (5.0 %) 17 (1.5 %)             | -3.0% - 0.5%                      |
| DVT only                          | 12 (1.1 %)                        |                                   |                                   |
| Non Fatal PE                      | 14 (1.3 %)                        | 24 (2.2 %)                        |                                   |
| Fatal event                       | 16 (1.5 %)                        | 15 (1.4 %)                        |                                   |
| PP analysis                       | PP analysis                       | PP analysis                       | PP analysis                       |
|                                   | N=920                             | N=794                             |                                   |
| Total VTE                         | 27 (2.9 %)                        | 35 (4.4 %)                        | -3.3% - 0.3%                      |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Table 7 Study 63123 Summary of efficacy results up to Day 97, - Number (%) of patients, Overall, the non-inferiority criteria were fulfilled in both studies; the upper limit of the 95% CI is well below the predefined non-inferiority margin of 3.5: 0.8 (PP) and 1.5 ('all randomised') in the DVT study and 0.3 (PP) and 0.5 ('all randomised') in the PE study. The impression from the results is that fondaparinux is approximately as efficacious as enoxaparin and at least as efficacious, possibly better, than UFH. The following graph depicts the symptomatic recurrent VTE cumulative event rates up to Day 97 in studies EFC2441 and 63123 for all randomised patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

As can be seen in the graph, in study EFC244 there were numerically more symptomatic recurrences during the study drug treatment period with fondaparinux (18 recurrences, 1.6%) than with enoxaparin (10,  0.9%),  but  this  difference  was  not  statistically  significant.  The  Applicant  has  provided  case summaries  for  all  patients  experiencing  fatal  PE  during  the  initial  treatment  period  (7 vs. 8  in  the pooled  fondaparinux  comparator  groups,  respectively)  and  no  specific  concerns  arise  from  these analyses. A lack of anti-inflammatory effects of fondaparinux, as compared with LMWH and UFH, could possibly have contributed to this numerical difference. Moreover, a reverse trend in favour of fondaparinux was observed in study 63123 as during the initial treatment period, 12 (1.1%) patients treated with fondaparinux sodium and 19 (1.7%) patients treated with UFH had a VTE endpoint.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The MAH has provided comparisons of the results in different subgroups and there is no evidence of any effect of demographic or baseline characteristics on the efficacy results. Discussion on clinical efficacy The choice of comparator, design and conduct of the dose selection study are acceptable and in line with the NfG document, although a more common approach to evaluate optimal doses for new antithrombotic agents for DVT treatment has been to use scoring systems (e.g. Marder score) based on repeated ascending venography for comparisons. The results were less informative than expected and the support for the selected doses is somewhat limited, although the MAH's arguments for the choice of 7.5 mg dose are reasonable. It should be noted that it has been difficult to demonstrate clear doseresponse relationships for other anti-thrombotic agents in earlier similar studies, also when repeated venography has been utilised The two phase III studies  are  large,  well  designed,  adequately  performed  and  are  considered  to  be informative.  Efficacy  of  fondaparinux  with  regard  to  the  composite  primary  endpoint  (non-fatal symptomatic VTE or fatal VTE) that is non-inferior to enoxaparin in DVT treatment and to UFH in PE treatment has been demonstrated. The VTE rate observed in the enoxaparin reference group was consistent with historical data and the protocol hypothesis. However, overall mortality and mortality rates  linked  to  PE  were  lower  in  the  Matisse  PE  study  when  compared  to  data  from  published registries (such as Icoper and Mappet) and data from the Columbus study. Further to a request from CHMP it has become apparent that the these lower rates can probably be explained by differences in the included patient populations. Thus, there is limited experience with Quixidar in haemodynamically unstable patients and no experience in patients requiring thrombolysis, embolectomy or insertion of a vena  cava  filter,  as  these  latter  3  categories  of  patients  were  excluded  from  the  Matisse-PE  trial. Therefore, the indication has been amended accordingly and a relevant warning statement has been introduced in section 4.4 of the SPC. The  major  discussion  at  CHMP  centred  on  the  most  appropriate  dosing  schedule.  The  two  main alternatives considered were dosing according to body weight, as used in the pivotal phase III trials and proposed by the MAH, or according to renal function using creatinine clearance cut-off values to recommend particular doses. The NONMEM population PK analysis indicated that dosing primarily according  to  renal  function  provided  the  most  consistent  exposure  levels  in  the  various  patient populations  and  might  be  considered  as  the  most  optimal  posology.  Thus,  several  potential  dosing schedules were discussed, notably one of 7.5 mg daily in patients with CLcr &gt; 50 ml/min and 7.5 mg on  Day  1  and  thereafter  5  mg  daily  for  CLcr  of  20-50  ml/min.  Despite  the  clear  dose-exposure relationship for bleeding (the main safety concern with Quixidar) seen in dose-ranging studies for the prophylaxis  indication,  major  bleeding  events,  as  anticipated,  were  few  in  the  studied  'treatment' population,  making  major  bleeding  a  poorly  sensitive  marker  for  detecting  differences  between subgroups or for predictions regarding risk in clinical practice. No correlation could be found in the data  submitted  for  this  application  between  exposure  and  either  efficacy  or  safety  endpoints,  and bleeding rates in patients at risk were similar between fondaparinux and the comparators. Moreover, the possibility of underexposure is a major concern when treating patients with life-threatening VTE. Therefore, in view of the available data, the CHMP decided against a change from the weight-based dosage tested in the clinical trials to a renal function-based dosage derived from kinetic modelling.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical safety

A total  of  4829  patients  were  randomised  and  treated  in  the  3  studies.  The  total  patient  population exposed is large, with 2,294 patients receiving the fondaparinux proposed dose regimen of 7.5 mg. The duration of exposure to active study drug was similar for the fondaparinux and comparator groups (mean duration 7 days) and there is limited exposure with fondaparinux (5 % of patients) beyond 10 days. This is reflected in section 4.2 of the SPC.

|                                                                                                                                                       | Fondaparinux Sodium   | Fondaparinux Sodium          | Fondaparinux Sodium     |                            |                            |              |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|--------------|
| Adjudication Criteria                                                                                                                                 | 5 mg (<50kg) (N=103)  | no Proposed Regimen (N=2294) | 10 mg (>100 kg) (N=120) | Daltepari n Sodium (N=119) | Enoxaparin Sodium (N=1101) | UFH (N=1092) |
| Any major bleeding                                                                                                                                    | 3 (2.9%)              | 28 (1.2%)                    | 1 (0.8%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 13 (1.2%)                  | 12 (1.1%)    |
| Bleeding event contributing to death during treatment period                                                                                          | 0 (0.0%)              | 3 (0.1%)                     | 0 (0.0%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 0 (0.0%)                   | 1 (0.1%)     |
| Non-fatal clinically overt bleeding within a critical organ                                                                                           | 0 (0.0%)              | 3 (0.1%)                     | 0 (0.0%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 0 (0.0%)                   | 1 (0.1%)     |
| - intracranial                                                                                                                                        | 0 (0.0%)              | 3 (0.1%)                     | 0 (0.0%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 0 (0.0%)                   | 0 (0.0%)     |
| - retroperitoneal                                                                                                                                     | 0 (0.0%)              | 0 (0.0%)                     | 0 (0.0%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 0 (0.0%)                   | 1 (0.1%)     |
| Product Non-fatal clinically overt bleeding associated with a fall in Hb ≥ 2 g/dl and/or leading to a transfusion of ≥ 2 units of PRBC or whole blood | 3 (2.9%)              | 22 (1.0%)                    | 1 (0.8%)                | 0 (0.0%)                   | 13 (1.2%)                  | 10 (0.9%)    |

<!-- image -->

The  percentages  of  transfused  patients  during  the  study  drug  treatment  period  were  similar  across treatment  groups  (1,5,  2.0,  1.8%  in  the  fondaparinux,  enoxaparin,  UFH  groups,  respectively). Significantly  more  fondaparinux  patients  tended  to  experience  a  Hb  decrease  of ≥ 2  g/dl  than enoxaparin  patients,  and  a  similar  trend  was  observed  for  the  incidence  of  a  Hb  &lt;8  g/l.  However, UFH-treated patients had the highest incidences in these parameters (Table 9).

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The incidence of SAEs grouped by WHO organ class was low, dominated by bleedings and with no differences between the treatment groups. The overall rate of permanent study drug treatment discontinuation due to AEs was low and similar in the fondaparinux and enoxaparin treatment groups (1.6 % and 2.3 %, respectively). In MATISSE-PE, it  was  slightly  lower  in  the  fondaparinux  than  in  the  UFH  treatment  group  (2.0  %  and  3.2%, respectively, excluding deaths). Bleeding and bleeding-related criteria The percentages of patients with major bleedings (MB) were similar between fondaparinux and the comparator groups during the study drug treatment period and during the whole study period. Most clinically  overt  MB  were  considered  major  because  of  a  fall  in  Hb  and/or  the  need  for  blood transfusion, and there was a slight tendency for more clinically serious bleedings in the fondaparinux group during the study drug treatment period. Table 8 - Number (%) of patients with MB events during study drug treatment period by adjudication criterion - As treated patients * it should be noted that for these 3 cases of intracranial haemorrhage one occurred following thrombolytic treatment of the PE and concomitant administration of UFH and aspirin, another in a patient who received only one injection of fondaparinux sodium and then received UFH and argatroban before occurrence of bleeding and the last one was multifocal intracranial bleeding in a patient with prostate cancer and high INR values (&gt;7). Most of the patients who experienced fatal bleeds or bleeds into a critical organ had clear risk factors for  increased  bleeding  (malignancy,  cachexia,  administration  of  other  antihaemostatic  drugs).  In patients with major bleeding, 'Supratherapeutic' INR (i.e. &gt;3) was more frequently observed at the time of bleeding in the fondaparinux patients (12 out of 28 MBs) than with the comparators (6 out of 27 in the UFH/enoxaparin groups combined).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 9 - Number (%) of patients with a Hb &lt;8 g/dl after start of study treatment and/or a decrease ≥ 2 g/dl between baseline and the end of study drug treatment - As treated patients

|                     | Fondaparinux Sodium      | Fondaparinux Sodium       | Fondaparinux Sodium       | Dalteparin     |                            |                |
|---------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|----------------|----------------------------|----------------|
| Haemoglobin         | 5 mg (50-100 kg) (N=103) | Proposed Regimen (N=2294) | 10 mg (50-100 kg) (N=120) | Sodium (N=119) | Enoxaparin Sodium (N=1101) | UFH (N=1092)   |
| Value <8 g/dl a,b   | 0/100 (0.0%)             | 23/2160 (1.1%)            | 0/118 (0.0%)              | 2/116 (1.7%)   | 7/1062 (0.7%)              | 13/1014 (1.3%) |
| Decrease ≥ 2 g/dl c | 2 /86 (2.3%)             | 109/2107 (5.2%)           | 1 /94 (1.1%)              | 1 /87 (1.1%)   | 34/1053 (3.2%)             | 67/993 (6.7%)  |
| Both                | 0 /86 (0.0%)             | 13/2107 (0.6%)            | 0 /94 (0.0%)              | 0 /87 (0.0%)   | 4/1053 (0.4%)              | 5/993 (0.5%)   |

|                               | Fondaparinux Sodium              | Fondaparinux Sodium               | Fondaparinux Sodium               |                                          |                                    |                         |
|-------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Covariate                     | 5 mg (50-100 kg) (N=103) n/N (%) | Proposed regimen (N=2294) n/N (%) | 10 mg (50-100 kg) (N=120) n/N (%) | longer Dalteparin Sodium (N=119) n/N (%) | Enoxaparin Sodium (N=1101) n/N (%) | UFH (N=1092) n/N (%)    |
| Age                           |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                          |                                    |                         |
| <65 years                     | 3/48 (6.3)                       | 35/1151 (3.0)                     | 3/61 (4.9)                        | 1/48 (2.1)                               | 14/555 (2.5)                       | 29/526 (5.5)            |
| [65-75[ years                 | 2/25 (8.0)                       | 25/560 (4.5)                      | 0/38 (0.0)                        | 7/36 (19.4)                              | 10/280 (3.6)                       | 17/257 (6.6)            |
| ≥ 75 years                    | 3/30 (10.0)                      | 38/583 (6.5)                      | 3/21 (14.3)                       | 5/35 (14.3)                              | 22/266 (8.3)                       | 23/309 (7.4)            |
| Weight                        |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                          |                                    |                         |
| <50 kg [50-100] kg            | 0/0 (NA) 8/100 (8.0)             | 3/53 (5.7) 87/1986 (4.4)          | no 0/0 (NA) 6/118 (5.1)           | 1/2 (50.0) 12/115 (10.4)                 | 0/24 (0.0) 44/967 (4.6)            | 2/25 (8.0) 56/932 (6.0) |
| >100 kg                       | 0/3 (0.0)                        | 8/253 (3.2)                       | 0/2 (0.0)                         | 0/2 (0.0)                                | 2/110 (1.8)                        | 11/134 (8.2)            |
| Missing                       | 0/0 (NA)                         | 0/2 (0.0)                         | 0/0 (NA)                          | 0/0 (NA)                                 | 0/0 (NA)                           | 0/1 (0.0)               |
| Neoplastic disease            |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                          |                                    |                         |
| Active/past                   | 3/19 (15.8)                      | 28/390 (7.2)                      | 1/23 (4.3)                        | 3/20 (15.0)                              | 20/186 (10.8)                      | 13/176 (7.4)            |
| No known cancer               | 5/84 (6.0)                       | Product 70/1904 (3.7 )            | 5/97 (5.2)                        | 10/99 (10.1)                             | 26/915 (2.8)                       | 56/916 (6.1)            |
| Baseline creatinine clearance | Baseline creatinine clearance    |                                   |                                   |                                          |                                    |                         |
| Missing                       | 1/14 (7.1)                       | 3/56 (5.4)                        | 0/20 (0.0)                        | 0/25 (0.0)                               | 0/11 (0.0)                         | 1/27 (3.7)              |
| <30ml/min                     | 1/4 (25.0)                       | 8/55 (14.5)                       | 0/0 (NA)                          | 0/4 (0.0)                                | 2/18 (11.1)                        | 3/28 (10.7)             |
| [30-50[ml/min                 | 3/20 (15.0)                      | 21/318 (6.6)                      | 2/10 (20.0)                       | 4/17 (23.5)                              | 14/145 (9.7)                       | 18/162 (11.1)           |
| [50-80[ml/min                 | 0/26 (0.0)                       | 32/733 (4.4)                      | 1/41 (2.4)                        | 5/32 (15.6)                              | 17/368 (4.6)                       | 11/352 (3.1)            |
| ≥ 80ml/min                    | 3/39 (7.7)                       | 34/1132 (3.0)                     | 3/49 (6.1)                        | 4/41 (9.8)                               | 13/559 (2.3)                       | 36/523 (6.9)            |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised As  observed  in  earlier  clinical  studies  with  fondaparinux,  there  was  a  tendency  to  an  increased incidence of bleedings with decreasing weight, malignancy, decreasing GFR and increasing age (3.0% 4.5 % and 6.5 % in patients aged &lt;65 years, 65-75 and &gt;75 years, respectively). A relevant warning has been included in the SPC. Similar tendencies were seen in the comparator groups. Table 10 Number (%) of patients with bleeding events (any bleeding) during the study drug treatment period according to selected baseline covariates - As treated patients The  group  of  patients  &lt;50  Kg  and  treated  with  fondaparinux  5  mg  is  very  small  (n=53)  and  an appropriate  warning  has  been  included  in  the  SPC.  Patients  with  a  body  weight  over  100  Kg  and treated with fondaparinux 10 mg are better represented (n=253). Around 23 % of phase III patients had had relatively recent surgery, although it was more than 3 days before study inclusion. Available data on type of surgery and delay between surgery and inclusion, as well as main efficacy and safety outcomes indicate that there are no significant differences between the treatment arms.

Regarding deaths , most were related to cancer. The following table shows the Number (%) of patients who died between first injection and Day 97 by adjudication criterion.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 11

|                                        | Fondaparinux Proposed Regimen (N=2294)   | Enoxaparin Sodium (N=1101)   | UFH (N=1092)   |
|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------|
| Related to efficacy endpoint           | 19/2294(0.8%)                            | 5/1101(0.5%)                 | 15/1092(1.4%)  |
| Related to bleeding event              | 8/2294(0.3%)                             | 0/1101(0.0%)                 | 1/1092(0.1%)   |
| Related to other disease               | 76/2294(3.3%)                            | 28/1101(2.5%)                | 32/1092(2.9%)  |
| Related to cancer a                    | 52/2183(2.4%)                            | 19/1101(1.7%)                | 22/1092(2.0%)  |
| Related to other disease than cancer a | 19/2183(0.9%)                            | 9/1101(0.8%)                 | 10/1092(0.9%)  |
| Total b                                | 103/2294(4.5%)                           | 33/1101(3.0%)                | 48/1092(4.4%)  |

|                                                   | Fondaparinux    | Comparator   |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------|--------------|
| EFC2441 (DVT)                                     |                 | Enoxaparin   |
| Total deaths during initial treatment a           | longer 5 (0.5%) | 0 (0%)       |
| Total deaths between first injection and day 97 b | 41 (3.8%)       | 33 (3.0%)    |
| 63123 (PE)                                        |                 | UFH          |
| Total deaths during initial treatment c           | 9 (0.8%)        | 12 (1.1%)    |
| Total deaths between first injection and day 97 d | 57 (5.4%)       | 50 (4.6%)    |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised a. Information not available for DRI2440. b. Total deaths between first injection and Day 97 Deaths in the individual phase III studies are summarised in the following table. Table 12 a. Difference 95% CI=[0.1, 0.9%] b. Difference 95% CI=[-0.8, 2.3%] c. Difference 95% CI=[-1.1, 0.5%] d. Difference 95% CI=[-1.0, 2.6%] There  were  no  significant  differences  in  overall  3-month  mortality  rates  in  the  individual  studies. There  was,  however,  a  tendency  towards  slightly  higher  mortality  in  the  fondaparinux  group,  with increased mortality due to bleedings and a trend to increased mortality due to cancer, which has been extensively discussed during the evaluation. These observations are not judged to affect the overall benefit/risk assessment and it would appear difficult to draw any conclusions from these statistically non-significant trends. No such trends were seen in the comparison with UFH (Matisse PE study). During the study drug treatment period 14 deaths (0.6 %) were observed in the fondaparinux proposed regimen group versus 0/119 (0 %) with dalteparin, 0/1101 (0 %) with enoxaparin and 12/1092 (1.1 %) with  UFH.  In  Matisse  DVT,  deaths  during  the  study  drug  administration  period  were  significantly increased in the fondaparinux group: 5/1091 vs 0/1101 [p = 0.03 Fisher's test]. Out of the 5 deaths during fondaparinux treatment, 2 patients had a fatal bleed, 2 deaths were related to cancer, and PE could  not  be  excluded  in  1.  In  Matisse  PE  alone,  there  were  6  deaths  during  the  study  drug administration period in the fondaparinux group versus 8 in the UFH group. The case reports of the fatal cases in the Matisse DVT studies have been reviewed and no specific safety concerns arise from these analyses.

The  results  for  platelet  levels,  platelet  antibodies  and  hepatically  related  laboratory  tests  were consistent  with  previous  clinical  trials  and  post-marketing  experience,  and  no  specific  concerns  are identified in relation to the clinical laboratory results.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on clinical safety

As observed in earlier clinical studies of fondaparinux there is a tendency for an increased incidence of  bleedings  with  increasing  age,  decreasing  weight,  malignancy  and  decreasing  GFR.  The  clinical evidence and the experience from the pharmacodynamic studies point to a relation between bleeding tendency and fondaparinux exposure. Considering the pharmacokinetic characteristics of fondaparinux and the available safety data, it is considered that the adherence to the dosing recommendations and the  warnings  and  contraindications  introduced  in  the  SPC  will  ensure  an  adequate  exposure  in  the different patient subgroups.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The observations regarding the observed bleeding incidences have been extensively discussed during the evaluation. It is concluded that the bleeding tendency with fondaparinux is of the same order of magnitude as that observed with the comparators. Unfortunately, plasma samples for measurements of fondaparinux concentration in patients suffering from MB were not collected and there are insufficient PK data in patients with MB to determine an exposure (ie. Anti-Xa) cut-off value that would predict a higher risk of bleeding. The incidences of other clinical adverse events did not differ between treatment groups and the pattern for  AEs  and  SAEs  was  also  consistent.  Similarly,  no  specific  concerns  were  identified  regarding platelet  levels,  platelet  antibodies  and  hepatically  related  laboratory  tests.  Platelet  monitoring  is  not considered justified in routine clinical practice. Finally, the safety of fondaparinux at curative doses has not been assessed in patients with very  recent  surgery  (&lt;3  days),  and  has  been  adequately  reflected  with  the  inclusion  of  a warning in section 4.4 of the SPC. Overall Conclusion and Benefit Risk Assessment Quality The quality of the product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. There are no unresolved quality issues, which have a negative impact on the Benefit Risk balance of the product. Preclinical No  additional  toxicological  studies  with  higher  doses  have  been  performed.  The  animal/human exposure ratios obtained for the recommended therapeutic treatment dose of 7.5 mg are sufficient to support the  safety  of  Quixidar  for  the  intended  indication.  Nonetheless,  the  toxicological  profile  of fondaparinux is not fully characterised for this higher dose indication. Hence, the limited exposure in the repeated dose and reproduction toxicity studies has been reflected in section 5.3 of the SPC. Clinical The studies provided in support of the indications treatment of DVT and PE are large, well designed and  performed  and  are  considered  to  be  informative.  Efficacy  of  fondaparinux  with  regard  to  the composite  primary  endpoint  of  non-fatal  symptomatic  VTE  or  fatal  VTE  that  is  non-inferior  to enoxaparin in DVT treatment and to UFH in PE treatment has been demonstrated. Adequate safety has been demonstrated in patients with normal renal function and mild to moderate renal impairment with the weight based dosage regimen used in clinical trials. In patients with severe renal impairment (CLcr &lt;30 ml/min), an increased rate of 'major bleeding', an increased rate of 'any bleeding', an increased frequency of transfusion, and an increased frequency of Hb decrease ≥ 2 g/dl compared  to  both  enoxaparin  and  UFH  was  observed.  Fondaparinux  should  therefore  be  contraindicated  in  patients  with  severe  renal  failure.  There  is  no  actual  clinical  experience  in  patients weighing &gt;100 kg with moderate renal impairment. Based on pharmacokinetic modelling results, a reduction of the daily dose to 7.5 mg daily may be considered after an initial 10 mg dose on Day 1 (if renal status is not available at the time of starting treatment) in this patient group.

The once daily sc injection of fondaparinux will be easier to apply than the aPTT-adjusted IV infusion of  UFH  and  does  not  require  coagulation  monitoring  in  clinical  routine.  The  synthetic  nature  of fondaparinux  prevents  any  potential  infectious  contamination  compared  with  the  animal  sourced therapies.