---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:16:00
document_pages: 37
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/raptiva-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: raptiva-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 15.9651702
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-27 19:41:43.813159
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Raptiva. For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

2.

Efalizumab, the active ingredient of Raptiva, is a recombinant humanised monoclonal immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) antibody with immunomodulatory properties. It  binds specifically to the CD11a subunit of LFA-1 (lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1, a leukocyte cell surface protein) and inhibits the binding of LFA-1 to ICAM-1, -2, and -3 (intercellular adhesion molecules 1, 2, and 3) which  interferes  with  lymphocyte  adhesion  to  other  cell  types.    LFA-1  is  present  on  activated T-lymphocytes,  and  ICAM-1  is  up-regulated  on  endothelial  cells  and  keratinocytes  in  psoriasis

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Introduction Raptiva is indicated in the treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to, or who have a contraindication to, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies including cyclosporine, methotrexate and PUVA. An initial single dose of 0.7 mg/kg body weight is given followed by weekly injections of 1.0 mg/kg body weight, subcutaneously. The duration of therapy is 12 weeks. Therapy may be continued only in patients who responded to treatment (PGA good or better). Psoriasis  vulgaris  is  a  chronic,  inflammatory,  skin  disorder  that  affects  0.5%  up  to  3%  of  world's population.  It  is  a  T-cell  mediated  immune  disorder  in  which  CD4+  and  CD8+  memory  T  cells stimulate the hyperproliferation of keratinocytes. The disease is characterised by a fluctuating course of remissions and exacerbations. Although rarely life threatening, psoriasis is frequently disabling and often compromises quality of life. Mild psoriasis can be treated by e.g. topical corticosteroids, topical vitamin D derivatives and topical vitamin  A  derivatives  (tazarotene).  Currently  approved  therapies  for  moderate  to  severe  psoriasis include  phototherapy,  systemic  retinoids,  cyclosporine  and  methotrexate.  Based  on  historical  data (e.g.  Spuls  et  al.  Journal  of  Dermatology  1997;137:943-49,  VMR  Heyendael  et  al.  N  Engl  J  Med 2003; 349: 658-65, CEM Griffiths et al. Health Technology Assessment 2000; vol.4: No. 40, VC HO et  al.  Br  J  Dermatol  1999;  141:  283-291.),  current  therapies  appear  to  be  very  effective,  especially UVB, PUVA, methotrexate and cyclosporin; PASI75 is reached in 60 to 90 % of patients with these treatments,  retinoids  appeared  less  effective  but  still  PASI75  is  reached  in  around  50%. Treatment strategies  with  existing  therapies  are  variable  but  in  any  case,  as  soon  as  clearance  or  \"almostclearance\" is obtained, it is good practice to stop or reduce treatment doses in order to limit long-term toxicity. The  Applicant  Serono  Europe  Limited  has  submitted  an  application  for  a  European  Marketing Authorisation for its product Raptiva through the Centralised Procedure. This application concerns a complete and independent application concerning a new active substance according to article 8.3 (i). Efalizumab, the active substance of Raptiva, is a recombinant humanised monoclonal immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) antibody with immunomodulatory properties. The to-be-marketed formulation is a subcutaneous (s.c.) formulation (lyophilised powder) produced by Genentech. Most  of the non-clinical programme  was  performed,  using  an  intravenous  (i.v.) formulation  (solution)  of  efalizumab  produced  by  XOMA.  Both  the  XOMA  material  and  the Genentech material evoked the primary pharmacological response. In the clinical programme, most of the phase I- II programme was performed, using the intravenous (i.v.) formulation. In the first pivotal clinical phase III study ACD2058g  the Xoma s.c. formulation was used. In phase III study ACD2059g both formulations were used. Phase III studies ACD2390g, ACD2600g and IMP24011 used efalizumab produced by Genentech, administered subcutaneously. There is no paediatric development programme for efalizumab. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Introduction

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

plaques.  By  preventing  LFA-1/ICAM  binding,  efalizumab  may  alleviate  signs  and  symptoms  of psoriasis by inhibiting several stages in the immunologic cascade: primary T-lymphocyte activation in lymph nodes, T-lymphocyte trafficking into psoriatic lesions, T-lymphocyte interaction with keratinocytes,  secondary  activation  of  T-lymphocytes  in  plaques,  and  release  of  pro-inflammatory cytokines.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

•

Production processes and excipients were optimised over the course of the Efalizumab development. In addition, at the Phase-III stage of clinical trials the manufacturing of Raptiva was moved from the manufacturing site XOMA to Genentech. At the time point of the submission of the application for marketing authorisation, five campaigns of Efalizumab had been produced.  In brief, changes in the process included:

Medicinal product no longer authorised Composition Raptiva is provided as a lyophilised powder for injection in a single use vial, which contains a nominal amount of 125 mg of efalizumab per vial of drug product (total amount 150 mg). Reconstitution of the single-use vial with 1.3 ml of the supplied water for injections (WFI) yields approximately 1.5 ml of solution, of which 1.25 ml is retrievable with a final concentration of 100 mg/mL efalizumab. Raptiva contains as excipients sucrose (lyoprotectant), histidine (buffering agent) and polysorbate 20 (surfactant). The vial and stopper components comply with Ph. Eur. requirements. The container-closure system consists of 10 cc Type I borosilicate glass vial, 20 mm grey rubber stopper and 20 mm West cap with an aluminum seal and a plastic flip-off cap. A prefilled  diluent  syringe  delivers  1.3 mL  of  WFI,  and  will  be  included  in  the  final  drug  product package. The Type I glass syringe and plunger meet Ph. Eur. requirements. The graduation is placed with a label on the syringe. Drug Substance Nomenclature INN Name: Efalizumab Compendial Name: Not applicable Chemical Name: Recombinant humanised monoclonal antibody to CD11a USAN/BAN/JAN Name: Efalizumab CAS Registry Number: 214745-43-4 Other Names: rhuMAb CD11a, anti-CD11a, hu1124 antibody Description of the Drug Substance Efalizumab is a full-length IgG1 κ isotype antibody composed of two identical light chains (214 amino acid  residues)  and  two  identical  heavy  chains  (451  residues).  The  heavy  chain  demonstrates C-terminal  heterogeneity  and  also  contains  one  N-linked  glycosylation  site  at  asparagine  301. The oligosaccharides are of complex biantennary structures with a core fucose with the two branches terminating  mainly  with  zero,  one or  two galactose  residues.  The  approximate  molecular  weight  is 150 kD. The heavy and light chains are covalently coupled to each other through inter-chain disulfide bonds consistent with the structure of a human IgG1. Efalizumab is a humanised form of the murine monoclonal  antibody MHM24  containing  human  constant  region  sequences  and  murine  light  and heavy  chain  Complementarity  Determining  Region  (CDR)  sequences.  The human  IgG1 framework contributes to 90% of the overall protein sequence. Manufacturing Process Development Drug Substance Manufacturing Process Development

- -Minor changes to the process due to differences in the facilities, and in order to harmonise the efalizumab process with other processes at Genentech.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Changes to the cell culture process including scale-up.
- -Changes to the purification process including scale-up.
- -Changes to the formulation so as to optimise the lyophilisation process.

## Drug Substance Formulation Development

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  Phase  I  and  II  clinical  trial  (XOMA  Q3  96)  formulation  was  developed  to  target  intravenous administration  of  efalizumab.  The  drug  substance  formulation  was  changed  in  the  XOMA  Q2  99 process to allow development of a lyophilised formulation for subcutaneous administration. The  drug  substance  formulation  was  further  optimised  in  the  GNE  Q1  00  process.  The  change  in lyoprotectant to sucrose has been demonstrated not to affect the quality. Further changes to improve the    buffering  capacity  were  made.  This  formulation  was  tested  in  Phases  II  and  III  clinical  trials. The Efalizumab Drug Substance formulation has since remained the same. The  comparability  of  the  drug  substance  manufactured  in  the  various  campaigns  is  discussed  in section Characterisation and Comparabiliy . · Manufacture Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA manufactures the drug substance at commercial scale for the market. The  Drug  Substance,  efalizumab,  is  a  recombinant  monoclonal  antibody  produced  in  transfected Chinese Hamster Ovarian cells (CHO). It is manufactured by cell culture followed by a purification process.  The  fermentation  is  performed  in  appropriate  medium  supplemented  with  other  required growth factors,  trace elements and other nutrients and reagents. DEVELOPMENT GENETICS Efalizumab  is  expressed  by  Chinese  hamster  ovary  (CHO)  cells,  CHO  DP-12  cells,  a  proprietary Genentech cell  line  derived  from  CHO-DUX  B11.  The  origin  of  this  cell  line  is  traced  back  to  its origin in 1958. Efalizumab is derived from the murine monoclonal antibody MHM24. The generation of this murine antibody and its subsequent humanisation has been described in the application and in the  open scientific literature.  The  construction of the expression  plasmid  pSVSDMHM-H.SV-L has been sufficiently described and an annotated sequence map has been submitted . CHO DP-12 cells were transfected with the expression plasmid. After selection and amplification, an expansion Prebank was established and used to prepare the master cell bank (MCB). Cell Bank System, Characterisation and Testing For  the  production  of  efalizumab,  a  two-tiered  cell  bank  system  of  master  cell  bank  (MCB)  and working cell bank (WCB) has been established. The preparation of the MCB and WCB have been described. Briefly, the preliminary bank was used to prepare the MCB and the MCB was used to prepare the subsequent WCB's. Cells were cultured and expanded  in  appropriate  flasks  in  growth  medium.  The  resulting  cell  suspension  was  harvested, resuspended in medium and distributed in ampoules. The ampoules were frozen. The cell banks are expected to retain viability for an indefinite period. MCB and WCBs have been tested for the presence of contaminants. Characterization studies were performed to assess adventitious and endogenous agents and to confirm the CHO cell origin of the cell banks. Infectious retrovirus particles were not present. These results are in line with results previously reported for other retrovirus-like particles from the parental CHO-K1 cell line.

New WCB will be produced in line with the protocol that was submitted as part of ther evaluation process.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Genetic Stability

Genetic stability has been assessed by copy number analysis, restriction endonuclease mapping, and nucleotide sequence analysis. The MCB and end of production (EOP) cells were analysed. The copy number does not change between MCB and EOP, the restriction pattern is identical, and the nucleotide sequence is identical within experimental error.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Batch and Scale Definition The applicant has detailed both the definition of a batch and the actual manufacturing scale used. Fermentation and Purification Introduction The  fermentation  and  purification  process  have  been  sufficiently  described.  The  manufacturing process  has  been  defined  within  the  limits  supported  by  process  validation  and  incorporates  the experience  gained  during  development  and  full-scale  manufacturing.  Furthermore,  the  application clearly  indicates  the  pre-specified  target  parameters  used  to  define  and  operate  the  manufacturing process. The information in its entirety supports both the robustness of the purification process and demonstrates the consistent manufacture of a highly purified product. Fermentation The Efalizumab cell culture process involves three stages: seed train, inoculum train, and the actual production culture using CHO cells in suspension. The fermentation process has been defined and described. Briefly, the seed train is a continuous long term, culture of cells. The seed train is grown in medium. The inoculum train is used to expand cells from  the  seed  train  to  a  full-scale  production  culture.  It  consists  of    cultures  of  increasing  size. The culture is  grown in  medium. One batch of harvested cell culture fluid (HCCF) is obtained per culture.  Data from the  batches submitted sufficiently justify that a target harvest of the  production culture at a defined time of culture assures a consistent product. Purification The drug substance purification process consists of a number of defined steps leading to manufacture of the Drug Substance. The purification process has been adequately described. The purification steps include chromatography, viral and ultra/diafiltration and are designed to run continuously and step duration times  have  been  given  based  on  the  current  manufacturing  experience.  After  these  steps,  the  drug substance (formulated bulk) is formulated by the addition of polysorbate 20 and sucrose. The sanitisation/regeneration procedures of the chromatography columns have been clearly described and it was sufficiently assured that no virus carry-over occurs with the re-use of the resin/columns. The lifetime of chromatography columns was set based on results from reuse studies. Consistency of chromatography runs is assured by step yield action limits based on currently available data. Acceptable  criteria  have  been  set  for  the  performance  of  the  UF/DF  membrane.  The  prevention  of carry-over of viruses is sufficiently assured by the described and validated sanitisation . · Control of Critical Steps and Intermediates The manufacturing process of the drug substance is monitored by appropriate in-process controls. The drug substance manufacturing process is designed to operate continuously without in-process hold steps.  On  occasion  it  may  be  necessary  to  store  an  intemediat  before  proceeding  to  the  next  step. The  applicant  has  performed  hoding  time  studies,  in  which  the  stability  of  all  intermediates  stored during production has been studied and is satisfactorily described.

## · Process Validation

Consistency of the cell culture process was validated and shown using full-scale runs.  The process was evaluated for robustness and reproducibility.  It was demonstrated that the cell culture process

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

consistently  yields  material  suitable  for  purification.  Consistency  of  the  purification  process  was validated and shown using several consecutive full-scale runs conducted at the Genentech South San Francisco facility.  The  process  was  evaluated  for robustness  and  reproducibility  with  respect  to  the removal of cell substrate impurities, process-related impurities and product-related  impurities, viral clearance  and  step  yields.  It  was  demonstrated  that  the  purification  process  yields  consistent intermediates and a consistent product. Consistency of product yield for each step and the process as a whole was demonstrated.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Characterisation and Comparability The  applicant  performed  an  extensive  characterisation  study  to  elucidate  the  structure  and  other characteristics of Efalizumab. The reference material has been subjected to a throughout characterisation.  To  evaluate  the  comparability  of  the  active  substance,  samples  representing  the different  campaigns  have  also  been  characterised.  The  samples  that  were  analysed  included  the qualification batches. All batches, except one were used in Phase III clinical trials. Physiochemical Characterisation The physiochemical characterisation studies have been performed employing state of the art methods. (Edman degradation; endoproteinase Lys-C peptide map analysis in combination with MS analysis; ESI-MS analysis; Ellman analysis (using DTNB); CE-SDS analysis; Peptide N-Glycosidase F digest in  combination  with  MALDI-TOF/MS;  boronate  chromatography;  cIEF;  SEC;  HP-IEC).  General information on the methods used has been given. The  results  for  the  reference  material  and  the  batches  analysed  were  provided  in  the  application. Confirmation that the protein structure was consistent throughout the batches tested and as expected from the primary sequence was obtained. -The expected masses were confirmed. -The expected N-terminal sequences of the light and heavy chain were also confirmed. -Besides the charge heterogeneity caused by enzymatic C-terminal processing, additional charge variants,  mainly  from  chemical  modifications,  were  found.  The  variants  are  fully  active  as determined by the cell adherence inhibition assay. -Seven glycation sites were identified. -Confirmation of the expected glycosylation for an antibody produced in CHO cells was found. Biological Characterisation Efalizumab blocks the binding of the CD11a subunit of the lymphocyte-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). The epitope recognized by the murine parent antibody of Efalizumab was mapped. As  shown  in  the  biological  characterisation  studies,  by  blocking  LFA-1  from  binding  to  ICAM-1 Efalizumab is able to elicit the following in vitro biological responses: -Inhibition of the mixed lymphocyte response -Inhibition of T-cell activation -Down-modulation of CD11a on T-cells -Inhibition of T-lymphocyte adhesion to human endothelia cells -Inhibition of transendothelia T-cell migration Efalizumab  binds  poorly  to  complement  protein  C1q  and  does  not  display  complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC). Efalizumab is recognised by the Fc γ receptor  series  (Fc γ RI,  Fc γ RIIA, Fc γ RIIB and Fc γ RIIIA). Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) activity is minimal and depends on the level of CD11a expression on the target cell. Comparability of XOMA and Genentech Material The results from the biological characterisation studies demonstrated comparable in  vitro biological activity of XOMA and Genentech material.

Physiochemical characterisation studies revealed differences in glycosylation, C-terminal and charge heterogenity  of  the  drug  substance  produced  at  XOMA  and  Genentech.Based  on  these  results  the CHMP concluded, that the Xoma and Genentech batches were not physicochemically  comparable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Consequently, clinical efficacy and safety data with Genetech material were considered pivotal and data with XOMA material were only considered supportive.

- Drug Substance Specification

Medicinal product no longer authorised Appropriate specifications for the drug substance have been set and justified. The  test  methods  have  been  sufficiently  described  and  validated  according  to  ICH  guidelines. Appropriate  reference  material  has  been  qualified.  The  stability  of  the  reference  material  will  be monitored.  The tests developed include identity tests, purity tests and assays, including a biological assay for potency testing purposes.  The bioassay was sufficiently validated. Batch Analysis Data Batch analysis data were provided. The results from the qualification batches were within the drug substance specifications. · Container Closure System The drug substance is stored in tanks for long term storage. The containers-closure system of these tanks has been sufficiently described. · Drug Substance Stability The applicant provided sufficient stability data during the evaluation process to support the proposed shelf-life for the drug substance. Drug Product · Pharmaceutical Development DRUG PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT The  liquid  and  the  lyophilised  formulation  development  have  been  thoroughly  described  and  the rationale for the selection  of the excipients (sucrose, histidine, polysorbate 20) has been adequately addressed and justified. No novel excipients and no excipients of animal or human origin are used. Minor changes have been made in the manufacturing process of the drug product. These have been adequately addressed and analytical data confirm comparability.  Primary container components are standard for the product type and acceptable. COMPARABILITY OF CLINICAL TRIAL BATCHES WITH TO-BE-MARKETED BATCHES The development of the drug substance manufacturing process and the comparability of the clinical trial material produced at XOMA and Genentech with batches intended for marketing were discussed. In summary, given the changes introduced, the CHMP concluded, that the assessment of the clinical efficacy and safety of Raptiva should be based on clinical trials performed with batches produced at Genentech, the to-be-marketed product. · Manufacture of Drug Product MANUFACTURING

Details on the manufacturers have been provided. All manufacturing operations for the drug product are  performed  by  Genentech,  South  San  Francisco,  CA,  USA.  Manufacturing  operations  for  the solvent in the prefilled syringes (sterile WFI) are performed at Baxter Pharmaceutical Solutions LLC, Bloomington,  IN,  USA.  Packaging  and  labelling  of  the  drug  product  and  pre-filled  syringe  are performed at Industria Farmaceutica Serono SpA, Bari, IT or Laboratories Serono S.A., in Aubonne and Coinsins, CH. The manufacturer responsible for batch release is Industria Farmaceutica Serono SpA, Guidonia Montecelio, IT.

The batch formula for minimal and maximal batch sizes have been provided.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  drug  product  manufacturing  process  together  with  the  in-process  controls  has  been  adequately described. The processes are standard manufacturing processes for the production of parenterals and include sterile filtration, aseptic filling, lyophilisation and labelling and packaging.

In-process controls and the corresponding acceptance criteria are described. Maximum process times and condition have been set for all critical steps performed at other temperatures than the proposed storage conditions. The times are adequately supported by data. Validation

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  critical steps in the manufacture of the medicinal product have been validated.  These include sterile filtration, steriliation of equipment and lyophilisation. · Drug Product Specification Drug product specifications for release and end-of-shelf life have been submitted.  The specification includes identity tests, purity tests and assays. · Batch Analysis Data Batch analysis data has been presented. All batches met the specifications. · Container Closure System The  components  of  the  container-closure  system  of  the  drug  product  are  described  in  the  section Composition of this report. · Stability of the Product Stability data for the drug product was generated from ongoing extensive stability studies. All  submitted  real  time/real  temperature  stability  data  met  the  specifications.  In  summary,  the submitted stability data support the proposed shelf life of 24 months at 2-8 o C . The  submitted  stability  documentation  on  the  diluent  in  the  prefilled  syringe  was  considered acceptable to support a shelf-life of 24 months. Adventitious Agents Safety Evaluation The viral safety of Raptiva has been adequately investigated and is sufficiently justified. Furthermore the safety of Raptiva with regard to other adventitious agents (including TSE) has been sufficiently assured. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects In general, the different aspects of the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological documentation comply with existing guidelines. The information provided in the application demonstrated consistent batchto-batch  production  of  Raptiva  achieving  a  defined  quality  for  the  drug  substance  and  the  drug product. The cell culture and purification of the drug substance, efalizumab, are adequately controlled and validated. Appropriate drug substance specifications have been set. The drug substance has been well characterised with regard to its physicochemical and biological characteristics using state-of theart  methods.  The  manufacturing  process  of  the  drug  product  has  been  described  and  validated  in sufficient  detail.  The  quality  of  the  drug  product  is  controlled  by  adequate  test  methods  and specifications. The viral safety and the safety concerning other adventitious agents (including TSE) have been sufficiently assured. On the basis of the data provided and the agreed follow-up measures, the quality of the product is satisfactory for the grant of a Marketing Authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Introduction

Efalizumab  does  not  cross-react  with  CD11a  from  species  other  than  humans  and  a  non-human primate. Therefore, conventional non-clinical safety data with the medicinal product were limited.

<!-- image -->

A comparison of binding characteristics of efalizumab manufactured at the two different manufacturing sites, Genentech and XOMA, to human and a non-human primate lymphocytes showed that  efalizumab  from  either  site  binds  with  similar  affinity  to  CD11a  on  human  and  non-human primate T lymphocytes.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Non-clinical in  vivo assessments  of  efalizumab  per  se  were  confined  to  a  non-human  primate. A number of constraints prevented a full histopathological evaluation which limited the value of the studies carried out to determine the safety of efalizumab. To have a more comprehensive safety evaluation, muM17, a chimeric rat/mouse anti-mouse CD11a antibody, was developed as a surrogate for efalizumab. Pharmacology studies  of  efalizumab  were  undertaken in  vitro with  human  and  non-human  primate lymphocytes, and in vivo in a non-human primateas part of ADME and safety studies. In vitro and in vivo pharmacology studies were also conducted with muM17 in mice to evaluate the acceptability of this antibody as a surrogate for efalizumab. Intravenous  (IV)  and  subcutaneous  (SC)  pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic  (PK/PD)  studies  of efalizumab were conducted in a non-human primate, and IV and SC PK/PD studies of muM17 were conducted in mice. Safety pharmacology parameters were incorporated in repeat dose toxicity studies with efalizumab and muM17. In addition, rabbits were used to assess pharmacokinetic comparability of the XOMA and Genentechmanufactured efalizumab. Efalizumab  was  evaluated  in  non-human  primate  IV  toxicity  studies  of  up  to  6  months  duration. In mice, repeat dose SC toxicity studies of up to 4 weeks duration, including an immunotoxicity study, were conducted with muM17. A 6-month muM17 study in a lymphoma-susceptible mouse strain was conducted. A full reproductive toxicity testing program was conducted with muM17 SC in mice, together with a battery of immunological assays on offspring. Pharmacology · Primary pharmacodynamics ( in vitro/in vivo All in  vitro assays  with  efalizumab  were  performed  utilising  human  lymphocytes,  and  animal pharmacology studies  with  efalizumab  were  performed  in  a  non-human  primate.  Similar  studies  in mice cells or mice evaluated the in vitro and in vivo pharmacological activities of the mouse chimeric antiCD11a antibody muM17. Studies  on  the  mechanism  of  action  for  efalizumab  and  muM17  showed  that  the  interaction  of efalizumab and muM17 with CD11a on leukocytes of 3 species is specific and leads to cellular uptake and degradation of CD11a by T lymphocytes. Consequently CD11a is down-modulated on the plasma membrane of these T lymphocytes, which are no longer able to be activated by α -CD3 antibodies, as detected by expression of CD69. These effects are concentration dependent. The down-modulation of CD11a on leukocytes leads to a hampered interaction with intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM1)  and  blocks  the  migration  of  T-lymphocytes  across  human  vein  endothelial  cells  (HUVEC)  in  a concentration dependent manner. The lowered expression of CD11a on T-lymphocytes also blocks the interaction with human keratinocytes. In vivo a down-modulation of CD11a on lymphocytes is found and similar effects to what is described for the in vitro experiments on the interaction with ICAM are observed. Furthermore extravasation of lymphocytes into the tissue is inhibited which leads to an altered trafficking of leukocytes, resulting in increased peripheral White Blood Cell (WBC) counts. The effects, described in vivo, disappear after stopping administration of the drug substance. Currently, no naturally occurring animal models of psoriasis exist. A model has been developed using human psoriatic skin grafted to SCID mice. In SCID-skin mice model, indications are obtained that efalizumab should have an ameliorating effect on psoriatic skin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The pharmacodynamics were further investigated in pharmacokinetic and toxicology studies. In  a  non-human  primate,  down-modulation  of  CD11a,  occurred  within  24 hours after dose administration of 2 mg/kg subcutaneous (SC) or 0.5 mg/kg intravenous (IV) or above. As long as the plasma  efalizumab  concentration  stayed  above  1-10µg/ml  the  CD11a  receptor  remained  almost completely occupied and the receptor was effectively down-modulated (80-95%). When treatment of the animals is discontinued, CD11a expression is increased to levels above pretreatment, suggesting a risk for rebound effect.

## Pharmacokinetics

Medicinal product no longer authorised In mice similar pharmacodynamics were observed after SC administration of muM17. The pharmacodynamic effect of a SC dose of 3 mg/kg/week muM17 in mice was equivalent to that of a SC dose of 1 mg/kg/week efalizumab in humans. · Secondary pharmacodynamics Both  the  humoral  response  to  some  antigens  and  the  cell-mediated  response  were  inhibited:  the primary  antibody-response  in  a  non-human  primate  to  tetanus  toxoid  and  primary  and  secondary response in mice to sheep red blood cells were hampered, and, in mice an inhibition of the delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) was observed. In the peri/postnatal reproduction toxicity study, a reduced primary antibody response was also seen in F1 mice up to at least 11 weeks of age. Cross-reactivity  with  other  cell  types,  amongst  which  glial  cells  and  stromal  cell,  belonging  to  the immune system, was observed. · Safety pharmacology Core safety endpoints were incorporated into the repeat dose non-human primate studies. The core safety pharmacology observations did not indicate any concern. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No  formal  non-clinical  drug  interaction  studies  have  been  performed  with  efalizumab  or  muM17. As  efalizumab  and  muM17  bind  specifically  to  CD11a-bearing  cells,  plasma  protein  binding, cytochrome P450 metabolism, conjugation reactions, P-glycoprotein transport and renal filtration are unlikely to be affected by efalizumab. Nevertheless, co-administration of drugs that affect lymphocyte number and activity or the expression of  CD11a could likely affect  both  the  PK  and  PD  of  efalizumab.  The  effects  of  efalizumab  on  the immune system may be potentiated by other immunosuppressives used for psoriasis treatment. · Summary of findings Efalizumab  is  a  recombinant  humanized  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  specifically  to  the  CD11a subunit of LFA-1 (lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1), a leukocyte cell surface protein. By this mechanism,  efalizumab  inhibits  the binding of LFA-1  to  ICAM-1,  which  interferes  with  T lymphocytes adhesion to other cell types. LFA-1 is present on activated T lymphocytes, and ICAM-1 is up-regulated on endothelial cells and keratinocytes in psoriasis plaques. By preventing LFA-1/ICAM binding, efalizumab may alleviate signs and symptoms of psoriasis. When treatment of non-human primate is discontinued, CD11a expression is increased to levels above pretreatment, suggesting a risk for rebound effect. Nonclinical data have only limited contribution in predicting these effects in human; therefore attention should be paid to clinical data. Efalizumab  inhibits  both  the  humoral  response  to  some  antigens  and  the  cell-mediated  response. In mice an inhibition of the delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) was observed. The effects of efalizumab on the immune system may be potentiated by other immunosuppressives.

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) were developed and used for measuring efalizumab in a non-human primate and rabbits, muM17 in mice, and anti-drug antibodies in these species.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Absorption- Bioavailability

Maximal plasma concentrations after SC administration of either efalizumab in a non-human primate or  muM17 in the  mouse  were  obtained  within  0.5-2  days.  Bioavailability  was  dose  dependent  and comparable.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Distribution Distribution  studies  in  mice  suggested  that  in  binding  species,  efalizumab  and  muM17  distribute mainly to the interstitial space, vascular space, and tissues known to express CD11a. In non-binding species, efalizumab distributes to interstitial and vascular spaces.  In binding species, the distribution is predominantly due to binding to CD11a. However, distribution was studied in CD-1 mice with the rat anti-mouse anti-CD11a antibody M17, disregarding the possible influence of the Fc-moiety on the distribution of the antibody. In blood, 125 I-M17 bound to leukocytes and platelets as anticipated based on  the  known  cellular  distribution  of  the  antigen.  Specific  uptake  of  radioactivity  was  observed  in spleen, liver, bone marrow and lymph node. Again, in these organs radioactivity was associated with leukocytes. In mice the antibody muM17 crosses the placenta and is excreted into milk. · Metabolism and excretion The disposition of efalizumab in the non-human primate studied is thought to be determined by both the specific saturable CD11a-mediated clearance and the nonspecific high-capacity Fc-mediated IgG clearance pathways. CD11a-mediated clearance of muM17 in the mouse was demonstrated in mice on a cellular level. Plasma pharmacokinetic data obtained in both species are consistent with the view of a saturable CD11a receptor-dependent non-linear PK at low doses and a linear Fc-mediated PK a higher doses.  In  the  rabbit  only  the  latter  is  accountable  for  the  disposition  of  efalizumab.  The  CD11a receptor-dependent non-linear PK leads to higher clearance and shorter T½ at low doses as compared to high doses. The pharmacokinetics of efalizumab in a re-exposure study were similar to those observed in other PK studies.  Development of an antibody response led to more rapid clearance, as would be expected. Antibodies after first exposure did not appear to affect the PD or PK, but after the second exposure, antibody titers were higher, efalizumab clearance was faster, and the pharmacological effects appeared to reverse faster than in the other animals. · Comparability Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic comparability of XOMA material that was used in the nonclinical  safety  studies  and  Genentech  material  that  is  intended  for  marketing  was  investigated. Overall, the data are too limited to draw firm conclusions, however, the results obtained did not lead to any unexpected results which could lead to any issues regarding comparability of the two materials being raised. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity After  a  single  administration  of  muM17  to  female  mice,  the  maximum  non-lethal  dose  was &gt; 50 mg/kg. The only observed effect was an increase in white blood cell counts. · Repeat dose toxicity

Among the studies, different formulations were used. In repeat-dose studies in a non-human primate a liquid formulation not intended for marketing was used.  In addition, the route of administration  was the intravenous one, whereas the clinical route will be subcutaneous.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Two of 33 animals developed detectable anti-efalizumab antibodies. No apparent adverse effects were noted. However, a previously mounted immune response affects pharmacokinetics - as  demonstrated in a re-exposure study. Efficacy may also be affected. Legal  and  ethical  restraints  related  to  the  species  used  in  the  toxicity  studies  justify  the  absence  of histopathological data. Instead, histopathology data are available from the 26-week p53 +/+  wild-type mouse study (see below). In repeat-dose studies in mice, muM17 was administered. Increased counts of white blood cells, lymphocytes, eosinophils, neutrophils and monocytes in blood, increased spleen weight, histological changes in the spleen, and decreased cellularity in lymph nodes may  be  associated  with  the  pharmacological  activity  of  muM17,  resulting  in  altered  trafficking  of white blood cells. As in the other species studied, inhibitory effects on the immune system were observed. A sharp but reversible  decrease  was  shown in the  primary antibody (IgM) forming cell response to exposure to sheep red blood cells. The secondary response (IgG) was not significantly reduced. Natural Killer cell activity  was  decreased  at  all  doses.  In  males,  this  effect  was  still  visible  after  a  4-week  recovery period. Spleen lymphocytes were increased, with corresponding increases in CD4+ cells in males, and in CD8+ in females. Anti-muM17 antibodies were detected in 2 out of 342 mice, with no apparent adverse effects. · Genotoxicity No genotoxicity studies were performed, since these are not needed according to the ICH Guideline for the Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals. · Carcinogenicity Carcinogenic potential and long-term toxicity of muM17 was tested in a 26-week study using p53 +/+ wild-type mice. No evidence of carcinogenicity was seen in this study. The study was limited to six months and so the results should be interpreted cautiously. Even though, it has previously been shown that  cyclosporin  can  induce  tumours  in  the  wild  type  p53  mouse  within  6  months,  a  duration  of 6 months is still rather short for a genetically non-modified mouse model. Therefore negative result of the study should be taken with reservation. Immunological effects observed in this study were similar to those in the repeat-dose toxicity studies.  In addition, platelet counts were decreased, an effect that was  more  prominent  in  females  than  in  males.  Histopathology  did  not  reveal  any  other  untoward effects. · Reproductive and developmental studies Reproductive and developmental toxicity was investigated in mice, using muM17. There were no effects on reproduction and fertility parameters. The parental effects that were observed were  also  shown  in  the  repeat-dose  studies.  A  number  of  observations  may  be  associated  with  the pharmacological  activity  of  muM17,  like  decreased  cellularity  in  lymph  nodes  and  histological changes in the spleen. Further, the number of antibody forming cells in response to exposure to sheep red blood cells was reduced by 95-99%.

In treated animals, an inhibitory effect on the humoral response to a tetanus toxoid immunisation was observed. The humoral response to tetanus toxoid immunisation occurred at lower levels and later in time in treated animals than in control animals. One animal died of infection. In the lymph nodes of treated  animals,  paracortical  atrophy  was  observed,  accompanied  by  a  decrease  in  CD3+  cells. This observation was consistent with the decreased cellularity, which was observed in lymph nodes of mice  (see  below).  The  effect  decreased  upon  recovery.  Among  CD4+  and  CD8+  subsets  in  blood, there was a slight increase in the proportion of CD4+ cells.

<!-- image -->

MuM17  crossed  the  placenta  of  pregnant  mice.  No  treatment-related  effects  on  embryo-foetal development were observed after administration of muM17 to mice up to 30 mg/kg/week.

In a pre- and postnatal study in mice, it was shown that in the offspring (F1), the antibody forming cell response to exposure to sheep red blood cells was reduced, indicating a decreased T-cell dependent immunity in pups caused by exposure to muM17 in utero and/or via the milk. This effect was visible

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

at 11 weeks of age. At 25 weeks of age, it was no longer significant indicating that it is a transient effect. There were no treatment-related effects on reproductive parameters in F0 and F1 mice, on the development of F1 mice and no visible effects on F2 pups. Increases in spleen weight were observed in F1 animals, which are likely associated with the pharmacological activity of muM17. In blood of F1 animals, there was a relative increase in CD4+ cells and a relative decrease in CD8+ cells.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  NOAEL  in  the  fertility  and  embryo/foetal  toxicity  studies  for  general  reproductive  and embryo/foetal parameters was 30 mg/kg/day and the 3 mg/kg/day dose is pharmacologically as potent as the therapeutic dose of 1 mg/kg in humans. Therefore, the ratio of the plasma exposures observed at these two doses was considered to represent a safety margin, being &gt;10. · Local tolerance In the 26-week non-human primate study, no gross evidence of irritation or contact sensitisation at the infusion site was noted during the study in any animal. · Other toxicity studies Studies on juvenile toxicity were not conducted since Raptiva has only been developed and is only indicated for adult patients. · Summary of findings In  the  toxicology  studies,  overall,  efalizumab  and  muM17  were  generally  well  tolerated  up  to 26 weeks at the highest doses tested, 40 mg/kg/week (IV) in a non-human primate and 30 mg/kg/week (SC) in mice, respectively. The main effects seen in the toxicology studies were those related to the pharmacology  of  the  antibody.  The  primary  pharmacological  effect  on  receptor  level,  i.e.  downmodulation  of  the  CD11a  receptor  was  seen  in  all  studies.  In  all  pivotal  studies,  there  was  a  full pharmacologic  effect  already  at  the  low  dose.  Higher  dosages  did  not  result  in  stronger  effects. Besides  impairment  of  transendothelial  trafficking,  reduced  adhesion  of  lymphocytes  and  other pharmacological  effects  leading  to  the  therapeutic  effect  resulting  from  the  down-modulation  of CD11a, other immunological responses were noted that are likely related to the down-modulation of CD11a,  but  may  be  considered  adverse.  Notably,  antibody  response  to  artificial  antigens  -  tetanus toxoid or sheep red blood cells - was severely diminished, indicating an impaired immune function. A potential exacerbation of infection by efalizumab cannot be ruled out. In  pups  of  mice  treated  with  an  antibody  analogue  of  efalizumab,  a  decrease  in  T-cell  dependent immunity was observed up to at least 11 weeks of age. Only at 25 weeks of age this decrease was no longer significant. No safety margin exists and warning referring to this effect should be included in section 5.3 of the SPC. Pregnant women should not be treated with Raptiva. Discussion on the non-clinical aspects Efalizumab binds specifically to the CD11a subunit of LFA-1. By preventing LFA-1/ICAM binding, efalizumab  may  alleviate  signs  and  symptoms  of  psoriasis.Efalizumab  does  not  cross-react  with CD11a  from  species  other  than  humans  and  a  non-human  primate.  Therefore,  conventional  nonclinical safety data with the medicinal product are limited and do not allow for a comprehensive safety assessment.Efalizumab  inhibits  both  the  humoral  response  to  some  antigens  and  the  cell-mediated response. In mice treated with the murine surrogate antibody muM17, an inhibition of the delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) was observed.The 6-month repeated dose study in a non-human primate is of limited value due to a number of constraints. Nevertheless, animals appear to have been sufficiently exposed to  cause  long-term  down-modulation  of  CD11a  and  the  potential  effects  of  this  long-term change were evaluated in the study to some extent. In addition the lack of histopathological data is partly compensated by p53 +/+ wild-typea 26-week study in mice with the surrogate antibody muM17. Studies did not produce results that would prevent use of efalizumab in humans.

No  evidence  of  carcinogenicity  was  seen.  Yet,  the  results  should  be  seen  with  some  reservation, because the duration of the study was only 6 months. Immunological effects observed in this study were similar to those in the repeat-dose toxicity studies of shorter duration. In addition, platelet counts

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were decreased.In pups of mice treated with an antibody analogue of efalizumab, a decrease in T-cell dependent  immunity  was  observed.  Pregnant  women  should  not  use  Raptiva  and  women  of childbearing  potential  should  be  advised  to  use  appropriate  contraception.Immunoglobulins  are expected  to  be  excreted  in  human  milk  and  an  antibody  analogue  of  efalizumab  was  shown  to  be excreted in milk of mice, therefore women should not breastfeed during treatment with Raptiva.Further reassurance of the safety of efalizumab should be obtained from long-term safety data in humans.

<!-- image -->

| 2651 patients   | 12 weeks   |
|-----------------|------------|
| 1053 patients   | 24 weeks   |
| 221 patients    | 48 weeks   |
| 158 patients    | 108 weeks  |

The s.c doses were administered into the upper arms, buttocks, abdomen, and thighs. Site of injection most probably do not impact on the exposure of efalizumab. Based on common medical practice, the site of injection was rotated in pivotal Phase III studies and rotating the site is recommended in the summary of product characteristics.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Introduction Seven phase I studies, 2 phase II studies and 7 phase III studies were submitted, including five pivotal clinical studies evaluating efficacy of efalizumab primarily as monotherapy versus placebo. All  studies  were  carried  out  in  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  plaque  psoriasis,  except  two bioequivalence studies (ACD2389g and ACD2617) in healthy volunteers, one study in patients with a primary renal transplant and one phase II study in patients with allergic asthma. Studies used efalizumab manufactured by either XOMA Ltd. (XOMA efalizumab) or Genentech, Inc. (Genentech  efalizumab).    XOMA  conducted  the  Phase I  and II  studies  except ACD2389g, and Genentech conducted all Phase III studies except for 24011 conducted by Serono. 3291 patients have received efalizumab (3186 s.c.) during the development programme: 2651 patients 12 weeks 1053 patients 24 weeks 221 patients 48 weeks 158 patients 108 weeks The overall exposure was 2,500 patient-years. All  clinical  trials  were  stated  to  have  been  conducted  in  accordance  with  \"good  clinical  practice\" (GCP). Pharmacokinetics A  number  of analytical methods have been used to characterise the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of efalizumab: assays to assess the plasma concentrations of efalizumab, assays to assess the pharmacodynamics of efalizumab, and assays to assess anti-efalizumab antibodies. · Absorption - Bioavailability Absorption has been studied in healthy subject and in the target population following both single-dose and steady-state i.v. and s.c. administration. After  subcutaneous  administration  of  efalizumab  peak  plasma  concentrations  are  reached  after 1 - 2 days, indicating a slow release of efalizumab from injection site. Comparison with intravenous data indicated an average bioavailability of about  41%  at the recommended  dose  level  of 1.0  mg/kg/wk.  Non-linear  pharmacokinetics  are  observed  due  to  the  saturable  receptor-mediated clearance. There is a large inter-individual variability (up to 100%) taking into account the whole dose range studied, but at a dose level of 1 mg/kg/wk variability is about 60-70%. Steady state was achieved at week 4. At the 1mg/kg/wk dose level (with an initial dose of 0.7 mg/kg the  first  week  as  conditioning  phase),  mean  efalizumab  plasma  trough  values  ranged  between 5.3 - 11.1 µg/ml. The elimination half-life was about 5 - 7 days.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Subjects who developed antibodies to efalizumab (HAHA) showed an apparently reduced efalizumab exposure,  however  it  appeared  that  this  reduction  did  not  affect  the  CD11a  down-modulation  and saturation of available binding sites.

## · Comparability of formulations

Medicinal product no longer authorised Early  clinical  studies  were  conducted  with  efalizumab  in  a  4  mg/mL  liquid  formulation  for intravenous  (i.v.)  administration  produced  by  XOMA.    In  addition,  to  support  subcutaneous  (s.c.) dosing, a lyophilised formulation was developed by XOMA that could be reconstituted at 100 mg/mL. After development the product was transferred to Genentech and further developed. Although a higher exposure was observed for the Genenetech formulation, further studies showed that the difference in pharmacokinetics seems to be of no pharmacodynamic relevance. · Distribution Measurements  of  volume  of  distribution  of  the  central  compartment  after  single  intravenous  doses were 110 ml/kg at dose 0.03 mg/kg and 58 ml/kg at dose 10 mg/kg. · Metabolism and excretion The expected products of the metabolism of biotechnology-derived proteins and peptides, including IgG1  monoclonal  antibodies  such  as  efalizumab,  are  small  peptides  and  individual  amino  acids. Cytochrome P450 enzymes as well as conjugation reactions are  not  involved  in  the  metabolism  of efalizumab.  The  metabolism  of  efalizumab  is  through  internalisation  followed  by  intracellular degradation  as  a  consequence  of  either  binding  to  cell  surface  CD11a  or  through  bulk  fluid  phase endocytosis and failure to bind to FcRn, the IgG salvage receptor, within the endosome.  If efalizumab does  not  associate  via  its  Fc  domain  with  FcRn  in  the  endosome,  the  antibody  is  directed  to  the lysosome for degradation to small peptides and amino acids.  Conversely, if efalizumab's Fc binds FcRn within the endosomes, the antibody is recycled back into circulation. The elimination half-life was about 5.5-10.5 days at 1 mg/kg/day subcutaneous. Tend at steady state is 25 days (range 13-35 days). Efalizumab  is cleared by nonlinear saturable elimination (dose dependent). The terminal half-life increases from low to high doses, reflecting elimination mediated mainly  by  the  specific  saturable  CD11a  receptors,  the  non  specific  high-capacity  FcRn  receptors (IgG salvage receptor), standard Fc γ receptors, or other nonspecific protein clearance mechanisms on reticuloendothelial cells. It appeared that the receptor mediated clearance of efalizumab was saturated when plasma efalizumab concentrations were above 1 µ g/ml. Levels of CD11a expression on CD3+ lymphocytes (Tcells) were (maximal) reduced for 70 - 80% in case an i.v. dose was used above 0.3 mg/kg/wk or a s.c dose of 1  mg/kg/wk  or  higher.  Regardless  the  dose  administered,  levels  remained  reduced  as  long  as efalizumab plasma concentrations remained above 1 µ g/ml. When efalizumab plasma levels decreased below 1 µ g/ml, the drug was rapidly cleared from the circulation and expression of CD11a returned to normal within 7 - 10 days thereafter. · Special populations Specific pharmacokinetic studies in patients with renal or liver impairment, and children have not been conducted  and  this  information  is  included  in  the  summary  of  product  characteristics.  Taking  into account the metabolism of efalizumab, it is not expected that the pharmacokinetics of efalizumab in patients with renal or hepatic impairment will be clinically significant influenced but Raptiva should be used with caution in this patient population.

A  population  pharmacokinetic  analysis  of  efalizumab  was  performed  with  a  base  model  assuming linear  PK  model. The model predicted a 24% decrease in CL/F in patients receiving 2 mg/kg/week thus  confirming  the  nonlinear  PK  of  efalizumab.  The  results  suggest  that  weight  is  the  single important predictor of efalizumab PK, while the effects of other covariates age, baseline PASI score and baseline lymphocyte count were modest.

No clinical program to evaluate the safety and efficacy of efalizumab in children was planed at the time of CHMP assessment .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Interaction studies

There have been no formal drug interaction studies performed with Raptiva.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  plasma  clearance  of  efalizumab  was  arround  50%  lower  in  renal  transplant  patients,  receiving cyclosporine/sirolimus/prednisone therapy or cyclosporine/mycophenolate mofetil/prednisone. Given the mechanism of action of efalizumab, its effects on the immune system may be potentiated by immunosuppressives commonly used for the treatment of psoriasis. Raptiva has not been  studied  in  combination  with  immunosuppressive  systemic  antipsoriasis medicinal products.  Therefore, combination therapies with these products are not recommended. Raptiva has  been  used  in  combination  with  topical  corticosteroids  in  psoriasis  patients  without  any untoward  effects  nor  with  any  observable  significant  beneficial  effect  of  the  combination  therapy above monotherapy with efalizumab. Pharmacodynamics · Mechanism of action Binding  of  CD11a  by  efalizumab  results  in  saturation  of  available  CD11a  binding  sites  and down-modulation of cell surface CD11 expression. This event is believed to decrease the activity of lymphocytes and reduce their translocation to peripheral tissues (such as in psoriatic plaques). Efalizumab  blocked  the  interaction  of  human  T-lymphocytes  with  tissue-specific  cells (e.g., human keratinocytes) in a concentration-dependent manner. · Primary and Secondary pharmacology Several  pharmacodynamic  studies  (phase  I-II)  including  also  dose  response  investigations  were provided that explored the mechanism of action and required dose to attain optimal pharmacodynamic effects and clinical efficacy. Pharmacodynamics evaluation was also included in the phase III trials. Multiple  IV  doses ≥ 0.3  mg/kg/wk  were  required  to  maintain  CD11a  down-modulation  between weekly doses, whereas doses ≥ 0.6 mg/kg/wk were required to maintain full CD11a saturation between weekly doses. Two Studies (HUPS254 and HUPS256) provided PK/PD data after multiple SC doses of  efalizumab  of  0.5,  1.0,  1.5,  2.0,  and  4.0  mg/kg/wk  for  8-12  weeks  in  subjects  with  psoriasis. Maximal PD effects were seen 24-48 hours after the first dose, compared with 4-24 hours after IV dosing in Study HU9602. Following  the  12th  and  last  dose  of  1.0  mg/kg/wk  SC,  CD11a  expression  returned  to  baseline  as efalizumab  was  cleared  from  circulation.  Between  5 and  8 weeks  following  the  last  dose,  CD11a expression was within 25% of baseline values. At the end of the follow-up period (12 weeks after the last  dose),  average  CD11a  expression  and  available  binding  sites  had  increased  to  above  baseline levels in the 2.0 mg/kg/wk group (174% ± 98% of baseline expression) but not in the 1.0 mg/kg/wk group (72%  ±  15% of  baseline  expression).  The  cause  or  clinical  relevance  of  this  above-baseline CD11a  expression  is  currently  unknown,  but  the  finding  is  in  line  with  the  results  of  the  animal studies. Overall, SC doses &gt; 1.0 mg/kg/wk did not appear to produce additional histologic changes in terms of epidermal  CD11a  saturation,  thickness,  dermal  and  epidermal  T-lymphocyte  numbers,  and  keratin 16  (K16)  expression,  despite  higher  circulating  levels.  Maximal  effects  on  CD11a  were  good indicators of adequate dosing but were not useful as predictors of clinical response at doses of 1.0 and 2.0 mg/kg/wk SC for 12 weeks.

Of  all  PK/PD  evaluable  subjects  (from 11 studies)  who  were  tested  for  anti-drug  antibody  titers against efalizumab in these studies, 85 were found to be positive. A conservative estimate based on the subset  of  subjects  with  adequate  follow-up  after  discontinuation  leads  to  an  estimate  of  6.3%. The absolute number of patients presenting anti-efalizumab antibodies remained too limited to allow definitive  conclusions  in  terms  of  the  effect  on  efficacy  and  safety,  such  as  possible  neutralising capacity. Limited data from long-term treatment in the ongoing trial ACD2243g seem to confirm the estimate  of  the  occurrence  of  antibodies  to  efalizumab  to  be  approximatelly  6%.  However,  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

sensitivity of the assay for neutralising antibodies is limited. The applicant should try to develop more sensitive  assay  in  addition  to  the  intended  post-marketing  monitoring  for  adverse  drug  effects  in patients with antibodies to efalizumab.

Absolute white blood cell (WBC) count increased by 2.5-3.5x10 3 cells/mm 3 to  reach approximately 10x10 3 cells/mm 3 following 1.0 or 2.0 mg/kg/wk efalizumab. The time course, extent, and reversal of lymphocyte increases closely followed the patterns observed in the PD markers of CD11a expression and available CD11a binding sites. Following the 12 th and final dose of 1.0 mg/kg/wk SC efalizumab, lymphocyte levels returned to within 10% of baseline by 8 weeks post last dose.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Available data suggest that a mild, general inflammatory reaction occurs after the initial administration of efalizumab in humans.  The changes in cytokines and acute phase reactants detected in  subjects  and  the  responses  of  cells  to  efalizumab in vitro suggest  that  the  first-dose  effect  is  not caused by activation of T-lymphocytes. Available  data  suggest  also  that  primary  immunisation  may  not  be  effective  during  efalizumab treatment. (A trend toward reduced IgG levels after rechallenge with φ X174 on Day42 was observed in  one  study).  The  SPC  states  that  subjects  should  not  receive  acellular,  live  and  live-attenuated vaccines during efalizumab treatment. The maintenance of a secondary humoral immune response was tested by measuring serum tetanus antibody  levels  in  subjects  before  and  after  receiving  a  single  IV dose  of  efalizumab.  The  results suggest  that  subjects  were  able  to  maintain  a  pre-existing  secondary  humoral  immune  status  after single and multiple doses of efalizumab. The results of studies on cell-mediated immunity, as assessed by intradermal challenge with tetanus toxoid, suggest that established T-lymphocyte-mediated immune responses persist despite efalizumab treatment. No relevant changes in CMV antibody levels were found during efalizumab treatment indicating that baseline immune response is maintained their throughout the entire study and that there is minimal risk of new or re-activated CMV infections. Overall, the PK/PD data are extensive although certain areas are not totally elucidated. The  pharmacodynamic  rationale  for  the  treatment  with  efalizumab  in  the  sought  indication  at  the recommended dose level is supported by the provided data. Clinical efficacy · Dose response studies Data  presented  from  a  number  of  Phase I  efalizumab  studies  show  that  improvement  in  psoriasis disease as assessed by histology was  seen  at an  IV dose of 0.3 mg/kg/wk  and  at  SC doses of ≥ 1.0 mg/kg/wk. SC doses &gt; 1.0 mg/kg/wk did not appear to produce additional histologic changes in terms of epidermal CD11a saturation, thickness, dermal and epidermal T-lymphocyte numbers, and keratin 16 (K16) expression, despite higher circulating levels. Together, the clinical pharmacology of efalizumab  and  the  safety  and  efficacy  data  (including  phase  III  studies  with  1.0 mg/kg/wk  or 2.0 mg/kg/wk) support the selection of 1.0 mg/kg/wk SC as the optimal dose for efalizumab. · Main studies Main  clinical  trials  conducted  in  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  plaque  psoriasis  are  presented below:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Study number Phase               | Study Design                                                                                                                                | Number of subjects entered/completed   | Duration of treatment   |
|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| ACD2058g Phase III Double-blind  | Efalizumab XOMAsubcutaneously, 1.0 mg/kg/wk 2.0 mg/kg/wk Placebo                                                                            | 162/149 166/145 170/151                | 12-24 WEEKS             |
| ACD2059g Phase III Double-blind  | Efalizumab XOMAor GNE subcutaneously, 1.0 mg/kg/wk 2.0 mg/kg/wk Placebo 2 nd 12 wk: 2.0 mg/kg/wk or 2.0 mg/kg/wk or 4.0 mg/kg/wk or placebo | 232/211 243/227 122/111                | 12-24 WEEKS             |
| ACD2390g PHASE III Double-blind  | Efalizumab GNE subcutaneously 1.0 mg/kg/wk Placebo                                                                                          | 369/345 187/175                        | 12 weeks                |
| ACD 2600G Phase III Double-blind | Efalizumab GNE subcutaneously 1.0 mg/kg/wk Placebo                                                                                          | 450/421 236/218                        | 12 weeks                |
| IMP 24011 Phase III Double-blind | Efalizumab GNE subcutaneously 1.0 mg/kg/wk Placebo                                                                                          | 529/476 264/247                        | 12 weeks                |

-

-

- -Pregnancy or lactation

Medicinal product no longer authorised In addition, there were an open-label (extension) studies; ACD 2243g, ACD2062g and ACD2391g. Five  of  these  studies (ACD2058g,  ACD2059g,  ACD2390g,  ACD2600g,  and  IMP24011)  were randomised, double blind, placebo-controlled, Phase III trials using efalizumab administered subcutaneously (SC) and are considered as pivotal trials. These phase III placebo-controlled trials with efalizumab were similarly designed. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were comparable. The differences involved  greatly  the  dose  regimen  and  follow-up  evaluations  RT  (re-treatment)  or  ET  (extended treatment). The primary endpoint concerned efficacy PASI75 measurement.  Safety was a secondary endpoint,  except  in  study  ACD2600g  where  endpoints  were  vice  versa.  Studies  ACD2058g, ACD2059g  and  ACD2390g  are  presented  together  before  presentations  of  studies  ACD2600g  and IMP24011, which were later submitted. Studies ACD2058g, ACD2059g and ACD2390g METHODS Study Participants Patients enrolled in the pivotal studies were subjects with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. Main Inclusion criteria were: Diagnosis of plaque psoriasis for 6 months, Minimum Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score of 12.0 at screening, -    Plaque psoriasis covering ≥ 10% of total body surface area (BSA),Candidate for systemic treatment. Main Exclusion criteria were: -History of or ongoing infections. -Presence or history of malignancy, -HIV

- -History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reactions to humanised monoclonal antibodies.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Treatments

For the 12-week FT (first treatment) period in Studies ACD2058g and ACD2059g, subjects received either  1.0 mg/kg/wk  or  2.0 mg/kg/wk  SC efalizumab  or  placebo.  Subjects  from  Study  ACD2390g were randomised in a 2:1 ratio to receive either 1.0 mg/kg/wk SC Genentech efalizumab or matching placebo for 12 weeks (FT period). The only allowed concomitant psoriasis treatments were emollient cream,  tar  or  salicylic  acid  preparations  for  the  scalp,  and  low-potency  (Grade VI-VII)  topical corticosteroids for lesions on the face, hands, feet, axillae, or groin.

Sample size

Medicinal product no longer authorised Objectives Primary objectives: -To assess the efficacy of weekly subcutaneous dosing of efalizumab 1.0 or 2.0 mg/kg in patients with  moderate  to  severe  psoriasis  versus  placebo  as  measured  by  the  proportion  of  subjects achieving ≥ 75% decrease from baseline in PASI at the end of the initial 12 week treatment period (First Treatment or FT Day 84). -Safety and tolerability of 12 weekly subcutaneous dosing of efalizumab 1.0 or 2.0 mg/kg versus placebo. Secondary objectives: -To assess the efficacy of weekly subcutaneous dosing of efalizumab 1.0 or 2.0 mg/kg measured by secondary endpoint (discussed below) versus placebo. -Efficacy and safety of a second 12-week course initiated at the time of relapse of efalizumab versus placebo. -Duration of response. -Time course of response. -In partial and non responders the following were assessed: safety and tolerability of 24 weeks of efalizumab,  efficacy  of  24  weeks  continuous  efalizumab  therapy  and  duration  of  response following a 24-week course of efalizumab. -In study ACD2390g: steady-state pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Outcomes/endpoints The primary efficacy endpoint in the Phase III trials was the proportion of subjects who had ≥ 75% improvement in PASI score (a PASI-75 response) from baseline when assessed 1 week after the last of 12 weekly doses of efalizumab. Secondary endpoint for all three studies included: -The proportion of subjects achieving an Overall Lesion Severity (OLS) rating of Minimal or Clear, -Mean improvement in the Itching Scale (a patient-reported measure), -The  proportion  of  subjects  with  a  Physician's  Global  Assessment (PGA)  rating  of  Cleared  or Excellent, -Mean improvement in the thickness component of the PASI score, -Mean improvement in the percentage of BSA affected by psoriasis. Other  pre-specified  secondary  efficacy  endpoints  in  Study  ACD2390g  included  the  proportion  of subjects with ≥ 50% improvement in PASI score relative to baseline after 12 weeks of treatment (known as PASI-50), mean percent PASI improvement over time, mean improvement in the Dermatology  Life  Quality  Index (DLQI),  and  mean  improvement  in  the  frequency  and  severity subscales of the Psoriasis Symptom Assessment (PSA). All  outcomes  were  measured  at 12 weeks  of  treatment  and  were  compared  with  baseline,  with  the exception of OLS, which is a static measure. The estimation  of  power  for  efficacy  assumed  PASI-75  response  rates  of  20  to  25%  in  efalizumab treatment groups versus placebo response rates of 2 to 5%.'

## Randomisation and blinding (masking)

For studies ACD2058g and ACD2059g patients and investigators were blinded for which treatment the patients received (efalizumab or placebo). However the dose level was not blinded for the patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

For  study  ACD2058g  the  subjects  were  randomly  assigned  to  low-dose  efalizumab,  high-dose efalizumab, low-dose placebo and high-dose placebo in a 2:2:1:1 ratio for the first 12 weeks (FT).

For study ACD2059g the subjects were randomised in a 4:4:1:1 ratio to high dose efalizumab, low dose efalizumab, high dose placebo and low dose placebo for the first 12 weeks.

Study ACD2390g was a double-blind study and the subjects were randomised to receive low dose efalizumab or placebo in a 2:1 ratio.

| Study no   |   Screened |   Randomised |   Percent |
|------------|------------|--------------|-----------|
| ACD2058g   |        675 |          498 |      26.2 |
| ACD2059g   |        911 |          597 |      34.5 |
| ACD2390g   |        771 |          556 |      27.9 |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Statistical methods In  studies  ACD2058g  and  ACD2059g  two  treatment  comparisons  were  of  interest  during  the  FT period of this study: 1.0 mg/kg efalizumab versus placebo and 2.0 mg/kg efalizumab versus placebo. The  placebo  groups  for  each  of  the  two  dose  levels  were  combined  for  all  statistical  comparisons following investigation of baseline comparability of the two placebo groups. All  statistical  tests  were  two  sided.  Except  where  noted,  evaluation  of  continuous  variables  was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA); ANOVA was to be replaced by the nonparametric counterpart if normality assumptions were severely violated. Results Participant flow and Baseline data Study ACD2058g consisted of 2 12-week treatment periods: First treatment (FT), and then retreatment (RT) or extended treatment (ET). There were 2 observation periods without treatment: Observation period (OB) and Follow-Up (FU). On FT Day 84 subjects were defined as responders, partial responders, or non-responders according to the following definitions: · Responder: PASI decreased ≥ 75% from FT day 0 · Partial responder: PASI decreased ≥ 50% but &lt; 75% from FT day 0 · Non-responder: PASI decreased &lt; 50% from FT day 0 Study ACD2059g consisted of 3 periods: First treatment (FT), extended treatment (ET) and FollowUp (FU). The 434 patients that have been treated with efalizumab during the FT period and go into extended treatment are further classified as the ET-A subjects. ET-AR are the responders, ET-AP are the  partial  responders and ET-AN are the non-responders.  For definitions about responders, partial responders and non-responders, see under study ACD2058g. Study  ACD2390g  consisted  of  1  treatment  period  of  12  weeks.  After  completion  of  this  trial,  all subjects  could  transfer  to  open-label  study  ACD2391g.  Subjects  who  discontinued  early  from  this study were to transfer to study ACD2391g for follow-up. In studies ACD2058g, 2059g and 2390g, there were far more male (between 64,8 % and 72,3 %) than female  included  in  these  studies  but  the  groups  were  comparable  regarding  gender  distribution. More whites (between 84,9 % to 91,6 %) than coloured people were included in all treatment groups. For the other characteristics there were no meaningful differences. However, in study ACD2058g the proportion of patients with prior systemic therapy was lower (54.8%, all subjects) in all the groups than  in  study  ACD2059g  (66.7%,  all  subjects)  and  study  ACD2390g  (75.9%,  all  subjects). For the other characteristics there were no significant differences between the studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Numbers analysed

The ITT population consisted of all subjects who were randomised into the FT period, whether or not they received any study drug or completed the full course of treatment.

## Outcomes and estimation

| Study No.   | Manufacturer/ Route/ Treatment Group   | Number Enrolled/ Completed a   | Primary Efficacy Endpoint(% of patients with ≥ 75% improvement in PASI score at FT Day 84 ) [95% CI]   | Statistical Test/ p-value   | Principal Secondary Efficacy Endpoint (Subjects with OLS rating of Minimal or Clear at FT Day 84)   | Statistical Test/ p-value   |
|-------------|----------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| ACD2058g    | XOMASC                                 | 498/445                        |                                                                                                        | Fisher's exact              |                                                                                                     | Fisher's exact              |
|             | Placebo                                | 170/151                        | 2.4% [0.6%, 5.9%]                                                                                      |                             | 2.9%                                                                                                |                             |
|             | 1.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 162/149                        | 38.9% [31.3%, 46.9%]                                                                                   | p<0.001                     | 32.1%                                                                                               | P<0.001                     |
|             | 2.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 166/145                        | 26.5% [20.0%, 33.9%]                                                                                   | p<0.001                     | 22.3%                                                                                               | P<0.001                     |
| ACD2059g    | GNE or XOMA SC                         | 597/549                        |                                                                                                        | Fisher's exact              | longer                                                                                              | Fisher's exact              |
|             | Placebo                                | 122/111                        | 4.9%                                                                                                   | -                           | 3.3%                                                                                                | -                           |
|             | 1.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 232/211                        | 22.4%                                                                                                  | p<0.001                     | 19.4%                                                                                               | p<0.001                     |
|             | 2.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 243/227                        | 28.4%                                                                                                  | p<0.001                     | 22.6%                                                                                               | p<0.001                     |
|             | GNE SC Placebo                         | 32/25                          | 0.0% [0-10.9]                                                                                          | -                           | 0.0%                                                                                                | -                           |
|             | 1.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 52/42                          | 9.6% [3.2-21.0]                                                                                        | -                           | 7.7%                                                                                                | -                           |
|             | 2.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 61/60                          | 21.3% [11.9-33.7]                                                                                      | -                           | 18.0%                                                                                               | -                           |
|             | XOMA SC Placebo                        | 90/86                          | 6.7% [2.5-13.9]                                                                                        | -                           | 4.4%                                                                                                | -                           |
|             | 1.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 180/169                        | 26.1% [ 19.9-33.2]                                                                                     | -                           | 22.8%                                                                                               | -                           |
|             | 2.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 182/167                        | 30.8% [24.2-38.0]                                                                                      | -                           | 24.2%                                                                                               | -                           |
| ACD2390g    | GNE SC                                 | 556/520                        | no                                                                                                     | Fisher's exact              |                                                                                                     | Fisher's exact              |
|             | Placebo                                | 187/175                        | 4.3% [1.9%, 8.3%]                                                                                      |                             | 3.2%                                                                                                |                             |
|             | 1.0 mg/kg/wk                           | 369/345                        | 26.6% [22.1%, 31.4%]                                                                                   | P<0.001                     | 25.7%                                                                                               | p<0.001                     |

<!-- image -->

|                | Placebo       | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk    | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|---------------|-------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 7/170 (4.1%)  | 63/162 (38.9%) p<0.001  | 50/166 (30.1%) p<0.001 |
| Study ACD2059g | 5/122 (4.1%)  | 52/232 (22.4%) p<0.001  | 69/243 (28.4%) p<0.001 |
| Study ACD2390g | 10/187 (5.3%) | 122/369 (33.1%) p<0.001 | Not applicable         |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Results of the first treatment period are provided in the table below. First treatment period - Primary Efficacy Endpoint and principal secondary efficacy endpoint GNE=Genentech; NA=not available; ND=not done. Note:  All p-values represent comparison with placebo. a Completed FT period or completed study, as applicable. b Not referred to in protocol as principal secondary endpoint (but was the first secondary endpoint mentioned in the protocol). Secondary endpoints: · The proportion of subjects achieving a PGA rating of excellent or cleared at FT day 84.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Mean (SD) improvement PASI thickness component at FT day 84.

|                | Placebo     | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|-------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 1.13 (2.22) | 3.42 (2.71) p<0.001    | 2.73 (2.71) p<0.001    |
| Study ACD2059g | 0.91 (2.31) | 3.01 (2.92) p<0.001    | 3.24 (3.08) p<0.001    |
| Study ACD2390g | 0.94 (1.94) | 3.20 (2.82) p<0.001    | Not applicable         |

|                | Placebo   | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|-----------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 0.5 (2.9) | 2.8 (3.4) p<0.001      | 2.7 (3.3) p<0.001      |
| Study ACD2059g | 0.4 (1.5) | 1.3 (1.6) p<0.001      | 1.5 (1.9) p<0.001      |
| Study ACD2390g | 0.7 (2.8) | 2.8 (3.3) p<0.001      | Not applicable         |

|                | placebo    | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 1.8 (11.6) | 13.8 (15.8) p<0.001    | 10.0 (15.8) p<0.001    |
| Study ACD2059g | 0.3 (13.7) | 9.9 (18.2) p<0.001     | 11.3 (18.4) p<0.001    |
| Study ACD2390g | 2.6 (9.9)  | 11.2 (15.1) p<0.001    | Not applicable         |

|                | placebo   | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|-----------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 2.1 (6.0) | 5.3 (6.5) p<0.001      | 5.5 (7.2) p<0.001      |
| Study ACD2059g | 1.7 (5.1) | 5.5 (6.0) p<0.001      | 6.0 (7.5) p<0.001      |
| Study ACD2390g | 1.6 (5.7) | 5.6 (6.6) p<0.001      | Not applicable         |

|                | placebo   | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|-----------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 0 (N=27)  | 11 (34.4%, N=32)       | 6 (26.1%, N=23)        |

Based  on  these  data  of  study  ACD  2058g,  attenuation  of  the  response  rate  during  retreatment compared to the response in the FT period cannot be excluded.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Mean improvement (SD) from baseline in itching scale scores during FT period. Improvement was reflected by a decrease in the 5-point itching score. · Mean (SD) in percent Psoriatic BSA during FT period. · Mean improvement (SD) in DLQI (dermatology life quality index) overall score during FT treatment, which was reflected by a decrease in DLQI score. Observation period Study  ACD2058g:  Of  the  111  patients  that  entered  the  Observation  period  (OB),  100  (90.1%) discontinued  early  primarily  because  of  relapse  of  psoriasis. The  median  time  to  protocol  defined relapse during the OB period for subjects treated with efalizumab during the FT period was 60.0 days (95% CI of 57.0-66.0) for the efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk and 59.0 days (95% CI of 57.0, 82.0) for the efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk. Retreatment period Study  ACD2058g:  Eighty-two  patients  that  received  efalizumab  in  the  FT  period,  entered  the  RT period. Of them 55 were treated with efalizumab (32 with 1mg/kg/week and 23 with 2 mg/kg/week). Of the 55 patients treated with efalizumab 13 patients (23.6%) discontinued including 12 due to nonresponse. Proportion of RT-A subjects (patients who received efalizumab in the FT period and relapsed in the OB period) who achieved at least 75% PASI improvement at RT day 84: All efalizumab vs. placebo p&lt;0.001.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Extended treatment period

Study ACD2058g: Most of the patients that were considered partial responders or non responders in the FT period entered the extended treatment period. Twenty-three discontinued because they did not respond to efalizumab.

|                | Placebo        | Efalizumab 1mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk   |
|----------------|----------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Study ACD2058g | 4 (6.7%, N=60) | 12 (21.1%, N=57)       | 13 (19.7. %, N=66)     |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Proportion of ET-A subjects who achieved 75% PASI reduction All efalizumab vs. placebo p=0.018. The results suggest that patients not responding within the first 3 months will be less likely to respond to prolonged treatment for another 3 months. Study  ACD2059g:  In  the  extended  period,  patients  received  either  efalizumab  2mg/kg/wk  or efalizumab  2mg/kg/every  other  week  or  4.0  mg/kg/wk.  The  majority  (around  77%)of  responder patients during extended treatment period maintained PASI 75 response. Attenuation of the response despite  the  higher  dose  used  (2mg/kg/wk  or  2mg/kg/every  other  week)  cannot  be  excluded.  Of  the initially  partial  responders,  28.9%  became  responder  in  the  efalizumab  2mg/kg/every  other  week group  and  53.2%  in  the  2mg/kg/wk  group  versus  4.3%  in  the  placebo  group.  Of  the  initially  nonresponders only 12.7% became responder at day 84 of the ET period with 4.0 mg/kg/wk. It should be noted that as studies ACD2058g and ACD2062g showed no added benefit for 2 mg/kg/wk in terms of efficacy vs. 1 mg/kg/wk, the latter was proposed as optimal dose for initial and long-term treatment. Follow-up period Study  ACD2058g:  Time  to  relapse  was  determined  during  FU  period  for  individuals  who  were classified  as  responders  at  the  end  of  the  RT  or  ET  period.  The  median  time  to  protocol  defined relapse during the FU ranged from 59 to 73.5 days. Study  ACD2059g:  Time  to  relapse  was  determined  during  FU  period  for  subjects  who  received efalizumab during ET period and were responders or partial responders at ET day 84. The median time was in all efalizumab groups 84 days (95% CI 77-85). Study ACD2600g METHODS ACD2600g  was  a  Phase  IIIb,  Randomized,  Double-Blind,  Parallel-Group,  Placebo-Controlled, Multicenter Study to Evaluate the Safety of 1.0 mg/kg Subcutaneously Administered Efalizumab in Adults with Moderate to Severe Plaque Psoriasis Who Are Candidates for Systemic Therapy. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of a 12-week course of 1.0 mg/kg subcutaneous (SC) efalizumab relative to placebo. The secondary objectives of this study were to evaluate the efficacy of a 12-week course of 1.0 mg/kg SC efalizumab relative to placebo, as measured  by  the  proportion  of  subjects  who  achieved  a ≥ 75% improvement in  Psoriasis  Area  and Severity  Index  (PASI),  the  Overall  Lesion  Severity  (OLS)  scale,  the  proportion  of  subjects  who achieved a ≥ 50% improvement in PASI, and the Psoriatic Symptom Assessment (PSA). The  study  consisted  of  a  screening  and  a  treatment  period.  All  subjects  started  the  study  in  the screening phase, which extended from Day -28 to Day -1. Eligible subjects continued to the treatment phase  from  Day  0  through  Day  84.  On  Day  0,  subjects  were  randomized  in  a  2:1  ratio  to  receive 12 weeks of 1.0 mg/kg SC efalizumab or placebo (initial conditioning dose of 0.7 mg/kg followed by 11 weekly doses of 1.0 mg/kg efalizumab). Randomization was stratified within each study center by subjects' Day 0 PASI score (&lt;16.0, &gt;16.1) and their prior treatment for psoriasis (naive to systemic treatment vs. prior systemic treatment). At the conclusion of the 12-week treatment period, subjects who completed treatment with study drug (efalizumab or placebo) through Day 84 were given the option of receiving efalizumab in the openlabel extension, Study ACD2601g. Subjects who discontinued early from this study transferred into Study ACD2601g for 12 weeks of follow-up observation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

## Study Participants

Adults with plaque psoriasis covering ≥ 10% of body surface area (BSA) and a PASI score of ≥ 12.0 at screening  who  were  candidates  for  systemic  psoriasis  therapy  were  randomized  into  the  study.  A subject  was  considered  a  candidate  for  systemic  therapy  if  assessed  by  a    clinician  as  requiring systemic  therapy  (e.g.,  psoralen  with  ultraviolet  light    [PUVA],  cyclosporine,  corticosteroids, methotrexate, oral retinoids, mycophenolate mofetil, thioguanine, hydroxyurea, sirolimus, azathioprine,    6-MP,  etanercept)  to  control  psoriasis,  whether  or  not  that  subject  had  a    history  of receiving systemic therapy.

| Percent Improvement from Baseline at Day 84                                                        | Placebo (n=236)   | Efalizumab (n=450)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 0                 | 29 (6.4%)            |
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 7 (3.0%)          | 77 (17.1%)           |
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 26 (11.0%)        | 128 (28.4%)          |
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 40 (16.9%)        | 78 (17.3%)           |
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 74 (31.4%)        | 77 (17.1%)           |
| ≥ 90% ≥ 75% to <90% ≥ 50% to <75% ≥ 25% to <50% ≥ 0% to <25% ≥ -25% to <0% ≥ -50% to < -25% < -50% | 64 (27.1%)        | 24 (5.3%)            |
|                                                                                                    | 11 (4.7%)         | 14 (3.1%)            |
|                                                                                                    | 3 (1.3%)          | 9 (2.0%)             |
| Missing a                                                                                          | 11 (4.7%)         | 14 (3.1%)            |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Criteria for exclusion included: -History of severe allergic or anaphylactic reactions to humanized monoclonal antibodiesHistory of or ongoing infection -HIV -Pregnancy or lactation Sample size The sample size for this study was based primarily on safety considerations. RESULTS Participant flow and Baseline data Overall,  the  two  treatment  groups  were  comparable  with  regard  to  demographic  and  baseline characteristics, except that the proportion of female subjects was higher in the placebo group than in the efalizumab group. The most commonly used prior systemic therapies were methotrexate (28.4%), systemic  retinoids  (13.4%),  other  unspecified  systemic  therapies  (12.8%),  systemic  corticosteroids (10.3%),  and  cyclosporine  (8.7%).  Prior  phototherapy  was  also  common,  including  UVB  (47.5%), systemic PUVA (23.0%), and topical PUVA (4.5%). Compliance: A total of 474 subjects (69.1%) received all 12 doses of study drug. Efficacy outcomes and estimation In adult subjects with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, treatment with 1.0 mg/kg/wk efalizumab for 12 weeks resulted in a statistically significant improvement compared with treatment with placebo in  measures  of  efficacy,  as  defined  by  the  principal  secondary  efficacy  endpoint  (24%  versus  3%; p&lt;0.001 vs. placebo). PASI Response by Percent Improvement from Baseline A Subjects who discontinued from the study early and did not complete the Day 84 PASI assessment.

The subgroup analyses were generally consistent with the results for the randomized population as a whole.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PASI Responders by Subsets of Randomized Subjects

| Subject Subset         | Placebo (n=236)   | Efalizumab (n=450)   |
|------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|
| Prior systemic therapy |                   |                      |
| Yes, n                 | 174               | 328                  |
| Responders, n          | 5 (2.9%)          | 81 (24.7%)           |
| 95% CI                 | 0.9%, 6.6%        | 20.1%, 29.7%         |
| No, n                  | 62                | 122                  |
| Responders, n          | 2 (3.2%)          | 25 (20.5%)           |
| 95% CI                 | 0.4%, 11.2%       | 13.7%, 28.7%         |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The  primary  objective  of  the  study  was  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  efalizumab  1  mg/kg given subcutaneously once a week for 12 weeks compared to placebo. Secondary objectives were to evaluate the safety and efficacy of efalizumab during the observation and re-treatment periods.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Statistical significant differences (p&lt;0.001) in favour of efalizumab over placebo were also shown on OLS scale, patient-reported outcomes on the PSA (frequency and severity) and itching components of PSA (frequency and severity). Study  IMP24011 Study IMP24011 is a randomised multicentre phase III study consisting of a 12-week double-blind, placebo-controlled  'first  treatment'  (FT)  period,  an  observation  (OB)  period  and  an  open-label  retreatment  (RT)  period. Efalizumab  was  given  at  1mg/kg  subcutaneously  once  per  week. FT  was followed by up to 24 weeks of observation for responders (patients showing &gt;75% improvement from baseline  in  PASI).  Non-responders,  partial  responders  and  responders  experiencing  relapse  could receive 12 weeks of open-label re-treatment, followed by 8 weeks of follow-up. A Protocol Amendment modified the study in order to prospectively assess the safety and efficacy of efalizumab  in  both  the  total  study  population  of  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  plaque  psoriasis (the 'moderate to severe' population) and the subgroup of 'high need' patients, defined as patients for whom at least 2 currently available systemic therapies were unsuitable because of lack of efficacy, intolerance  or  contraindication.  This  amendment  increased  the  planned  sample  size  and  modified study entry criteria in order to enrol sufficient numbers of 'high need' patients to permit analysis. At  the  end  of  the  observation  period  for  PASI75  responders,  or  if  relapse  or  clinical  need  for re-treatment  is  noted  during  the  observation  period,  patients  would  enter  a  12-week  open-label re-treatment  (RT)  period.  (Relapse  is  defined  as  loss  of  50%  or  more  of  the  improvement  from baseline in PASI score observed at Week 12.) During the RT period, they would receive efalizumab 1 mg/kg subcutaneously once a week. Only results from the first treatment (FT) were available at the time of the CHMP assessment. METHODS Study Participants Patients  with  moderate  to  severe  psoriasis  were  included.  Prior  and  concomitant  therapy  was  as  in study ACD2600g. Objectives

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Outcomes/endpoints

The  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  the  proportion  of  patients  showing  &gt;75%  improvement  from baseline  in  PASI  score  (PASI  75%  response)  after  the  initial  12  weeks  of  treatment.  The  primary efficacy analysis population was the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) population. Secondary endpoints similar to study ACD2600g.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Sample size It was originally planned to enrol at least 330 patients. The above-mentioned amendment increased the planned sample size to at least 690 patients. Randomisation Patients  meeting  the  study's  entry  criteria  were  randomised  in  a  2:1  ratio  to  receive  efalizumab 1  mg/kg  (after  initial  conditioning  dose  of  0.7  mg/kg)  or  placebo  subcutaneously  once  a  week  for 12  weeks  (the  'first  treatment'  or  FT  period).  Randomisation was  stratified  by  Psoriasis  Area  and Severity Index (PASI) score ( &lt;16.0 or &gt;16.1) and previous use of systemic treatment for psoriasis (yes or no) and country. Statistical methods The estimation of power for efficacy assumed a PASI-75 response rate of 20% in efalizumab group versus a placebo response rate of 7.5%. RESULTS The study was still ongoing at the time of the CHMP assessment: the present results include data from all patients up to Study Day 84. Recruitment/Baseline data Trial IMP24011 included 793 patients (264 were randomised to placebo and 529 were randomised to efalizumab). As part of the 793 patients, IMP24011 included a prospectively defined cohort of 526 moderate to severe plaque psoriasis patients who met the definition for unsuitability of existing systemic therapies based on patient's history of therapy (see above-mentioned protocol amendment). These patients had a contraindication or were resistant (i.e. lack of efficacy or not controlled) or intolerant to at least two systemic therapies (such as psoralen-ultraviolet light therapy or PUVA, cyclosporin, corticosteroids, methotrexate,  oral  retinoids,  mycophenolate  mofetil  (MMF),  thioguanine,  hydroxyurea,  sirolimus, azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine or etanercept). The most frequently unusable medications in the define cohort were methotrexate (70.2%) &gt; PUVA (55.9%) &gt; retinoids (48.9%) &gt; cyclosporine (35.7%). Main reason for the drug not to be used being resistance to therapy for methotrexate (45.6%), PUVA (35.9%) and retinoids (31.0%), and, intolerance for cyclosporine (19.2%). Compared to the population of patients included in other psoriasis trials, this group of patients had a more severe disease as judged by the high baseline PASI score (mean: 24.4), psoriasis body surface area  (38.2%),  the  higher  frequency  of  arthritis  associated  to  psoriasis  (24%)  and  the  high  level  of previous use of systemic therapies, with 98.7% of the patients having used 1 or more therapy, 93.0% having used 2 or more and 41.1% having used at least three systemic therapies. Outcomes and estimation Primary Analysis PASI 75% Response at Day 84 in the ITT Population is provided in the table below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Parameter   | Statistics                          | Placebo (N=264)   | Placebo (N=264)   | Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk (N=529)   | Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk (N=529)   |
|-------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| PASI75      | N                                   | 264               |                   | 529                               |                                   |
|             | Responder                           | 11                | (4.2%)            | 166                               | (31.4% )                          |
|             | Partial responder and non-responder | 253               | (95.8% )          | 363                               | (68.6% )                          |
|             | Treatment Effect (OR*) vs Placebo   | 10.51             | 10.51             | 10.51                             | 10.51                             |
|             | 95% Confidence Intervals            | 5.59 -19.79       | 5.59 -19.79       | 5.59 -19.79                       | 5.59 -19.79                       |
|             | P-Value                             | <0.0001           | <0.0001           | <0.0001                           | <0.0001                           |

| Parameter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | no Subjects resistant or intolerant or contraindicated for systemic therapy (n = 526)   | no Subjects resistant or intolerant or contraindicated for systemic therapy (n = 526)   | Other subjects+ (n= 267)                      | Other subjects+ (n= 267)                           |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Placebo                                                                                 | Efalizumab                                                                              | Placebo                                       | Efalizumab                                         |
| product PASI75 PASI50 Mean PASI change from baseline Mean %PASI change from Baseline OLS (minimal or clear)% DLQI mean change from baseline PGA, excellent or cleared (%) Mean %BSAimprovement Mean PSA frequency improvement Mean PSA severity improvement Mean PGPA improvement | 2.7 12.0 2.1 7.6 2.7 2.3 2.7 -0.6 2.1 1.9 0.4                                           | 29.5 52.0 11.8 46.1 21.3 5.4 25.7 12.8 5.8 6.3 2.8                                      | 7.5 20.0 3.5 12.1 5.0 2.5 7.5 2.9 1.9 1.9 0.5 | 34.8 56.7 11.2 52.6 34.8 6.2 29.9 13.4 5.6 6.2 2.7 |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised * Stratified logistic regression was used to estimate the log odds ratio for efalizumab versus placebo for PASI 75% response at 12 weeks. The logistic regression model included the randomisation factors (baseline PASI score, prior treatment for psoriasis and geographic region) as additional covariates. 'High need' status was used as a stratification variable. Primary analysis in high need patients In  the  subgroup  of  'high  need'  patients  (n=  526),  PASI75  was  achieved  by  29.5%  of  the  patients (placebo:  2.7%,  p&lt;0.0001).  Mean  PASI  change  from  baseline  was  11.8  (placebo:  2.1)  and  mean percent change from baseline was 46.1% (placebo: 7.6%, p&lt;0.001). Secondary endpoints Other  main  results  from  IMP24011  at  week  12  of  treatment  are  presented  in  the  table  below, differentiating 'high need' patients and other subjects. +: other subjects are those who did not met the criteria of being resistant or intolerant or having contraindication to at least two systemic therapies

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PASI response to treatment was also analysed by baseline PASI category (see table below).

IMP24011.33. PASI Response to Treatment at Day 84 by Baseline PASI Category: ITT Population - All

| Baseline PASI category   | Statistics                                                              | Placebo (N=264)   | Placebo (N=264)       | Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk (N=529)   | Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk (N=529)   |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| <= 16.0                  | Responder Partial responder and non- responder 95% CI for response rate | 2 68 0.3 %        | (2.9%) (97.1 %) 9.9%  | 45 88 25.9 %                      | (33.8 %) (66.2 %) 42.5%           |
| 16.1 - 30.0              | Responder Partial responder and non- responder 95% CI for response rate | 8 135 2.4 %       | (5.6%) (94.4 %) 10.7% | 88 191 26.1 %                     | (31.5 %) (68.5 %) 37.3%           |
| > 30.0                   | Responder Partial responder and non- responder 95% CI for response rate | 1 50 0.0 %        | (2.0%) (98.0 %) 10.4% | 33 84 20.3 %                      | (28.2 %) (71.8 %) 37.3%           |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised category Statistics (N=264) &lt;= 16.0 Responder 2 Partial responder and nonresponder 68 95% CI for response rate 0.3 % 16.1 - 30.0 Responder 8 Partial responder and nonresponder 135 95% CI for response rate 2.4 % &gt; 30.0 Responder 1 Partial responder and nonresponder 50 95% CI for response rate 0.0 % · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis) In  the  pivotal  clinical  trials,  inclusion  has  not  been  restricted  solely  to  patients  having  received systemic  treatment,  which  makes  the  studied  population  heterogeneous.  Efficacy  results  in  patients who were prior systemic psoriasis therapy naïve versus those patients who were pre-treated with such agents suggested that the response in these groups is similar.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PASI 75 responder by treatment by systemic therapy history, pooled data *

<!-- image -->

| History of systemic Therapy   | Responder (PASI) 75   | Placebo     | Efalizumab 1 mg/kg/wk   | Efalizumab 2 mg/kg/wk   |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| All                           |                       | (N = 715)   | (N=1213)                | (N=409)                 |
|                               | Yes                   | 25 ( 3.5%)  | 320 (26.4%)             | 114 (27.9%)             |
|                               | No                    | 690 (96.5%) | 893 (73.6%)             | 295 (72.1%)             |
| No                            |                       | (N=225)     | (N=353)                 | (N=164)                 |
|                               | Yes                   | 8 ( 3.6%)   | 95 (26.9%)              | 40 (24.4%)              |
|                               | No                    | 217 (96.4%) | 258 (73.1%)             | 124 (75.6%)             |
| Yes                           |                       | (N=490)     | (N=860)                 | (N=245)                 |
|                               | Yes                   | 17 ( 3.5%)  | longer 225 (26.2%)      | 74 (30.2%)              |
|                               | No                    | 473 (96.5%) | 635 (73.8%)             | 171 (69.8%)             |

Medicinal product no longer authorised * Studies ACD2058g, ACD2059g, ACD2390g and ACD2600g. · Supportive studies Study ACD2343g is  an  ongoing  phase  III  open-label  evaluating  12  weeks  of  subcutaneously efalizumab and up to 132 additional weeks of continued therapy. The  long-term  trial  ACD2243g  included  339  subjects  in  a  12-week  induction  treatment  period. Those who achieved at least partial response (PASI50 or more) or OLS of cleared, minimal or mild were allowed to continue therapy for four consecutive periods of 12 weeks each, followed by another series of consecutive 12-week periods for a second year. The trial is still in progress with a third year of treatment being introduced. The latest update of the database accounted more than 200 patients followed for one year, 171 patients treated up to 96 weeks, 158 patients up to 108 weeks (i.e. two years), 140 patients for up to 120 weeks and 75 patients up to 132 weeks. PASI75 response after 12-week induction was achieved in 140/339 (41.3%, ITT analysis) vs. 150/339 after  24  weeks  and  vs  122/339  (36%,  ITT  analysis)  at  the  end  of  the  two-year  period  (EMT4  or 108 weeks) with an overall withdrawal rate of &lt;10%. These results should be interpreted with caution because of the open nature of the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Withdrawal rate and main efficacy and safety results from the long-term trial ACD2243g for up to 108 weeks

Medicinal product no longer authorised FT: first 12-week induction period. MT and EMT: maintenance therapy and extended maintenance therapy 12week periods. Open label study ACD2391g included patients from study ACD2390g that received 12 weeks initial treatment with efalizumab. In ACD2391g, subjects received additionally 12 weeks extended treatment with 1 mg/kg/wk efalizumab. 161/368 patients (43.8%) were responders after 24 weeks compared to 98/369 (26.6%) responders after the first 12 weeks of efalizumab treatment. Among the non-PASI50 responders from the first 12 weeks course on therapy, 18.9% achieved at least PASI 75. Out of the 98 responders of the FT period, 80.6% remained responders in the extended treatment period. Study ACD2062g : Phase III open label trial for subjects who had previously completed a Phase I or II trial, or study ACD2058g, and studied the safety and tolerability of retreatment with efalizumab. · Discussion on clinical efficacy There were concerns regarding the clinical comparability of the Genentech and Xoma products (see clinical  pharmacokinetics  section  and  quality  section).  In  the  pivotal  clinical  study  ACD2059g  (in which both formulations were used) the efficacy results in the Genentech groups appeared to be lower and there was an apparent dose response effect with the Genentech product (9.6% of the Genentech 1 mg/kg/wk group in Study 2059g (n= 52) had a 75% PASI improvement vs. 21.3% of the 2.0 mg/kg /wk treatment group). Altogether, the enriched efficacy and safety data for the Genentech formulation allow a benefit-risk assessment of the to-be-marketed Genentech product but does not allow definitive conclusions as to the clinical comparability of the Xoma and Genentech formulations. In response to the CHMP objections for the indication ' Treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe  plaque  psoriasis  eligible  for  systemic  therapy  or  phototherapy' ,  the  company  provided  new results of the ongoing IMP24011 study and revised the propsed indication as follows: 'Treatment of adult  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  chronic  plaque  psoriasis  eligible  for  systemic  therapy  or phototherapy,  whose  severity  of  disease  justifies  systemic  therapies  and  who  do  not  adequately respond, or have a contraindication, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies'. The  company  has  provided  5  pivotal  Phase  III  clinical  studies  in  patients  with  moderate  to  severe plaque  psoriasis,  with  efalizumab  administered  subcutaneously.  The  latest  trial  (IMP24011)  was ongoing but the 12 weeks treatment primary results have been provided. These studies have evaluated efficacy  of  efalizumab  primarily  as  monotherapy  versus  placebo  and  there  is  no  data  regarding efficacy of efalizumab versus other available systemic therapies.

| Analysis         | FT               | MT1              | MT2              | MT3              | MT4              | EMT1             | EMT2             | EMT3             | EMT4             |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) | Withdrawal (all) |
| n                | 49               | 21               | 22               | 19               | 22               | 8                | 12               | 12               | 13               |
| %                | 14.5             | 7.2              | 8.2              | 7.7              | 9.6              | 4.0              | 6.2              | 6.6              | 7.6              |
| PASI75 n         | 140              | 150              | 157              | 153              | 147              | 135              | 131              | 124              | 122              |
| ITT n            | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              | 339              |
| PASI75 (%)       | 41.3             | 44.2             | 46.3             | 45.1             | 43.4             | 39.8             | 38.6             | 36.6             | 36.0             |
| MT-ITT n         | 339              | 290              | 290              | 290              | 290              | 290              | 290              | 290              | 290              |
| PASI75 (%)       | 41.3             | 51.7             | 54.1             | 52.8             | 50.7             | 46.6             | 45.2             | 42.8             | 42.1             |
| As-Treated n     | 339              | 290              | 269              | 247              | 228              | 202              | 194              | 182              | 170              |
| PASI75 (%)       | 41.3             | 51.7             | 58.4             | 61.9             | 64.5             | 66.8             | 67.5             | 68.1             | 71.8             |

Efalizumab  is  statistically  significantly  superior  to  placebo.  For  PASI  75  the  absolute  difference between the response to efalizumab and placebo is of deltas ranging between 17.7 and 36.5. In the most  recent  data  on  study  IMP24011  for  PASI  75  the  absolute  difference  between  the  response  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised efaluzimab and placebo was approx. 27% in the total population. In the so called 'high need' group (aiming to support the new proposed indication) the results were similar (approx. 27%). The 'high need' group has been defined by the applicant as the group of patients for whom there was unsuitability of existing systemic therapies based on patient's history of therapy i.e. these patients had a  contraindication  or  were  resistant  (lack  of  efficacy  or  not  controlled)  or  intolerant  to  at  least  two systemic therapies. IMP24011 Protocol criteria for patients who are not controlled by, contraindicated to,  or  intolerant  to  two  or  more  systemic  therapies  were  lacking  accuracy;  to  be  judged  from  the patients histories of psoriasis treatments. Nevertheless, patients included under this 'high need' group were shown to have a higher severity of psoriasis compared to other subjects in efalizumab trials and they also had been more pre-treated with existing therapies. As a consequence, the short-term efficacy shown versus placebo in  this  population  is  considered  clinically  relevant.  Nevertheless,  taking  into account  safety  data  and  in  order  to  better  define  the  target  population  for  clinical  practice,  it  was decided to word the therapeutic indication as follows: 'Treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to or who have a contraindication to or are intolerant of other systemic therapies including cyclosporin, methotrexate and PUVA.' Patients who 'failed to respond to' being defined by insufficient response (PASI&lt;50 or PGA less than good), or worsening of the disease while on treatment, and who were adequately dosed for a sufficiently long duration to assess response with at least each of the 3 major systemic therapies as available. Based on data on retreatment period in Study ACD2058g and on extended treatment period in study ACD2059g, attenuation of the response to efalizumab could not be excluded. Nevertheless, in Trial ACD2243g, which allowed continued therapy in  a  cohort  of  patients  who  achieved  at  least  partial response after the first 12-week treatment period, PASI75 response after the first 12-week treatment had been achieved in 41% patients vs. 44% after 24 weeks and 36% at the end of the two-year period, with an overall withdrawal rate of &lt;10%. These results should be interpreted with caution because of the  open  nature  of  the  study.  These  data  come  from  the  broad  population  initially  studied  while efficacy data after 12 weeks was not available in the restricted population yet. In the broad population, a very low response rate was also observed after extended (&gt;12 weeks) treatment of patients who did not respond in the first 12 weeks, in open label trials. As a consequence,  in order to limit the exposure (see clinical safety; lack of long-term safety data, risk of psoriasis exacerbation or recurrence), it was decided that the duration of therapy should be 12 weeks and therapy may be continued only in patients who responded to treatment (PGA good or better). Clinical safety · Patient exposure A  total  of  3,014  subjects  with  moderate-to  severe  psoriasis  have  been  treated  with  efalizumab  at different  doses  during  the  clinical  development  programme  (cut-off  08  October  2003).  A  total  of 1,730 subjects were treated with 1 mg/kg/wk efalizumab manufactured by Genentech and of which 1,395 subjects were treated for at least 12 weeks, 433 subjects were treated for at least 24 weeks, and 125 subjects for at least 84 weeks. A safety update on longer experience with the product especially from trial ACD2243g was later provided and safety results from study IMP24011 became available. · Adverse events Adverse events were experienced by the majority of patients. The most frequent symptomatic adverse drug reactions (ADRs) observed during Raptiva therapy were mild to moderate dose-related acute flulike  symptoms  including  headache,  fever,  chills,  nausea  and  myalgia.  In  large  placebo-controlled clinical studies, these reactions were observed in approximately 41% of Raptiva-treated patients and 24% in placebo-treated patients over 12 weeks of treatment. The table below provides the adverse events that occurred in ≥ 3% of Patients Treated with Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk in the FT Period of the first four pivotal studies (ACD2058g, ACD2059g, ACD2390g, and ACD2600g), distinguishing the efalizumab formulations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Adverse Events that Occurred in ≥ 3% of Patients Treated with Efalizumab 1.0 mg/kg/wk in the FT Period*

| COSTART Body System Preferred Term   | Placebo (n=455)   | Genentech Efalizumab (n=930)   | Placebo (n=260)   | XOMAEfalizumab (n=690)   |
|--------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|
| Body as a whole                      |                   |                                |                   |                          |
| Headache                             | 86 (18.9%)        | 294 (31.6%)                    | 73 (28.1%)        | 248 (35.9%)              |
| Infection                            | 76 (16.7%)        | 134 (14.4%)                    | 34 (13.1%)        | 91 (13.2%)               |
| Chills                               | 19 (4.2%)         | 112 (12.0%)                    | 13 (5.0%)         | 95 (13.8%)               |
| Pain                                 | 20 (4.4%)         | 82 (8.80%)                     | 18 (6.9%)         | 85 (12.3%)               |
| Back pain                            | 8 (1.8%)          | 33 (3.5%)                      | 6 (2.3%)          | 42 (6.1%)                |
| Fever                                | 9 (2.0%)          | 55 (5.9%)                      | 15 (5.8%)         | 71 (10.3%)               |
| Flu syndrome                         | 20 (4.4%)         | 76 (8.2%)                      | 9 (3.5%)          | 26 (3.8%)                |
| Asthenia                             | 16 (3.5%)         | 54 (5.8%)                      | 21 (8.1%)         | 65 (9.4%)                |
| Accidental injury                    | 32 (7.0%)         | 47 (5.1%)                      | 13 (5.0%)         | 48 (7.0%)                |
| Digestive                            |                   |                                |                   |                          |
| Nausea                               | 25 (5.5%)         | 92 (9.9%)                      | 26 (10.0%)        | 92 (13.3%)               |
| Diarrea                              | 28 (6.29%)        | 50 (5.4%)                      | 20 (7.7%)         | 52 (7.5%)                |
| Musculoskeletal                      |                   |                                | longer            |                          |
| Myalgia                              | 22 (4.8%)         | 84 (9.0%)                      | 13 (5.0%)         | 50 (7.2%)                |
| Arthralgia                           | 10 (2.2%)         | 31 (3.3%)                      | 9 (3.5%)          | 35 (5.1%)                |
| Respiratory                          |                   | no                             |                   |                          |
| Pharyngitis                          | 29 (6.4%)         | 72 (7.7%)                      | 18 (6.9%)         | 47 (6.8%)                |
| Rhinitis                             | 26 (5.7%)         | 59 (6.3%)                      | 20 (7.7%)         | 39 (5.7%)                |
| Cough increased                      | 20 (4.42%)        | 40 (4.3%)                      | 11 (4.2%)         | 25 (3.6%)                |
| Sinusitis                            | 28 (6.2%)         | 48 (5.2%)                      | 6 (2.3%)          | 29 (4.2%)                |
| Skin/appendages                      |                   |                                |                   |                          |
| Herpes simplex                       | 10 (2.2%)         | 37 (4.0%)                      | 14 (5.4%)         | 37 (5.4%)                |
| Acne                                 | 3 (0.7%)          | 33 (3.5%)                      | 1 (0.4%)          | 23 (3.3%)                |
| Pruritus                             | 26 (5.7%)         | 59 (6.3%)                      | 14 (5.4%)         | 30 (4.3%)                |

| 'high need'                 | 'high need'               | 'Non-high need'   | 'Non-high need'    |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Placebo N=184               | Efalizumab N=342          | Placebo N=80      | Efalizumab N=187   |
| All AE 112 (60.9,           | 53-68) 253 (74.0, 69-79)  | 45 (56.3, 45-67)  | 130 (69.5, 62-76)  |
| Infections 41 ( 22.3 ,      | 16-29) 88 ( 25.7 , 21-31) | 6 ( 7.5 , 3-16)   | 38 ( 20.3 , 15-27) |
| Arthritis-related 30 (16.3, | 11-22) 66 (19.3, 15-24)   | 6 (7.5, 3-16)     | 21 (11.2, 7-17)    |
| Psoriasis-related 28 (15.2, | 10-21) 44 (12.9, 10-17)   | 8 (10.0, 4-19)    | 15 (8.0, 5-13)     |
| Gastrointest.dis. 18 (9.8,  | 6-15) 60 (17.5, 14-22)    | 6 (7.5, 3-16)     | 18 (9.6, 6-15)     |
| Respiratory dis. 14 (7.6,   | 4-12) 37 (10.8, 8-15)     | 7 (8.8, 4-17)     | 14 (7.5, 4-12)     |

Medicinal product no longer authorised * Data pooled from ACD2058g, ACD2059g, ACD2390g, and ACD2600g The appplicant has also submitted safety data following 12 weeks treatment of 529 patients treated with  efalizumab  and  264  patients  with  placebo  in  study  IMP24011.  The  table  below  summarises adverse events types by treatment and by patient groups (N, %, 95% confidence intervals).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Acute AE                 | 38 (20.7, 15-27)   | 140 (40.9, 36-46)   | 21 (26.3, 17-37)   | 72 (38.5, 31-46)   |
|--------------------------|--------------------|---------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Severe AE                | 17 (9.2, 5-14)     | 36 (10.5, 7-14)     | 2 (2.5, 0-9)       | 19 (10.2, 6-15)    |
| AE leading to withdrawal | 5 (2.7, 1-6)       | 19 (5.6, 3-9)       | 2 (2.5, 0-9)       | 11 (5.9, 3-10)     |
| SAE                      | 7 (3.8, 2-8)       | 20 (5.8, 4-9)       | 2 (2.5%)           | 9 (4.8, 2-9)       |

There  were  transient  increases  in  circulating  lymphocyte  counts,  and  less  often  neutrophil  or eosinophil  counts,  coincident  with  efalizumab  administration  and  resolving  after  discontinuation. Between  40  and  50%  of  patients  developed  sustained  asymptomatic  lymphocytosis  during  Raptiva therapy.  All  values  were  between  2.5  fold  and  3.5  fold  the  ULN  (Upper  Limit  of  Normal). These increases were also observed in nonclinical models and attributed to demargination and release of cells from lymph nodes.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events Serious adverse events were infrequent and there was no consistent pattern to the events suggestive of a relationship to efalizumab. Infections During the first 12-week treatment period, the percentage of subjects with at least one infection-related adverse event was comparable between efalizumab- and placebo-treated subjects (28.6% vs 26.3%). The observed incidence of infections requiring hospitalization among efalizumab subjects  was  1.61 per 100 pt-yr, this incidence was estimated as 1.08 per 100 pt-yr in the placebo group. There was no clear evidence of an increased frequency of cases of herpes virus infections in the efalizumab-treated groups when compared to placebo. No cases of tuberculosis, toxoplasmosis, histoplasmosis or other opportunistic infections have been observed. In the target population studied in study IMP24011, the infection rate in Raptiva-treated patients was approximately 25.7% versus 22.3% in placebo-treated patients. Malignancies Thirty malignancies under efalizumab were observed for 1,780 patient-years of exposure, yielding an incidence  of  1.68  case  per  100  patient-years,  whereas  3  cancers  were  observed  with  placebo  for 185 patient-years of exposure yielding an incidence of 1.62 cases per 100 patient-years. The number of cases of lymphoproliferative disorders reported for efalizumab-treated subjects was consistent with that expected in the psoriasis population. An observed increased frequency of non-melanomatous skin cancers (NMSC) in both efalizumab and placebo groups is likely to be linked to an ascertainment bias. The  number  of  cases  of  solid  malignancies  in  efalizumab-treated  subjects  was  consistent  with  that expected in subjects with psoriasis and in the general US population. Recurrence of psoriasis, erythrodermic and pustular forms of psoriasis Recurrence of psoriasis occurred in 16% of patients after discontinuation of efalizumab and in 13% of patients under placebo. Recurrences were more frequent in patients who were non-responders. Among 3,291 patients having received efalizumab, 29 cases of erythroderma (0.9%) and 10 cases of pustular  psoriasis  (0.3%)  were  observed  during  treatment  or  after  discontinuation  of  treatment  with efalizumab.  Four  cases  of  erythroderma  were  observed  in  979  patients  receiving  placebo  (0.4%). Overall, 22/39 (56%) cases occurred during treatment with efalizumab, whereas 17/39 (44%) occurred after discontinuation. The majority of these cases occurred in nonresponders. Deafness In the pooled results of 12 week clinical trials, the event deafness including audiometric changes was reported  at  a  slightly  higher  rate  in  the  efalizumab  treatment  groups  (1.0%  efalizumab  1mg/kg/wk, 3.7% efalizumab 2mg/kg/wk) compared to placebo group (0.6%). See also 'Discussion on clinical safety' for significant events. · Laboratory findings

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the combined safety database of 3291 Raptiva-treated patients, there were nine occurrences (0.3%) of  thrombocytopenia with less than 52,000 cells per µ l  reported.  Four  of  these  patients  had  clinical signs  of  thrombocytopenia.  Based  on  available  platelet  count  measurements,  the  onset  of  platelet decline was between 8 and 12 weeks after the first dose of Raptiva in 5 patients, but occurred later in the other patients. In one patient, thrombocytopenia occurred 3 weeks after treatment discontinuation. The platelet count nadirs occurred between 12 and 72 weeks after the first dose of Raptiva. Therefore, platelet counts are recommended upon initiating and periodically while receiving Raptiva treatment. The  only abnormalities observed in chemistry parameters were small elevations in alkaline phosphatase  and  SGPT/ALT  values,  which  did  not  lead  to  discontinuation  of  study  treatment. Many of these subjects already had elevated alkaline phosphatase or SGPT/ALT levels at screening or baseline, prior to efalizumab exposure. A risk of hepatotoxicity for efalizumab, even small, might be augmented in alcohol abusers and should be monitored post-marketing.

Eight types of common adverse events were observed to occur more frequently in subjects receiving efalizumab  than  placebo:  headache,  chills,  pain,  nausea,  myalgia,  fever,  arthralgia,  and  peripheral oedema.  Five of these events (chills, pain, fever, myalgia and nausea) were more common during the first  2 weeks of efalizumab therapy.  Deafness is reported at a higher rate in the efalizumab treated groups than in the placebo group. Due to the slightly increased reports of deafness and dizziness in the efalizumab group compared to placebo the risk of these reversible ADEs should be mentioned in the SPC although the mechanism is still unknown.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Anti-efalizumab antibodies. The percentage of patients showing anti-efalizumab positive test at any time was 3.9% (n=98) among the 2,516 patients and the percentage of patients showing anti-efalizumab positivity at any time was 6.3% (n=67) among the 1,063 patients with the additional day 56 test. The present absolute number of patients presenting anti-efalizumab antibodies remained too limited to allow definitive conclusions in terms of the effect on efficacy and safety. · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions There have been no formal drug interaction studies performed with Raptiva. Use  of  concomitant  medications  for  other  disease  such  as  hypertension,  diabetic,  depression, P-pills/sex hormonal therapy were continued during treatment with efalizumab. No specific adverse events were detected. Concomitant topical steroids were used in two studies (n=262). The efficacy and safety of efalizumab did not appear to be modified by the use of topical steroids. Given the mechanism of action of efalizumab, its effects on the immune system may be potentiated by systemic immunosuppressives commonly used for the treatment of psoriasis. Therefore, combination therapies with these products are not recommended. · Discontinuation due to adverse events Discontinuation from study were infrequent. Few subjects discontinued efalizumab for infections (&lt;1%) or injection-related events (&lt;0.5%). · Post marketing experience None was available at the time of the assessment. · Discussion on clinical safety Efalizumab appears to be safe and well tolerated in the provided relatively short-term studies. There is no evidence of lymphocyte depletion or clinically significant toxicity affecting bone marrow, liver, kidney, or other organ systems. There was no appreciable increase in the incidence of serious infections or non-cutaneous malignancies in these short-term studies.

There  are  yet  no  safety  data  past  12-week  treatment  in  the  ongoing  study  IMP24011  especially  in relation to the newly claimed restricted indication.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

There  is  no  comparative  safety  data  derived  from  prospective  comparative  studies  with  efalizumab versus active comparators.

The  long-term  safety  data  are  limited  especially  with  regard  to  the  risk  of  infections,  the  risk  of autoimmune disease, the potential for induction suppression of humoral and cellular immunity, and the risk of malignancies.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The risk of infections, autoimmune reactions and malignancy during efalizumab treatment seems to be low based on the available global safety data. However, the association of efalizumab with increased risk of infection may be of more immediate concern when continuous therapy is sought. The interim results of study IMP 24011 reported a higher incidence of infections and infestations in efalizumab patients (21.0%) than in placebo patients (11.2%), however the incidence of infections in the  placebo  group  'non-high  need'  appears  particulary  low.  Most  reported  events  in  this  category appeared  to  be  minor  infections  and  not  suggestive  of  opportunistic  infections  that  occur  in immunocompromised patients. Also in the new study ACD 2600g two serious infections (pneumonia and  sepsis)  occurred  in  2  efalizumab  treated  subjects  (0.4%);  both  events  led  to  discontinuation  of treatment.  The  applicant  recognised  that  the  risk  of  infections  is  a  potential  issue  and  that  this  risk should be monitored closely and a new contraindication (patients with immunodeficiency) and a new warning regarding the risk of infection were incorporated in the SmPC. Psoriasis  related  adverse  events  was  the  cause  of  discontinuation  of  treatment  in  approximately 0.5% of efalizumab recipients. Among 3,291 patients having received efalizumab, 22/39 (56%) cases of erythoderma or pustular psoriasis occurred during treatment with efalizumab, whereas 17/39 (44%) occurred  after  discontinuation.  The  majority  of  these  cases  occurred  in  non  responders.  In  term  of incidence  of  erythoderma  or  pustular  psoriasis  per  100  patient-years,  there  was  nevertheless,  no difference versus placebo. Nevertheless, the possibility of a rebound mechanism cannot be ruled out. In this framework,  a  study  will be launched  to investigate therapeutic options for subjects discontinuing  efalizumab  and  experiencing  reoccurrence  of  inflammatory  psoriasis.  Furthermore,  a warning under section 4.4 of the SPC was introduced. There were too limited data to exclude the potential for emergence of neutralising HAHA and related complications. The additional data limited data from trial ACD2243g seem to confirm the estimate of the occurrence of antibodies to efalizumab to be approx. 6%.  However, the sensitivity of the assay for neutralising antibodies is limited the applicant should try to develop more sensitive assay in due time in  addition  to  the  intended  post-marketing  monitoring  programme  for  ADEs  in  patients  with antibodies to efalizumab. In  the  controlled  clinical  trials  at  least  one  adverse  event  of  arthritis  was  reported  for  4  (1.8%)  of 219  patients  receiving  placebo,  10  (2.4%)  of  420  patients  receiving  1.0  mg/kg/wk  Genentech efalizumab  and  5  (8.2%)  of  61  patients  receiving  2.0  mg/kg/wk  efalizumab.  Twelve  (0.6%)  of 1953 patients treated with efalizumab sc had a serious adverse event of arthritis, in most patients due to  exacerbation/worsening of psoriasis arthritis. In the interim analysis of study IMP24011, adverse events  of  arthritis  were  observed  slightly  more  often  in  subjects  receiving  efalizumab  than  placebo (10 of 125 subjects or 8.0% in the placebo group versus 28 of 252 subjects or 11.1% in the efalizumab group). Arthralgia, arthritis, back pain and arthrosis were the more common types of arthritis-related reports, occurring in 4.8%, 4.0%, 3.6% and 1.2% of efalizumab treated subjects, respectively. Bursitis, joint  disorder,  tendon  disorder,  bone  pain,  and  neck  pain  were  reported  infrequently  (&lt;1%). Association of efalizumab use with increased risk of arthritis cannot be excluded at this moment and a warning has been included in the SPC. Data  on  the  association  of  efalizumab  use  with  increased  risk  of  actinic  keratitis  and  associated acneiform eruptions are limited and should be monitored in post-marketing monitoring. Based  on  ALT  values,  a  slight  and  transient  liver  dysfunction  can  be  observed  with  efalizumab. A mixed origin, liver and intestinal, appears to be the basis of the increase of alkaline phosphatase. A dose-response relationship is possible for these enzymatic elevations, such that the proposed dose of 1 mg/kg/wk allows maximisation of the benefit risk ratio of efalizumab. A risk of hepatotoxicity for efalizumab, even small, might be augmented in alcohol abusers and should be monitored this issue in post-marketing.

In summary, short-term safety does not raise concerns but considering that efalizumab is a selective immunosuppressive agent with limited safety data and limited non-clinical safety assessment, a Post

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Marketing  Surveillance  Programme  should  be  performed  to  further  assess  the  following  safety concerns:

- -Autoimmune reactions, malignancy and the occurrence of serious opportunistic infections due to impact on immune response,
- -Development  of  anti-efalizumab  antibodies  and  adverse  events  seen  in  patients  with  antiefalizumab-antibodies,

In  a  non-human  primate,  following  treatment  discontinuation,  CD11a  expression  was  increased  to levels above pretreatment. Attention to the risk of a rebound effect should therefore be paid in human. No evidence of carcinogenicity potential was seen in a 6-months study with p53 +/+ wild type mice with an antibody analogue of efalizumab.

Medicinal product no longer authorised -Potential interactions, -Evolution of actinic keratoses, -The risk of hepatotoxicity in alcohol abusers, -Risk of exacerbation of psoriasis or rebound. To this  purpose  the  Company committed to  detect and assess these risks through a Post-Marketing Surveillance Programme, relying on specific pharmacovigilance monitoring and further studies. In addition the Company will evaluate opportunities for better understanding the mechanism of action of efalizumab with a view to optimising the clinical use of the product. 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Benefit/risk assessment Quality In general, the different aspects of the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological documentation comply with existing guidelines. The information provided in the application demonstrated consistent batchto-batch  production  of  Raptiva  achieving  a  defined  quality  for  the  drug  substance  and  the  drug product.  The  fermentation  and  purification  of  the  drug  substance,  Efalizumab,  are  adequately controlled and validated. Appropriate drug substance specifications have been set. The drug substance has  been  well  characterised  with  regard  to  its  physicochemical  and  biological  characteristics  using state-of  the-art  methods.  The  manufacturing  process  of  the  drug  product  has  been  described  and validated in sufficient detail. The quality of the drug product is controlled by adequate test methods and  specifications.  The  viral  safety  and  the  safety  concerning  other  adventitious  agents  (including TSE) have been sufficiently assured. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Efalizumab  is  a  recombinant  humanized  monoclonal  antibody  that  binds  specifically  to  the  CD11a subunit  of  LFA-1.  By  preventing  LFA-1/ICAM  binding,  efalizumab  may  alleviate  signs  and symptoms of psoriasis. Efalizumab  does  not  cross-react  with  CD11a  from  species  other  than  humans  and  a  non-human primate. MuM17, a chimeric rat/mouse anti-mouse CD11a antibody was developed as a surrogate for efalizumab. Nevertheless, conventional non-clinical safety data with the medicinal product are limited and do not allow for a comprehensive safety assessment. Increased counts of white blood cells, increased spleen weight, histological changes in the spleen, and decreased  cellularity  in  lymph  nodes,  resulting  in  altered  trafficking  of  white  blood  cells,  were observed as well as platelet counts decrease. Efalizumab  inhibits  both  the  humoral  response  to  some  antigens  and  the  cell-mediated  response. In  mice  an  inhibition  of  the  delayed  type  hypersensitivity  (DTH)  was  observed.  In  pups  of  mice treated  with  an  antibody  analogue  of  efalizumab,  a  decrease  in  T-cell  dependent  immunity  was observed. Pregnant women should not use Raptiva.

Further  reassurance  of  the  safety  of  efalizumab  should  be  obtained  from  long-term  safety  data  in humans.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy

The  provided  3  original  pivotal  clinical  studies  and  the  newly  submitted  additional  two  large controlled clinical trials (Studies ACD2600g, and IMP24011) have evaluated efficacy of efalizumab primarily as monotherapy versus placebo.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Study IMP24011 prospectively included patients (n=526) who were not controlled by, contraindicated to, or intolerant to two or more systemic therapies as judged from the patients histories of psoriasis treatment. Results showed that this group had a higher severity of psoriasis compared to other subjects in efalizumab trials and included patients for which several of the current therapies were unsuitable. In this  study,  the  absolute  difference  between  the  response  to  efaluzimab  and  placebo  was approximately 27% for the primary endpoint (PASI75) both in the total and the restricted populations. This efficacy data, in line with results of previous studies, indicate modest efficacy (in terms of PASI 75 response rate).  Nevertheless,  it  is  clinically  relevant  in  patients  with  moderate  to  severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to or who have a contraindication to or are intolerant of other  systemic  therapies.  Secondary  endpoints  were  consistent  with  results  of  the  primary  endpoint through all phase III clinical trials. In  an  early  study,  the  median  time  to  relapse  ( ≥ 50% loss of improvement) in patients who initially responded  to  treatment  ( ≥ 75% improvement  on  PASI  after  12  weeks),  ranged  from  59  to  74  days following  the  last  Raptiva  dose.  Therapy  may  be  continued  only  in  those  patients  who  respond adequately to treatment. Re-treatment may be associated with lower or inadequate response to Raptiva than in the earlier treatment periods. Safety The overall exposure was up to 2,500 patient-years. Efalizumab appears to be safe and well tolerated. The most frequent adverse drug reactions observed were mild to moderate dose-related acute flu-like symptoms  including  headache,  fever,  chills,  nausea  and  myalgia.  Leukocytosis  and  lymphocytosis were  also  very  common  but  lymphocyte  returned  to  baseline  after  therapy.  Thrombocytopenia  was uncommon but platelet count monitoring is recommended. The  long-term  safety  data  are  limited  especially  with  regard  to  the  risk  of  infections,  the  risk  of autoimmune disease, the potential for induction suppression of humoral and cellular immunity, and the risk of malignancies. There  are  yet  no  safety  data  past  12-week  treatment  in  the  ongoing  study  IMP24011  especially  in relation to the newly claimed restricted indication. The interim results of study IMP 24011 reported a higher incidence of infections and infestations in efalizumab patients (21.0%) than in placebo patients (11.2%) but were not suggestive of opportunistic infections. Psoriasis  related  adverse  events  (3.2%),  including  erythoderma  or  pustular  psoriasis  were  reported (mainly in non-responders) and the possibility of a rebound mechanism cannot be ruled out. Antibodies to efalizumab occured approximatelly in 6% of patients. There were too limited data to exclude the potential for emergence of neutralising HAHA and related complications. Association  of  efalizumab  use  with  increased  risk  of  arthritis,  actinic  keratitis  and  hepatoxicity  in alcohol abusers could not be excluded. As a consequence, the Company will perform a Post Marketing Surveillance Programme to further assess the safety of efalizumab (see discussion on clinical safety)'. Benefit/risk assessment Taking  into  account  above-mentioned  efficacy  and  safety  data,  the  CHMP  consider  that  the benefit/risk  assessment  of  Raptiva  is  positive  in  the 'Treatment  of  adult  patients  with  moderate  to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to or who have a contraindication to or are intolerant of other systemic therapies including cyclosporin, methotrexate and PUVA.'

Patients who 'failed to respond to' being defined by insufficient response (PASI&lt;50 or PGA less than good),  or  worsening  of  the  disease  while  on  treatment,  and  who  were  adequately  dosed  for  a sufficiently long duration to assess response with at least each of the 3 major systemic therapies as available.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Due  to  the  lack  of  long-term  safety  data  and  the  risk  of  psoriasis  exacerbation  or  recurrence,  the duration of therapy should be 12 weeks and therapy may be continued only in patients who responded to treatment (PGA good or better).

In order to further assess potential risks especially of autoimmune reactions, malignancy, infections, adverse  events  due  anti-efalizumab-antibodies  and  interactions,  the  Company  will  perform  a  Post Marketing Surveillance Programme.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the  benefit/risk  ratio  of  Raptiva  in  the Treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to or who have a contraindication to or are  intolerant  of  other  systemic  therapies  including  cyclosporin,  methotrexate  and  PUVA was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.