---
document_datetime: 2023-11-15 10:11:40
document_pages: 26
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/rebetol-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: rebetol-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.9835081
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-18 10:03:22.832786
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Rebetol. This scientific discussion  has  been  updated  until  5  September  2004.  For  information  on  changes  after 5 September 2004 please refer to module 8B. 1. Introduction The WHO has estimated that more than 170 million persons may be infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) world-wide. At least 85% of infected persons develop chronic infection and about 70 % go on to chronic liver disease. Treatment of chronic HCV hepatic disease has so far relied on interferon alfa. Recent evidence suggests that sustained long term improvement in hepatic histology and function only occur when there has been a reduction in HCV RNA to undetectable levels. This is included in the definition  of  response.  A  six-month  course  of  interferon  alfa  monotherapy  gives  a  response  rate  of 10-15%, while 12-18 months therapy may provide rates of up to 25-30%. This  application  seeks  marketing  authorisation  for  ribavirin,  an  antiviral  agent,  for  the  treatment  of hepatitis C in combination with Interferon alfa-2b. Ribavirin  is  a  synthetic  nucleoside  analogue  with in  vitro antiviral  activity.  While  the  exact mechanism of action of ribavirin against DNA and RNA viruses is unknown, there is a depletion of host  cell  nucleotide  pools,  synthesis  of  abnormal  mRNA,  and  some  suppressive  effect  on  viral polymerase activity. The current clinical applications of ribavirin are limited to inhalation treatment to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) bronchiolitis in infants and young children and for (unlicensed) treatment of some viral haemorrhagic fevers (e.g. Lassa). Initially (7 May 1999), Rebetol, in combination with interferon alfa-2b was indicated: · For  the  treatment  of  adult  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  who  have  previously  responded (with  normalisation  of  ALT  at  the  end  of  treatment)  to  interferon  alpha  therapy  but  who  have subsequently relapsed. · For the treatment of adult patients with histologically proven chronic hepatitis C, not previously treated, without liver decompensation, with elevated ALT, who are positive for serum HCV-RNA and who have fibrosis or high inflammatory activity. Patients with only portal fibrosis (minimal fibrosis) should have a high inflammatory score. The  indication  was  extended  following  the  first  authorisation  of  Rebetol  further  to  the  availability  of preclinical and  clinical data on  the use of ribavirin in  combination  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b. The indication currently approved (9.9. 1999) is therefore the following: Rebetol  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  and  must  only  be  used  as  part  of  a combination regimen with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b. Rebetol monotherapy must not be used. There is no safety or efficacy information on the use of Rebetol with other forms of interferon (i.e., not alfa-2b). Please refer also to the peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) for prescribing information particular to that product. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Naïve patients

Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment of adult patients with chronic hepatitis C, not previously treated, without liver decompensation, with elevated ALT, who are positive for serum HCV-RNA (see section 4.4 ).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Relapse patients

Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment of adult patients with chronic hepatitis C who have previously responded (with normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha monotherapy but who have subsequently relapsed.

<!-- image -->

A comparability report is provided which critically compares the drug substance used for early studies, sourced from Heinrich Mack, with the two intended commercial suppliers (WenZhou and Orgamol). This report shows that ribavirin sourced from Orgamol and WenZhou are equivalent to each other and comparable  or  superior  to  that  previously  provided  by  Heinrich  Mack,  especially  with  respect  to residual solvent levels.

2. Part II: chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Active substance Ribavirin is a synthetic nucleoside analogue. Its molecular weight is 244.21. The chemical name of ribavirin is 1β -D-Ribofuranosyl-1 H -1, 2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide. Ribavirin (INN name) is not a new chemical entity. It is marketed as the active ingredient in inhalation solution products and is the subject of monographs in the USP and BP. The  commercial  drug  substance  for  Rebetol  will  be  sourced  from  two  suppliers,  Orgamol  and Wenzhou. The synthetic processes for the manufacture of the active ingredient are described in their DMFs. The  drug  substance  complies  with  the  BP.  The  batch  analysis  provided  is  satisfactory  and  fully supports the proposed 'in house' specifications, which are considered an improvement as compared to the BP specifications. The  drug  substance  specification  consists  of  description,  identity,  melting  range,  specific  optical rotation, LOD, sulphated ash, heavy metals, impurities (specified and unspecified) assay and residual solvents. The reference standard is that of the British Pharmacopoeia. The drug substance is described as freely soluble in water.  Studies in support of the development of the  dissolution  method  indicate  that  release  of  the  product  from  the  S-P  dosage  form  is  not  pH dependant.  It may be inferred that dissolution of the bulk drug substance reflects this. Two polymorphic forms are possible, a low melting form II and high melting form I. There is sufficient evidence in the dossier that both synthetic routes produce exclusively form II; DSC analysis in the comparison of the three known sources of ribavirin has been provided.  Additionally, the drug substance specification includes melting point limits which preclude formation and release of the higher melting form I. Neither the BP nor USP includes melting point limits. Wenzhou has provided adequate evidence of structure including UV and IR material. The IR spectrum produced  by  Orgamol  for  their  drug  substance  is  concordant  with  the  IR  spectrum  of  ribavirin published in the 1998 BP. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

A  number  of  related  substances  were  studied  as  potential  ribavirin  impurities  arising  from  the synthesis of the active ingredient or formed as degradation products. Each of the named impurities has been fully characterised.

## Manufacture and control

The  listing  of  O-benzoyltribavirin  as  an  impurity  indicates  that  the  BP  monograph  is  based  on  a different route of synthesis - thus it is not considered necessary to control this impurity in the drug substances from the two sources cited in the dossier i.e. Wenzhou and Orgamol.  The synthetic routes are essentially the same.  In both synthetic pathways a catalyst is used.  It is considered that if present this  potential  impurity  will  be  controlled  under  the  current  limit  for  'each  unspecified  impurity =0.1%'. Consideration was given to the possibility of the alfa-anomer forming as a degradation product and this was critically investigated. Stress studies in aqueous acid and base and at elevated temperatures at solid  state  did  not  show  evidence  of  anomerization.  As  a  consequence,  the  specification  for  this synthetic impurity needs only to be given for the drug substance and is not required for the finished product. Other ingredients Ribavirin capsules consist of white opaque preservative-free hard gelatin capsules containing a drugpowder blend, manufactured in a 200 mg strength. A No. 1 size capsule with blue printing is used. The capsule contains, in addition to the drug substance, microcrystalline cellulose as a diluent, spray dried  lactose  monohydrate  as  a  diluent,  croscarmellose  sodium  as  a  disintegrant,  and  magnesium stearate as a lubricant. All of these are compendial excipients. All materials used in the manufacturing of the product are in line with the current CPMP guideline on TSE. Product development and Finished product In  REBETOL,  Ribavirin  is  formulated  as  hard  gelatin  capsules  for  oral  use  in  a  200  mg  strength, packaged in blister strips of PVC/PE/PVdC and aluminium lidding. Pharmaceutical development Ribavirin capsules 200 mg are currently marketed in the US by Schering Corporation. The  initial development  studies were  carried out with a  formulation  manufactured  by  ICN pharmaceuticals. Schering Corporation was granted an exclusive license from ICN and a development programme was initiated to improve the formulation. The  original  clinical  trial  formula  which  was  obtained  from  ICN  Pharmaceuticals  differs  from  the current proposed commercial formula in that lactose monohydrate has been substituted for a portion of the  disintegrant,  croscarmellose  sodium.  Due  to  the  high  percentage  of  drug  substance  in  the  drug product, the re-formulation also involved a processing change to provide consistent fill weight at high speed filling. Reassurance has been provided that drug substance from the different sources has the same physical characteristics and will lead to a consistently robust product. A full comparison of the characteristics of the three sources of drug substance has been provided. GMP inspection status There were no major issues relating to manufacture of the drug product, therefore a product specific inspection has been considered not necessary by the CPMP. It was considered that an inspection of the drug  substance  manufacturing  site  was  not  necessary.  Batch  release  for  all  EU  Member  States  is performed by SP Labo N.V. Belgium. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Suitable  finished  product  specifications  and  stability  indicating  analytical  procedures  have  been developed and validated for release and stability testing of Ribavirin capsules 200 mg. Justification of specifications is included in the dossier. Qualitatively, ribavirin is identified by comparing the HPLC retention  time  and  the  TLC  Rf  values  of  the  sample  versus  those  of  the  Reference  Standard  and  a physical description is also provided. Quantitatively, the HPLC assay, dissolution, moisture content,

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

uniformity  of  mass  and  microbial  quality  specifications  are  acceptable  for  control  of  the  content, purity and release properties of the finished product.

Dissolution  testing  is  performed  using  the  basket  stirring  method  for  agitation  and  the  dissolution medium is water.  The  basket  is  generally  recognised  as  the  preferred  apparatus  for  capsule  dosage forms. The dissolution procedure was validated with respect to selection of the apparatus, agitation rate and medium. The dissolution  medium is not pH controlled  since the  dissolution  rate  of  ribavirin  is  not affected by the pH of the medium. A comparison of the dissolution profiles in dissolution media with and without deaeration demonstrated that deaeration is not necessary. The dissolution method was also validated with regard to precision, ruggedness and accuracy. Studies  have  been  conducted  to  demonstrate  the  reproducibility  of  the  blend  manufacturing  and capsule filling processes. Appropriate in-process storage times both before capsule filling and before final packaging were also evaluated. Initial assay data on stability batches have demonstrated that no manufacturing overcharge is required. Stability Stability  studies  for  Ribavirin  (SCH  18908) Capsules 200 mg were conducted using the recognised ICH  room  temperature  conditions  of  25ºC/60%  RH  and  refrigerated  conditions  of  4ºC/60%  RH. Additional studies were performed at 30ºC/60% RH, this being considered as the ICH intermediate accelerated test condition, at 40ºC/75% RH as the accelerated condition, and at 30ºC/70% RH. Studies were carried out on seven batches of the capsule product in two packaging systems. The shelf life is 2 years. Conclusions on Part II The  drug  substance  is  the  subject  of  a  monograph  in  the  BP.  The  applicant's  test  methods  and specifications  meet  or  exceed  that  required  by  the  BP.  Additional  information  regarding  the  drug substance is provided in the supplier DMFs. The  manufacturing  process  for  the  product,  Ribavirin  Capsules  200  mg,  has  been  adequately developed to ensure consistency between batches and adherence to product specifications. All of the test methods customarily required to support the control of active and inactive ingredients in a finished pharmaceutical  and  for  stability  monitoring  of  the  product  are  thoroughly  validated.  Product specifications  are  based  on  consistency  with  clinical  and  toxicology  samples,  stability  data  and profiles  of  representative  batches,  manufactured  at  the  commercial  site  and  which  support  the recommended two-year shelf life. Therefore,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  data  for  ribavirin  drug  substance  and  Ribavirin  Capsules 200 mg conform to the quality of a well characterised and stable product. 3. Part III: toxico-pharmacological aspects The dossier relies mainly on individual data on ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b. Pharmacodynamics No animal or cell culture models for hepatitis C virus infection exist and it was not possible to test the effect on hepatitis C virus except in human patients. No preclinical studies were, therefore, performed to demonstrate anti-viral pharmacodynamic activity by ribavirin or the combination of ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b on hepatitis C virus. Pharmacokinetics Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  pharmacokinetics  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b  have  been  reasonably  well  characterised individually.

Data  on  interferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin  administered  concomitantly  is  only  available  from  two preclinical  studies.  Both  of  these  studies  were  conducted  in  monkeys  because  interferon  alfa-2b  is biologically  inactive  in  other  laboratory  animal  species.  Serum  neutralising  factors  are  elicited  by interferon alfa-2b in monkeys, and dosing was therefore limited to 1 month's duration.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Drug interactions

<!-- image -->

No formal preclinical animal studies on drug interactions with Rebetol have been performed, except with interferon alfa-2b and antacids. The effects of interferon alfa-2b on the phosphorylation of ribavirin were investigated in HepG2 and human PHA-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear (PBM) cells. Interferon alfa-2b at concentrations  of  10  and  100  IU  ml -¹  had  no  effects  on  the  phosphorylation  of  ribavirin  at  either 1  or  10  micrograms  ml -1 in  both  cell  lines,  with  the  triphosphate  being  the  predominant  metabolite formed. Ribavirin indirectly affects the phosphorylation of a number of other purine and pyrimidine nucleoside analogues in vitro. IMP is the major phosphate donor in the initial phosphorylation of the adenosine analogue  2',  3'-dideoxyinosine  and  the  formation  of  the  monophosphate  is  stimulated  by  ribavirin. This  appears  to  be  due  to  the  increased  intracellular  concentration  of  IMP  that  results  from  the inhibition  of  IMP  dehydrogenase  by  ribavirin.  However,  the  phosphorylation  of  zidovudine  and stavudine  is  inhibited  by  ribavirin.  These  analogues  are  phosphorylated  by  thymidine  kinase,  an enzyme  which  is  not  involved  in  the  phosphorylation  of  ribavirin  but  whose  activity  is  under feed-back control by deoxythymidine triphosphate. Due to this possible interaction in humans, it is recommended that plasma HIV RNA levels be closely monitored in patients treated with Rebetol concurrently with either of these two agents. The interaction can persist up to two months after interruption of Rebetol therapy (five ribavirin halflives). No  interaction  has  been  shown  with  non-nucleoside  reverse-transcriptase  inhibitors  or  protease inhibitors: Rebetol may be co-administered with these. Toxicology Ribavirin  alone  was  evaluated  in  mice,  rats,  dogs,  rabbits,  cats  and  cynomolgus  monkeys  whereas interferon alfa-2b, alone or combination with ribavirin, was tested only in monkeys which is the only species responsive to interferon alfa-2b. Single dose toxicity Ribavirin was tested in the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, renal, and central nervous systems in rats following a single oral dose of 200 mg/kg. No significant changes were found in blood pressure, heart rate, ECG, urinary excretion, gastric motility, behaviour. Repeated dose toxicity Cynomolgus monkeys received an sc injection of 3105 micrograms/m 2 interferon alfa-2b every other day in combination with 50-mg/kg/day ribavirin (3 animals per sex) or 100 mg/kg/day (5 animals per sex)  for  29  days  in  a  study  which  was  in  compliance  with  Good  Laboratory  Practices  (GLP). Additional groups of 3 animals per sex received either 3105 µg/m 2 interferon alfa-2b or 50 mg/kg/day ribavirin, and a control group of 5 animals per sex was given a sc injection of saline every other day and a daily oral dose of saline. There were 2 deaths in the high dose combination group, one male and one female. All animals treated with ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b had decreased food consumption, diarrhoea, dehydration  and  hypothermia.  No  similar  clinical  signs  were  recorded  for  animals  on  'monotreatment',  although  decreased  food  consumption  was  noted  in  animals  treated  with  50-mg/kg/day ribavirin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

It  was  concluded  that  the  administration  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b  in  combination  did  not produce  any  unexpected  toxicity.  The  major  treatment-related  change  was  a  mild  to  moderate anaemia, the severity of which was greater than that produced by either drug alone.

Studies  in  rats,  dogs  and  monkeys  indicated  that  anaemia  occurred  with  doses  as  low  as  10  to 15  mg/kg / day  of  ribavirin.  These  studies  suggested  that  effects  of  ribavirin  on  erythrocytes  are dependent on both dose and duration of dosing and are reversible upon dose reduction or withdrawal, with considerable interspecies difference in sensitivity. Decreased erythrocyte survival at 15  mg/kg/day  and  normal  osmotic  fragility  at  30  mg/kg/day  in  monkeys,  and  reticulo-endothelial

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

system  pigmentation  in  dogs  and  monkeys  at  30  mg/kg/day,  were  considered  to  be  suggestive  of extravascular haemolysis involving erythrophagocytosis in at least these 2 species.

The degree of in vivo susceptibility to erythroid effects appears to mirror the degree of retention of phosphorylated ribavirin in erythrocytes, with monkeys more affected than humans, and humans more affected than rats. In  order  to  assess  the  effects  of  the  combination  ribavirin  plus  peginterferon  alfa-2b,  one-month repeated toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys were performed during the post-authorisation phase. The  duration  of  the  studies  was  limited  to  one  month  due  to  occurrence  of  neutralising  antibodies directed to interferon. The combination did not reveal unexpected new target organs but the effects were more marked with the combination compared to each individual component. Overall, there were changes  in  haematological  parameters  (reduced  numbers  of  erythrocytes,  platelets,  neutrophils  and lymphocytes), lymphoid organs (atrophy) and skin (inflammation, erosion and ulcers). One important aspect  to  consider  is  the  reduction  in  neutrophil  numbers  that  is  linked  to  peginterferon  alfa-2b treatment. This reduction could alter the host resistance to infections and may explain the few cases of mortalities reported. Neutrophil function was, however, not affected. Reproductive and development toxicity Ribavirin has been shown to be embryotoxic and/or teratogenic in conventional studies in all animal species investigated (rat, rabbit) at doses below those used therapeutically. The incidence and severity of the effect increases with the dose. In  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  in  male  mice,  both  testes  and  sperm  were  affected.  Recovery occurred, upon cessation of therapy, within one or two spermatogenic cycles. There  are  non-clinical  (monkey)  and  clinical  indications  that  interferon  alfa-2b  may  impair  female fertility. No studies have been performed using the combination product. Mutagenicity and Carcinogenicity Ribavirin has been shown to have mutagenic potential in a Balb/3T3 cell transformation assay, mouse lymphoma assay, and in a mouse micronucleus assay. One mouse and three rat carcinogenicity studies have been completed with ribavirin. There were no evidence of any carcinogenic potential for ribavirin in the mouse study (dose up to 75 mg kg -1 day -1 ). In the latest, and only GLP compliant, rat carcinogenicity study, the incidence of C-cell adenoma of the thyroid was increased in the high dose (40 mg kg -1 day -1 ) females (20% compared to control value of  11%).  Overall,  the  incidences  of  this  tumour  type  in  both  the  control  and  high  dose  animals exceeded  or  were  at  the  'high  end'  of  the  historical  range  for  the  strain  of  rat  (CD)  used.  It  was concluded that the difference in tumour incidence in high dose females was most likely due to their increased  survival  rate  (38%  compared  to  control  value  of  23%)  than  to  a  carcinogenic  effect  of ribavirin Neither of the 2 earlier non-GLP rat carcinogenicity studies, both of which used higher doses than the later  study,  produced  any  indication  of  a  carcinogenic  effect.  The  exposure  levels  that  could  be reached  were  lower  that  the  expected  human  exposure:  plasma  concentration  approximated  the expected therapeutic level 1x in mice and 0.1x in rat. Conclusion on Part III Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  conclusion,  the  combination  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b  or  peginterferon  alfa-2b  did  not reveal new and unexpected target organs but amplified the effects seen with each compound alone. Target  organs  of  ribavirin  were:  erythrocytes,  lymphoid  system  and  gastrointestinal  tract  in  dogs. Ribavirin accumulates in erythrocytes of non-human primates and humans leading to a very long half life in these species compared to rodents or dogs.

Ribavirin is teratogenic and embryotoxic at doses well below the recommended human dose.

Ribavirin  is  mutagenic  although  the  studies  were  not  conducted  adequately  and  the  mechanism  of action is not known. The carcinogenic potential of ribavirin was evaluated but, due to anaemia, animal

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

exposure could not reach multiple of the human exposure. Therefore, it is not possible to conclude on the potential carcinogenicity risk to humans.

<!-- image -->

Relating to the proposed indication, there is a synergistic effect, whose mechanism is unknown, of the combination  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b  on  the  virologic  sustained  response  and  on  the histologic response in both relapse and naïve patients.

4. Part IV: clinical aspects WHO has estimated that more than 170 millions persons may be infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) world-wide  (more  than  5  millions  in  Europe),  but  acute  icteric  manifestations  are  uncommon  and much infection goes unrecognised. At least 85% of infected persons develop chronic infection: some have a benign and indolent infection, while twenty to thirty percent of these will eventually develop cirrhosis and its complications, haemorrhage, hepatic insufficiency and primary liver cancer. Mortality  associated  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  (CHC)  results  mainly  from  the  development  of  liver fibrosis  and  the  subsequent  occurrence  of  cirrhosis.  Liver  fibrosis  progression  in  CHC  has  been clarified by a recently published study ( T. Poynard, P. Bedossa, P. Opolon et al. Natural history of liver  fibrosis  progression  in  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C.  The  Lancet  1997; 349 :  825-832 ). Without treatment, 377 (33%) patients had an expected median time to cirrhosis of less than 20 years, and 356 (31%) will never progress to cirrhosis or will not progress for at least 50 years. These findings suggest  the  presence  of  at  least  three  populations:  rapid  fibrosers,  intermediate  fibrosers  and  slow fibrosers. HCV is a flavivirus  which  contains  a  positive  sense  RNA  genome.  There  are  six  major  genotypes (1-6),  and  a  number  of  subtypes  of  each  genotype  (a,  b,  c),  some  of  which  show  characteristic geographic distribution of prevalence. Viral load at commencement of therapy and the viral genotype and subtype appear to determine to some extent the response to interferon therapy. Studies of oral ribavirin monotherapy in chronic HCV have shown no discernible effect on circulating HCV RNA levels; any biochemical improvement were not sustained (see also: Pharmacodynamics ). No new clinical data were included in the dossier on ribavirin alone. The data provided concern only the  combination  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b.  Efficacy  and  safety  data  on  the  combination ribavirin/peginterferon alfa 2b were subsequently submitted during the post-authorisation phase. The  clinical  trials  were  conducted  according  to  GCP  standards  and  agreed  international  ethical principles. Pharmacodynamics Ribavirin is a purine analogue with a broad spectrum of antiviral activity. Ribavirin exerts inhibitory but  not  virucidal  activity in  vitro against  almost  all  DNA  and  RNA  viral  families.  To  date,  neither in vitro nor in vivo resistance to ribavirin has been demonstrated. The precise mechanisms by which ribavirin inhibits viral replication have not been fully elucidated. The drug must initially be phosphorylated within infected cells to be effective. For some viruses, the inhibition of IMP dehydrogenase by ribavirin monophosphate results in a depletion of GTP, blocking RNA-primed DNA synthesis. In addition, it has been postulated that ribavirin triphosphate can prevent capping  of  viral  messenger  RNA  as  well  as  inhibit  certain  viral  RNA.  However,  ribavirin  is  not incorporated  into  either  RNA  or  DNA  and  ribavirin  treatment  per  se  does  not  induce  endogenous synthesis of alpha-interferons. Anaemia  was  noted  (Shulman)  after  3-5  days  of  ribavirin  at  different  dosages.  Both  marrow suppression and haemolysis were considered possible mechanisms. Ribavirin monotherapy (Di Bisceglie et al., 1995) had beneficial effects on transaminase levels during therapy  but  these  were  not  sustained  at  18  months,  and  produced  small  improvements  in  liver histology, but did not affect HCV RNA levels. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacokinetics

Ribavirin is absorbed rapidly following oral administration (mean Tmax = 1.5 hours), followed by rapid distribution  and  prolonged  elimination  phases  (single  dose  half-lives  of  absorption,  distribution  and elimination  are  0.05,  3.73  and  79  hours,  respectively).  Absorption  is  extensive  with  approximately

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

10%  of a radiolabelled dose excreted in the faeces. However, absolute bioavailability is approximately  45-65%,  which  appears  to  be  due  to  first  pass  metabolism.    A  high  intra-subject variability (30% change in AUC and Tmax) has been shown, and may be due to first-pass metabolism and sequestration in non-plasma compartments.

Renal impairment: In study C95-156 groups of patients (with CrCl &gt;90 ml/min; 61-90; 31-60; 10-30 and  in  haemodialysis)  were  compared  after  administration  of  a  single  dose  of  ribavirin  400  mg. In the four non-dialysis groups both total and renal clearance decreased with decreasing renal function. Renal clearance strongly correlates with CrCl. The use of ribavirin for patients with CrCl &lt;50 ml/min has  been  contraindicated  and  it  is  recommended  that  combination  therapy  is  discontinued  should serum creatinine increase above 2 mg/dl.

There  is  a  linear  relationship  between  dose  and  AUChr,  following  single  doses  of  200-1200  mg ribavirin.    Ribavirin  does  not  bind  to  plasma  proteins.  The  distribution  volume  of  ribavirin  is  high: the  transport  in  non-plasma  compartments  has  been  mainly  studied  in  red  cells,  and  the  ratio  of distribution of ribavirin among whole blood and plasma is 60:1. Ribavirin has two pathways of metabolism: a reversible prosphorylation pathway and a degradative pathway involving deribosylation and amide hydrolysis to yield a triazole carboxylic acid metabolite. Both ribavirin and its triazole carboxiamide and triazole carboxylic acid metabolites are also excreted renally.  Upon multiple dosing, ribavirin accumulates extensively in plasma with a six-fold ratio of multiple-dose  to  single-dose  AUC12hr.    Following  oral  dosing  with  600  mg  BID,  steady-state  was reached  by  approximately  4  weeks,  with  mean  steady  state  plasma  concentrations  approximately 2200  mg/ml.    Upon  discontinuation  of  dosing,  the  half-life  was  approximately  298  hours,  which probably reflects slow elimination from non-plasma compartments. Bioequivalence  between  the  ICN  and  Schering-Plough  capsules  was  confirmed  by  study  C96-242. This  study  is  critical  to  the  application,  as  early  development  has  been  conducted  with  the  ICN formulation. The kinetics  of  ribavirin  are  altered  by  food  (single-dose  study  C96-398  in  15  healthy  volunteers): administration  in  the  fed  state  significantly  increases  Cmax,  AUC  (both  increase  of  70%)  and  Tmax (mean  =  3.3  hours).  In  the  initial  clinical  trials  in  support  to  this  application,  patients  were  not instructed to take Rebetol with food. The  CPMP  considers  that  it  is  important  that  ribavirin  is  taken  with  food,  in  order  to  ensure  that appropriate absorption occurs at initiation of treatment. The SPC was modified accordingly (section 4.2  Posology  and  method  of  administration).  In  case  of  toxicity,  dose  adjustments  can  be  made according  to  what  is  indicated  in  the  SPC  (section  4.2  Posology  and  method  of  administration). Considering the recommendations in the SPC and the implications of reduced efficacy in the fasted state,  it  was  agreed  not  to  further  investigate  the  effect  of  food  on  ribavirin's  pharmacokinetics. The effect of antacids (study C96-214) is to decrease bioavailability of ribavirin. AUC is decreased by 14% if Rebetol is taken together with antacids. Given the variability of the kinetics of ribavirin, the magnitude of this effect has not been judged to be clinically relevant. As in  vitro studies  have  shown  that  ribavirin  indirectly  affects  the  phosphorylation  of  a  number  of other purine and pyrimidine nucleoside analogues (see: Part III), it is recommended that plasma HIV RNA levels be closely monitored in patients treated with Rebetol concurrently with zidovudine and stavudine.  The  interaction  can  persist  up  to  two  months  after  interruption  of  Rebetol  therapy (five  ribavirin  half-lives).  No  interaction  has  been  shown  with  non-nucleoside  reverse-transcriptase inhibitors or protease inhibitors: Rebetol may be co-administered with these. Special populations: Hepatic impairment. Study C95-155 enrolled 17 patients (out of 23) with liver impairment (5 mild, 5 severe, 7 moderate - Child-Pugh's group A, C, B respectively), which received a single dose of 600 mg  ribavirin.  Cmax  increased  significantly  with  severity  of  hepatic  impairment,  but  no  significant difference  was  found  in  AUC  (tf)  or  renal  clearance.  This  suggests  that  the  major  site  of  first  pass elimination are probably the tissues of the gastrointestinal tract, so hepatic dysfunction has no effect on the kinetics of ribavirin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In addition, the use of ribavirin has been contraindicated for haemodialysis patients.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No kinetic studies have been carried out with Rebetol in children (under the age of 18) and they are excluded from its use. However, the applicant has initiated a study in paediatric patients, and this point will be reviewed when more data are available.

Response was  defined  as  a  composite  endpoint  combining  virological  response  at  week  48  (loss  of detectable  HCV-RNA /qPCR &lt;100 copies/ml) with improvement in the HAI score in the 48  week liver biopsy (Knodell score for sum of categories I+II+III &gt;2)

The use in elderly subjects (&gt; 65 years of age) depends on adequate creatinine clearance. In  summary,  ribavirin  has  a  long  half-life  due  to  intracellular  distribution.  Its  PK  appears  to  be influenced mainly by, food intake (70% variability during a single-dose study), individual variability (30%), and renal impairment. Clinical Efficacy Part A: Combination ribavirin/interferon alfa-2b The efficacy of the combination therapy of ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b was evaluated in: · one phase II study (H095-058, Reichard et al ., Lancet 1998) in naïve patients (n=100), · two  phase  III  studies  (C95-144,  I95-145) in  patients  who  relapsed  after  interferon  treatment (n=153 and n=192). (Part A.1) · two phase III studies (C95-132, I95-143) in patients with chronic HCV not previously treated with interferon (n=912 and n=832), (Part A.2) All  were  double  blind,  placebo-controlled  trials,  comparing  interferon  alfa-2b  (3  MIU  TIW) monotherapy with interferon alfa-2b (3 MIU t.i.w) plus ribavirin 1,000 (for weight &lt;75 kg) or 1,200 (for weight &gt;75 kg) mg/day. Dose reductions were allowed in patients with abnormal laboratory findings, who could continue on treatment if the abnormality was within the cut-off value requiring discontinuation. Ribavirin dose was reduced  for  abnormalities  in  haemoglobin  (&lt;10  g/dl)  and  bilirubin  (&gt;5  mg/dl);  interferon  dose  was reduced in case of decrease of white blood cells (&lt;1.5 10 9 /L),  neutrophil (&lt;0.75 10 9 /L) and platelet (&lt;50 10 9 /l) counts. Part A.1: Studies of ribavirin/interferon alfa-2b in relapse patients The  standard  treatment  period  was  24  weeks,  followed  by  24  weeks  of  untreated  follow-up.  Final assessment was performed at week 48. Regarding baseline characteristics, groups were well balanced with regard to age, gender, ALT, time since last course of interferon (max 2 years), and duration of previous therapy (mostly between 4 and 15 months). Approximately 85% of patients in study C95-144, and 65% in study I95-145 had more than  2  million  copies/ml  of  HCV-RNA  at  baseline.  About  54-60%  (total  194  patients)  patients  per group had HCV genotype 1 infection, while 9-21% (total 60 patients) had genotype 2, 15-31% (total 85  patients)  had  type  3,  and  only  5  patients  in  the  entire  study  had  other  genotypes.  The  baseline biopsies  showed  fibrous  portal  expansion  in  72-82%  of  patients  (total:  315),  bridging  fibrosis  in 52 patients (11-21%), and cirrhotic changes in 9 patients (0-4%). Overall 86% (131/153) and 95% (182/192) patients completed treatment and follow-up (48 weeks) in studies  C95-144  and  I95-145  respectively.  There  was  no  difference  in  discontinuation  rate  in  the treatment arms. Evaluation of the biopsies was performed by the same  single pathologist in both studies. The pathologist was blinded with respect to patient identification, treatment group and time of biopsy (pre- or post-treatment). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Overall  responders  showed  improvement  in  both  parameters.  Patients  with  missing  data  (missing HCV-RNA, biopsy or both) were classified as non-responders.

Relapsers were HCV RNA negative at week 24 but positive at week 48.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The following secondary endpoints were also examined:

- -response rate at week 24 (HCV-RNA qPCR)

-

-

-

- Sustained virological response and high viral load: the combined treatment is associated with sustained  virological  responses  (40-44%  for  interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  against  0-3%  for interferon alfa-2b + placebo) also in patients with a high HCV-RNA level at baseline:

-proportion of patients with normalisation of ALT at week 24 and 48 -proportion of patients with improvement in biopsy (categories I+II+III combined scores) -change from pre-treatment in biopsy scores  (categories I+II+III combined scores) The primary endpoint (overall response) was evaluated at week 48, end of follow-up period, together with the histologic parameters. End of follow-up virological response rate after combined therapy was 48.6% (p &lt;0.0001), compared with the significantly inferior rate of 4.7% for patients who received interferon  alfa-2b  monotherapy.  Sustained  improvement  in  Knodell  score  occurred  in  63%  of combination  patients,  compared  to  41%  of  monotherapy.  The  overall  response  was  37.0%  in  the combination arms, 3.5 % in the monotherapy (p &lt;0.001). Some  secondary  endpoints  were  evaluated  at  end  of  therapy  (week  24).  The  ALT  response  was evaluated as  well at  week 48.  End  of  therapy  virological  response  rates  were  significantly  superior with combined therapy: rates were 81% for combined and 46% for monotherapy. ALT response was 89%  for  combined  and  57%  for  monotherapy  at  week  24;  52%  for  combined  and  15%  for monotherapy at week 48. Each of the two studies independently demonstrated that the addition of ribavirin to interferon alfa-2b resulted in an approximately 10-fold enhancement in efficacy compared to retreatment with interferon alfa-2b alone. Also, response induced by the combined treatment seems to be more stable: of those patients who had a virologic response at the end of treatment, 58% (83/141) in the interferon alfa-2b+ribavirin group compared to 9% (7/80) in the interferon alfa-2b+placebo group maintained the response at the end of follow-up. In  the  clinical  trials,  patients  who  failed  to  show  virological  response  at  week  24,  failed  to  show sustained  response  at  week  48  (one  interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  relapse  patient  had  PCR  = 200 copies/ml and became sustained responder). An analysis of the correlation among endpoints has been made: · Virological response and ALT level: a sustained ALT normal level is highly correlated with the eradication of detectable HCV-RNA at the end of follow-up: the number of patients with normal ALT  /  number  of  sustained  virologic  responders  (%)  is  80/83  (96%)  for  interferon  alfa-2b  + ribavirin; 8/8 (100%) for interferon alfa-2b  + placebo · Virological  response  and  HAI  Knodell  score:  the  decrease  in  hepatic  inflammation  is  highly correlated with the eradication of HCV-RNA whatever the treatment. · Early relapses and genotype: in HCV genotype1, sustained virologic response was obtained in 29% of interferon alfa2b  +  ribavirin  treated  patients  versus  3%  interferon  alfa-2b  +  placebo  treated.  In  other HCV genotypes, a sustained virologic response was obtained in 74% interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin treated patients versus 6% interferon alfa-2b + placebo treated. in the interferon alfa-2b+ribavirin group, relapse between the end of the treatment and the end of the follow-up occurred more frequently in patients infected with HCV genotype 1. logistic regression analysis of sustained virologic response demonstrated that, in addition to treatment group, HCV genotype other than 1 was a significant predictor (p&lt;0.001). Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Predictors of sustained response

Logistic regression analysis of the pooled data using virological response as the endpoint, showed that combined  treatment  (interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin),  HCV  genotype  other  than  1  and  baseline  high

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

viral  load  were  significant  predictors  of  sustained  virological  response  at  6  months  after  the  end  of treatment.

<!-- image -->

|                                       | Interferon alfa-2b + Ribavirin   | Interferon alfa-2b + Placebo   |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Other Genotypes/< 2 million copies/ml | 18 %(3/17)                       | 95 %(19/20)                    |
| Other Genotypes/ > 2 million          | 67 %(36/54) 3 %(2/60)            | copies/ml                      |
| Genotype 1/< 2 million copies/ml      | 44 %(11/25)                      | 13 %(3/24)                     |
| Genotype 1/ > 2 million copies/ml     | 24 %(18/74)                      | 0 (0/71)                       |

-

-

-

Patients  in  I95-143 were  similarly  randomised  with  balancing  for  the  same  factors  as  in  C95-132. The  difference  was  that  the  IFN/placebo  24-weeks  group  was  omitted  in  this  study  since  current recommendations were to give  48  weeks  IFN  in  naive  patients:  832  patients  received  treatment  as follows:

Sustained  Virological  Response  by  Baseline  HCV  Genotype  and  Virus  Level/Combined  results  for relapse patients: A QOL questionnaire was completed by the patients before therapy, during therapy and six months following  the  end  of  therapy.  All  sustained  responders  had  improvement  of  QOL,  whatever  their treatment. Part A:2 Studies of ribavirin/interferon alfa-2b in naïve patients Phase II trial The treatment period was 24 weeks, followed by 24 weeks of untreated follow-up. Final assessment was performed at week 48. In  the  evaluable  population,  sustained  response  was  seen  in  49%  of  combination  and  20%  of interferon alfa-2b mono-therapy patients. At 24 weeks, 68% of combination and 54% of mono therapy had normal ALT, dropping to 46 % and 28 % respectively at 48 weeks. Phase III trials The trials (C95-132 and I95-143) evaluated the safety and efficacy of ribavirin plus interferon alfa-2b in patients with chronic HCV infection who had not previously been treated with IFN. Both trials were multicentre, double-blind and placebo-controlled. Patients were selected according to criteria similar to those employed in the IFN-experienced patient trials  except  that  they  had  no  past  exposure  to  IFN  nor  ribavirin.  Adults  had  to  have  detectable HCV-RNA by the National Genetics Institute (NGI) PCR assay, had a liver biopsy within one year which  showed  changes  consistent  with  chronic  hepatitis,  and  had  elevated  ALT  for  the  past  six months. Patients with decompensated cirrhosis were excluded. Treatment regimens and dose adjustments in patients who developed laboratory abnormalities outside of  the  prescribed  limits  were  as  for  the  previous  studies.  The  major  difference  was  that  these  trials allowed for some patients to be treated for up to 48 weeks. Patients in C95-132 were randomised to one of four treatment groups, which were balanced according to  presence/absence  of  cirrhosis,  pre-treatment  HCV-RNA  level  and  HCV  genotype;  912  patients received treatment as follows: -IFN alfa-2b plus ribavirin for 24 weeks 228 patients IFN alfa-2b plus ribavirin for 48 weeks 228 patients IFN alfa-2b plus placebo for 24 weeks 231 patients IFN alfa-2b plus placebo for 48 weeks 225 patients In this study, fibrosis was graded with Knodell HAI score and METAVIR SCORE. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- IFN alfa-2b plus ribavirin for 24 weeks

277 patients

- IFN alfa-2b plus ribavirin for 48 weeks

277 patients

- IFN alfa-2b plus placebo for 48 weeks

278 patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In this study, fibrosis was graded with Knodell HAI score and METAVIR score.

| Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143)   | Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143)   | Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143)   | Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143)   | Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143)   |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                   | I/R(24)                                           | I/P(24)                                           | I/R(48)                                           | I/P(48)                                           |
| All Genotypes                                     | 42% (118/278) a                                   | 80% (53/66)                                       | 21% (55/260)                                      | 46% (67/147)                                      |
| 1                                                 | 62% (84/136)                                      | 89% (25/28)                                       | 26% (33/127)                                      | 56% (37/66)                                       |
| 2/3                                               | 21% (27/230)                                      | 76% (28/37)                                       | 15% (18/120)                                      | 37% (29/79)                                       |
| 4/5/6                                             | 58% (7/12)                                        | 0/1                                               | 31% (4/13)                                        | 50% (1/2)                                         |

Groups  were  well-balanced  with  regard  to  age,  sex,  ALT  and  source  and  duration  of  infection. There were 58-70% of patients in each group who had more than 2 million copies/ml of HCV-RNA at baseline. Overall, 64-72% had HCV genotype 1 infection, while 11-17% had genotype 2, 10-20% had type 3. From biopsies 4-5% had cirrhotic changes, 15-19% showed bridging fibrosis. (These figures do not take into account the interferon alfa-2b +placebo 24 weeks group, which is not considered in the assessment of efficacy). A 24-week post-therapy follow-up phase then ensued in all treatment groups in both trials. The  primary  efficacy  variable  in  individual  study  analysis  was  sustained  virological  response (undetectable  HCV-RNA  as  measured  by  the  NGI  PCR  assay,  which  has  a  cut-off  limit  of &lt;100 copies/ml) at 24 weeks post-therapy. Secondary  efficacy  endpoints  were:  improvement  in  liver  biopsy  scores  at  the  end  of  follow-up, biochemical response (ALT normalisation at the end of follow-up), combined biochemical/virological response. For the combined results, the primary efficacy endpoint was overall response, a composite endpoint defined as the association of virological and histological responses. In both trials, there were fewer patients who completed 48 weeks therapy compared with 24 weeks therapy; however, the losses were similar for both combined and monotherapy groups and about 70% of patients assigned to 48 weeks actually completed therapy. Almost all the patients who reached the end of treatment were available for the post-therapy follow-up. Combined results of the studies were as follows: · End  of  follow-up  virological  response  rates  after  combination  therapy  were  33%  for  the 24-week treatment group and 41% for the 48-week group, compared with significantly inferior rates  of  6%  and  16%  for  patients  who  received  monotherapy  for  these  respective  treatment periods.  This  shows  borderline  superiority  for  48 vs. 24  weeks  in  each  individual  study (p=0.053 and 0.055), and the low percentage of sustained responders in interferon monotherapy has to be noted. The treatment difference between combination 24-week and 48-week is found to be statistically significant (p=0.008) in the meta-analysis of both individual studies. · End  of  therapy  virological  response  rates  were  also  significantly  superior  with  combined therapy. In the 24-week treatment groups, rates were 55%; after 48 weeks of treatment, rates were 51% Monotherapy rates were 29% (24 weeks and 48 weeks). · Combination therapy with I/R decreased relapse rates compared to I/P. Extending duration with I/R(48)  further  decreased  the  relapse  rate,  making  I/R(48)  significantly  more  effective  than I/R(24) (p=0.008). This was true for all HCV genotypes, particularly type 1 in which relapse rates were reduced to 26% with I/R (48). Consistently higher relapse rates were noted with type 1 than with types 2 or 3. Relapse Rate by HCV Genotype (C95-132, I95-143) a: Patients who had positive or missing HCV-RNA at End of FU ÷ patients who were HCV-RNA negative at the end of treatment. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Sustained virological response rates were markedly lower for genotype 1 HCV infections compared with all non-genotype 1, whatever the treatment or duration. However, combination therapy was still superior to IFN alone against genotype 1.

- A  virological  response  to  therapy  at  4  weeks  strongly  predicted  a  sustained  response; the  likelihood  of  a  sustained  response  decreased  with  increased  duration  of  therapy  before  a

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

finding of undetectable HCV RNA. None of the patients who first became negative after Week 24 became sustained responders.

| Time to First HCV-RNA Negative   | I/R(24)        | I/P(24)     | I/R(48)      | I/P(48)     |
|----------------------------------|----------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| 4 wks                            | 83% (92/111) a | 48% (10/21) | 82% (94/115) | 71% (47/66) |
| 12 wks                           | 44% (66/149)   | 9% (3/32)   | 66% (91/137) | 35% (29/84) |
| 24 wks                           | 19% (8/42)     | 0% (0/22)   | 44% (20/45)  | 15% (6/39)  |
| 36 wks                           | -              | -           | 0 (0/6)      | 0 (0/11)    |
| 48 wks                           | -              | -           | 0 (0/2)      | 0 (0/2)     |

<!-- image -->

Sustained Virologic Response by Time to First Negative HCV-RNA/RT-PCR. a: Number of sustained responders÷number of patients HCV-RNA negative for the first time in the interval. Nevertheless in study C95-132, of the 87 patients in the 48-week combination therapy group who had a sustained virological response, 40 first became negative for HCV-RNA at week 12, and 11 others at week 24 on therapy. Also, 15/29 responders in the 48-week monotherapy group first became negative for HCV RNA after the 4-week visit (11 at 12 weeks and 4 at 24 weeks). Delayed viral clearance was also documented in 35/70 who received 24 weeks of combination therapy and had a sustained virological response at follow-up, including 30 first negative at 12 weeks and 5 at 24 weeks. These  findings  indicate  that  treatment  should  not  be  interrupted  in  non-responders  at  week  12, contrarily  to  what  is  currently  done  under  interferon  monotherapy.  In  such  late  responders  (first negative PCR at week 24), treatment should on the contrary be continued until week 48.  On the other hand,  the  data  suggest  that  it  is  not  worth  continuing  treatment  in  patients  with  still  detectable HCV-RNA at week 24. · Baseline viral loads and HCV genotype influenced the sustained virologic response as follows: Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment) Overall sustained histologic response showed for the 48 weeks therapy group a mean change in Knodell score of -2.6 in the combination groups against -1.0 in monotherapy, improvement in both groups being higher compared with 24 weeks (-1.9 and -0.6 respectively). Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment)   | Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment)   | Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment)   | Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment)   | Sustained Virologic Response to Treatment by HCV Genotype and Virus Levels (Naïve patients 24 weeks after the end of treatment)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                   | Rebetol + interferon alfa-2b 24 weeks product                                                                                     | Interferon alfa-2b 24 weeks                                                                                                       | Rebetol + interferon alfa-2b 48 weeks                                                                                             | Interferon alfa-2b 48 weeks                                                                                                       |
| HCVGenotype 1 and ≤ 2 million copies/ml                                                                                           | 32%                                                                                                                               | 4%                                                                                                                                | 33%                                                                                                                               | 25%                                                                                                                               |
| HCVGenotype 1 and > 2 million copies/ml                                                                                           | 10%                                                                                                                               | 0.9%                                                                                                                              | 27%                                                                                                                               | 3%                                                                                                                                |
| HCVGenotype other than 1 and ≤ 2 million copies/ml                                                                                | 61%                                                                                                                               | 25%                                                                                                                               | 64%                                                                                                                               | 36%                                                                                                                               |
| HCVGenotype other than 1 and > 2 million copies/ml                                                                                | 62%                                                                                                                               | 11%                                                                                                                               | 63%                                                                                                                               | 26%                                                                                                                               |

<!-- image -->

- The majority of the patients had disease for more than 5 years. For those patients, in study C95132, combined therapy was clearly superior to monotherapy, but 48 weeks was not better than 24  weeks  of  combined  treatment.  In  trial  I95-143  response  rates  were  markedly  higher  than those achieved with 24 weeks or monotherapy (61% vs. 39% and 24%).

The  majority  of  patients  included  were  mildly  injured,  with  fibrosis  score  corresponding  to  the  F1 METAVIR quotation. Nevertheless,  due  to  the  high  number  of  patients  included,  the  5%  cirrhosis

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(F4  stage)  and  the  15%  bridging  fibrosis  (F3  stage)  correspond  to  approximately  400  patients (100 patients per arm), which seems enough to enable efficacy evaluation in this subgroup as a whole. For naive patients, it is proposed that only patients with liver fibrosis or high inflammatory activity be treated with the combination (see Section 4.1 of the SPC).

On the  contrary,  recent  reports  (Marcellin  et  al.,  Ann.  Intern.  Med.  1997;127:875-881  /  Lau  et  al., Gastroenterology 1998;114:suppl:A1284) stated that such sustained virologic responses were usually:

Part A : Summary and conclusions on efficacy for ribavirin in combination with interferon alfa2b: Relapse patients The results from the clinical trials showed that the combined treatment is significantly more potent than  interferon  alfa-2b  alone  to  induce  a  sustained  overall  response  in  patients  who  previously responded to interferon alpha and subsequently relapsed. Despite the findings of study C96-398, ribavirin has been given in the trials without regard of food. As mentioned above, the SPC has to reflect the CPMP recommendation to administer ribavirin with food, in order to achieve an optimal therapeutic index. Even if  the  definition  of  overall  response  is  in  accordance  with  the  consensus  recommendations,  a sustained virological response as well as a decrease of Knodell HAI score represent surrogates of the only relevant endpoint, which is the decreased risk of cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The only established predictive factor of cirrhosis is fibrosis. The trials do not show any advantage in term of decreasing fibrosis within the six months after treatment stop. One has to consider that the treated population was moderately severe, with a median Knodell score under 7. Only 3% cirrhosis and 18% bridging fibrosis patients were included. Data on more severe and cirrhosis patients are required. The benefit of adding ribavirin to interferon is particularly significant when the viral load is high. A virologic response at 1 and 3 months is partly predictive of sustained response but does not allow to stop the treatment if it is not reached. The  treatment  duration  evaluated  is  24  weeks.  The  proposed  duration  of  treatment  seems  to  be pertinent in good prognostic patients (genotype non 1/ viral load &lt; 2 million copies/ml). In patients with  poor  prognostic  criteria  (genotype  1/  viral  load  &gt;  2  million  copies/ml)  and  non  responders  at 24 weeks, studies testing a prolongation to 48 weeks of the combined treatment or other schedules are required to establish the optimal treatment duration. Naïve patients Data concerning the naïve patients have shown that interferon alfa-2b/ribavirin combination therapy for either 24 or 48 weeks always provides higher efficacy than interferon monotherapy with regard to virologic, biochemical and histologic endpoints. Both a higher rate of virologic response at the end of combination therapy period associated with a subsequent decrease in relapse rate have been demonstrated. However,  sustained  virologic  response  and  decrease  in  inflammation  scores  are  only  surrogate markers  of  the  clinically  relevant  endpoint,  i.e.  decreased  rate  of  progression  towards  cirrhosis  and hepatocellular carcinoma. On a consensus basis, it is considered that, in the course of natural history of the disease, hepatitis C is not a life-threatening pathology as long as the cirrhosis stage is not reached. To that regard, it is to be noted that the submitted data demonstrated no effect of combination therapy on fibrosis. However, the 6-month follow-up is a rather short time frame to point out an effect on such a slow progressive phenomenon. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- (i) long lasting (5 to 10 years) and
- (ii) associated  with  progressive  improvement  in  histologic  parameters,  including  a  decrease  of fibrosis progression towards cirrhosis

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

These properties will have to be confirmed with a long-term follow-up (5 years) to be undertaken by the applicant.

As for predictors of sustained response, early virologic response is much less predictive of sustained response than expected from interferon monotherapy data: late clearance of HCV-RNA from serum (week  24)  during  bi-therapy  was,  contrarily  to  what  was  observed  during  interferon  monotherapy, frequently associated with sustained virologic response. These  findings  indicate  that  discontinuing  therapy  at  week  12  because  of  persistent  viremia  is  not indicated.  However,  there  was  no  further  benefit  in  continuing  treatment  in  patients  who  failed  to achieve a sustained virologic response at week 24 of therapy. Other identified positive predictors of sustained response were genotypes 2 or 3, low viral loads, low advanced fibrosis stages and age &lt; 40 and are associated with the highest response rates. Several of those factors probably mutually interact. It appears that there is no longer a place for interferon alpha monotherapy in the therapeutic strategy for CHC patients when ribavirin is not contra-indicated. There was a greater benefit of 48-week interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin therapy over 24-week interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin therapy in patients with genotype 1 and high viral load (27% sustained response with  interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  (48)  versus  10%  with  interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  (24))  and  in patients with advanced fibrosis stages. In other subgroups, a 24-week bi-therapy course provided the maximum benefit. The 25% difference, between interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin (48) and interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin (24), in the percentage of sustained virological responses among late responders, when compared to the 8% difference observed in the overall population (41% SR for interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin (48) versus 33%  SR  for  interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  (24),  indicates  that  late  responders  may  also  retrieve  a benefit in receiving a 48-week treatment course in order to achieve a consolidated response. Indeed,  the  population  of  late  responders  probably  overlays  to  a  great  extent  those  above-defined subgroups retrieving a benefit from being administered a 48-week therapy course (i.e. genotype1/high viral load and advanced fibrosis stage). This needs however to be confirmed, and the Applicant should provide data on: · disease characteristics (genotype, viral load and fibrosis stage) of late responders. · the rates of sustained responses among late responders, broken down by genotype, viral load, fibrosis stage and treatment group. Optimum treatment duration has been discussed taking into account all the identified positive response predictors, but it appears that · HCV genotype · viral load · extent of fibrosis, · age · gender should be considered as routine parameters to determine opportunity to prolong treatment to 48 weeks. No  data  are  currently  available  for  patients  previously  non  responders  to  interferon.  Efficacy  of ribavirin  and  interferon  remains  to  be  investigated  in  the  following  cases:  cirrhosis,  severe  renal impairment, CH with extra-hepatic manifestations and HIV co-infected patients. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Part B: Combination ribavirin/peginterferon alfa-2b

Two clinical studies were submitted as part of the variation application to support the extension of the use of ribavirin in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- One dose ranging and pharmacokinetic Phase II study (I96-403)

<!-- image -->

Efficacy  was  evaluated  at  24  weeks  and  also  at  follow-up  (24  weeks  after  the  end  of  treatment). Sustained  response  was  determined  by  the  proportion  of  subjects  that  were  HCV-RNA  negative (loss of detectable serum HCV-RNA/PCR, &lt; 100 copies/ml) 24 weeks after the end of treatment. All other  subjects,  including  those  who  discontinued  before  the  required  serum  HCV-RNA/q  PCR evaluations were obtained, were considered as non- responders.  A subject was classified as a relapser if  the  subject was a responder at the end of treatment and became HCV-RNA positive at follow-up week 24. Secondary endpoints were the normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment and at 24 weeks of follow-up, loss of HCV-RNA at the end of treatment, and improvement and change from baseline in biopsy scores.

· One pivotal confirmatory study (C/I98-580) in patients with chronic HCV not previously treated with interferon (n = 1580) Phase II In  a  dose  ranging,  pharmacokinetic  study  (study  I96-403),  it  was  demonstrated  that  there  is  no pharmacokinetic interaction when peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin are co-administered. There was a peginterferon alfa-2b dose-related effect on viral clearance, and this effect was further enhanced by the addition of ribavirin. Peginterferon alfa-2b at the dose of 1.4 micrograms/kg/week combined with ribavirin (800 mg or 1000-1200 mg/day) had the best efficacy for clearing HCV-RNA from the serum, at weeks 1, 12 and 24, with an acceptable tolerance. Phase III The  efficacy  and  the  safety  of  two  PegIntron/Rebetol  regimens  compared  to  standard  therapy  of IntronA/Rebetol  was  evaluated  in  study  C/I98-580.    This  was  a  large  (n  =  1580  randomised,  1530 treated), randomized (stratified: genotype 1 versus non-1, cirrhosis +/), multicentre, active-controlled, open-labelled, study where patients received one of the following treatments: · I/R : Interferon alfa-2b 3MIU three times weekly + ribavirin 1000/1200 mg (authorised posology) for 48 weeks, N=505 · PEG1.5/R :  Peginterferon  alfa-2b  1.5  microgram/kg  once  weekly  in  combination  with  ribavirin 800 mg daily for 48 weeks. The dose of ribavirin was lower than that originally approved due to safety concerns, N=511 · PEG0.5/R :  Peginterferon  alfa-2b  1.5  microgram/kg  once  weekly  for  4  weeks,  dropping  to 0.5 microgram/kg/week for a further 44 weeks in combination with ribavirin 1000/1200 mg daily, N=514 The  48  week  treatment  phase  was  followed  by  24  weeks  of  untreated  follow-up.    Patients  were instructed to take Rebetol with food. Of the 1580 patients randomised, 1530 were treated (50 patients were not treated mainly due to patient preference). The  patients enrolled  were predominantly  Caucasian  (89%), middle aged males (mean age 44 years). As it is typical with European/American population, the majority were infected with genotype 1 (~ 70%) and had a high viral load pre-study (&gt; 2 million copies/ml). There was a wide  rage  of  subject  weight:  38-181  kg.    Baseline  demographic  and  disease  characteristics  were consistent  across  all  patients  groups.  Approximately  10  %  had  cirrhosis  as  determined  by  local pathologist assessment. All subjects had clinically compensated, but active, liver disease. The baseline liver histology data are summarized in Table 1. Overall 80 % (1230/1530) of patients completed 48 weeks of treatment. Discontinuation of treatment was mainly due to adverse events (14 %, 13 % and 13 % respectively for PEG 1.5/R, PEG 0.5/R and I/R).  All  patients  treated  with  at  least  one  dose  of  study  medication  defined  the  ITT  population. Adverse events and laboratory test results were examined for safety. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In this trial,  the  combination  of PegIntron (1.5 micrograms/kg/week) and ribavirin was significantly more effective and clinically superior to the control arm of interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin ( Table 1 ).

|                           | A PEG 1.5/R (n=511)   | B PEG 0.5/R (n=514)   | C I/R (n=505)   | A vs. C a B vs. C   |
|---------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------|---------------------|
| End of Treatment          | 65%                   | 56%                   | 54%             | p<0.001 b p=0.3707  |
| End of 6 months Follow-Up | 54%                   | 47%                   | 47%             | p=0.0121 c p=0.7261 |

| Table 2                          | Sustained response rates with PegIntron + ribavirin (by ribavirin dose , genotype and viral load) product   | Sustained response rates with PegIntron + ribavirin (by ribavirin dose , genotype and viral load) product   | Sustained response rates with PegIntron + ribavirin (by ribavirin dose , genotype and viral load) product   | Sustained response rates with PegIntron + ribavirin (by ribavirin dose , genotype and viral load) product   |
|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| HCVGenotype                      | Rebetol dose (mg/kg)                                                                                        | P 1.5/R                                                                                                     | P 0.5/R                                                                                                     | I/R                                                                                                         |
| All Genotypes                    | All ≤ 10.6 > 10.6                                                                                           | 54% 50% 61%                                                                                                 | 47% 41% 48%                                                                                                 | 47% 27% 47%                                                                                                 |
| Genotype 1                       | All* ≤ 10.6 > 10.6                                                                                          | 42% 38% 48%                                                                                                 | 34% 25% 34%                                                                                                 | 33% 20% 34%                                                                                                 |
| Genotype 1 ≤ 2 million copies/ml | All ≤ 10.6 > 10.6                                                                                           | 73% 74% 71%                                                                                                 | 51% 25% 52%                                                                                                 | 45% 33% 45%                                                                                                 |
| Genotype 1 > 2 million copies/ml | All ≤ 10.6 > 10.6                                                                                           | 30% 27% 37%                                                                                                 | 27% 25% 27%                                                                                                 | 29% 17% 29%                                                                                                 |
| Genotype 2/3                     | All ≤ 10.6 > 10.6                                                                                           | 82% 79% 88%                                                                                                 | 80% 73% 80%                                                                                                 | 79% 50% 80%                                                                                                 |

Table 1 Virologic Response (% of patients HCV negative six months after cessation of treatment) a: Logistic regression b : 95 % confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c : 95 % confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) A  logistic  regression  analysis  of  the  weight  effect  demonstrated  that  weight-adjusted  dosing  for ribavirin  maximises  the  sustained  virologic  response  rate  ( Table  2 ).  The  sustained  response  rate increased up to 61% with PEG 1.5/R with the optimised ribavirin dose (&gt; 10.6 mg/kg) compared to 47 % with standard I/R therapy. HCV genotype  and  baseline  virus  load  are  important  prognostic  factors  ( Table  2 ).    The  sustained response rate with the optimised regimen was improved to 48 % in the difficult to treat HCV genotype 1 patients and to 88% in patients infected with HCV genotypes 2 &amp; 3; relapse rates were reduced in these sub-populations 17 % and 7 %, respectively. Also regardless of genotype, response rates in this trial  were  increased  if  patients  were  able  to  maintain  compliance.    Regardless  of  genotype,  patients who  received  the  recommended  combination  regimen  and    maintain  compliance  ( ≥ 80 %  of  their treatment  with  Rebetol  and  peginterferon  alfa-2b)  had  a  higher  sustained  response  6  months  after 1 year of treatment than those who took less (72 % vs. 46 %). * 1 vs. non-1: p ≤ 0.03, logistic regression The response rates of patients with genotypes 4/5/6 were 50%, 33% and 38% for the P1.5/R, P0.5R and I/R groups, respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  addition,  almost  all  subjects  who  became  sustained  responders  also  normalised  their  ALT  after completion  of  therapy.  Among  those  few  sustained  responders  who  failed  to  normalise  their  ALT during  follow-up,  the  ALT  was  only  minimally  elevated  (&lt;1.5  ULN)  in  the  majority  of  the peginterferon alfa-2b treated patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Doses recommendation

The data analysis confirmed that the optimal dose of peginterferon alfa-2b is 1.5 micrograms/kg and demonstrated  that  the  optimal  dose  of  ribavirin,  balancing  for  efficacy  and  safety,  for  use  in combination  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  1.5  micrograms/kg  is  13 ± 2  mg/kg  for  all  patients;  this  is particularly effective for those infected with HCV genotype 1.  The following dose recommendation for ribavirin, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b (1.5 micrograms/kg per week) was defined: · Patients with body weight &lt; 65 kg, 800 mg/day · Patients with body weight 65 - 85 kg, 1000 mg/day · Patients with body weight &gt; 85 kg, 1200 mg/day Duration of treatment The rationale for selecting a fixed treatment period of 1 year in this study was the type of patients anticipated to be enrolled (~ 70 % genotype 1/high viral load). The risk of over-treating some patients and inducing undue adverse events could not be excluded. In genotype 1 patients with a high viral load at baseline, it was shown that a treatment for 48 weeks was necessary to establish high sustained response rate. However in genotype 1 patients with a low baseline viral load the optimal duration of combined treatment, as evaluated with interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin, is debated. Therefore  a  6  months  treatment  period  was  agreed,  with  the  automatic  extension  of  this  treatment period to another 6 months in genotype 1 patients with high baseline viral load who exhibit negative HCV RNA after  the  first  6  months.  For  the  other  patients,  the  possibility  to  extend  the  treatment period for another 6 months can be considered. Part B : Summary and conclusions on efficacy for ribavirin in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b: In this trial,  the  combination  of PegIntron (1.5 micrograms/kg/week) and ribavirin was significantly more  effective and clinically superior to the control arm  of interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin. This effect was further enhanced when both peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin are dosed according to body weight. The sustained response rate increased up to 61% with PEG 1.5/R with the optimised ribavirin dose (&gt; 10.6 mg/kg). In the subgroup of patients infected with genotype 1 the response rate was 48% (versus 33% with the regimen I/R) and for genotype2/3 patients was 88% (versus 79% with the regimen I/R) when the ribavirin dose was optimised. The optimal duration of the combined treatment has not yet been fully established in subjects with non type 1 genotype infections or type 1 genotype infections with low baseline viral load. The information provided on the overall population at present indicate that the treatment should be continued at least for 24 weeks and thereafter the patients shall be re-evaluated in order to extend the treatment up to one year . It was considered that a number of prognostic factors would be involved in the clinical decision of  continuing  the  treatment  beyond  24  weeks,  including  the  level  of  bridging  fibrosis,  the  level  of response  in  terms  of  viral  load,  age,  gender,  tolerability  to  the  treatment  of  individual  patients. The Marketing Authorisation Holder has agreed to provide the CPMP with additional information on the clinical benefit of the optimised dosing regimen of the combined treatment for specific subgroups of hepatitis C patients. Clinical Safety The safety database consists of: Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Data from two ribavirin/interferon alfa-2b phase III studies (C95-144, I95-145) in patients who relapsed after interferon treatment (n=153 and n=192). Part A
- Data  from  the  two  ribavirin/interferon  alfa-2b  phase  III  placebo  controlled  studies  in  naïve patients (C95-132 and I95-143; n=912 and n=832), Part A

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Data from one ribavirin/peginterferon alfa-2b phase 3 active controlled study in naïve patients (C/I98-580;  n=1530).    This  data  was  provided  following  the  initial  marketing  authorization. Part B

<!-- image -->

Depression  and  irritability  increased  during  treatment  in  both  treatment  groups.  There  is  a  trend toward a slight increase in the overall incidence of neuro-psychiatric events in the combined treatment arm. When occurring the  depressions  were  more  severe,  with  several  suicide  attempts  and  suicidal ideation, in patients treated with ribavirin. More patients discontinued the treatment or reduced their doses for neuro-psychiatric reasons in the ribavirin treatment groups.

· Postmarketing Assessments, Part C Part A: Ribavirin in combination with Interferon alfa-2b The  pattern  of  adverse  events  reporting  across  the  relapse  and  naïve  populations  were  similar,  and reflect the safety profiles of Interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin administered alone. The most common adverse events reported in both treatment groups and both populations (relapse and naïve) were flu-like symptoms including headache, fatigue, myalgia, fever and rigors. These symptoms typically occurred upon initiation of therapy and decreased with continued treatment. Cough and pharyngitis were reported more frequently in the combination treatment population. Respiratory system disorders (coughing, dyspnoea, and pharyngitis), skin disorders (pruritus, rash, dry skin),  asthenia/fatigue,  anorexia/nausea, and insomnia were  more common in patients who received Ribavirin + interferon alfa-2b than in those who received interferon alfa-2b and placebo. Together with haemolysis, these are the defining toxicities of ribavirin use. Haemolysis is the defining toxicity of the combination therapy and appears to be related to ribavirin. Among patients treated with the combination, 74% experienced a drop in haemoglobin &gt;2g/dl versus 9% with interferon alone. A decrease in haemoglobin levels below 10 g/dl was observed in up to 14% of the patients. Some  degree  of  neutropenia  occurred  in  both  groups,  in  about  half  of  all  patients.  Possibility  of immunosuppression is an aspect that the applicant has to monitor with the follow-up measures. The moderate and mild cardio-vascular events are similar in both treatment groups. Due to  the  possibility  of  cardio-vascular  adverse  events  secondary  to  ribavirin-associated  anaemia, cardiac adverse events were minimised and successfully managed by provisions made in the protocols for  1)  the  exclusion  of  patients  with  a  severe  cardiac  history,  2)  the  requirement  of  a  minimum  Hb level  at  entry,  3)  the  increased  monitoring  of  patients  whose  Hb  levels  decreased,  and  4)  the  strict criteria for dose discontinuation and modification. Few patients discontinued due to anaemia, suggesting that the criteria for management of decrease in haemoglobin  concentration  were  largely  successful.    Close  monitoring  of  patients  with  history  of cardiac disease is required, and the criteria for dose adjustment must be strictly followed. Anaemia/decrease in haemoglobin concentration was the most frequent reason for dose reduction with I/R  (7%-8%)  relative  to  I/P  (0%),  and  occurred  with  similar  incidence  regardless  of  treatment duration. There may be an increase in uric acid levels, due to haemolysis. The potential for development of gout must be carefully monitored in pre-disposed patients. Thyroid function abnormalities (change in TSH values) requiring clinical intervention occurred in 3 % of patients with no previous thyroid disorder. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The proportion of discontinuations due to psychiatric events was higher with I/R(48) (9%) than with the other treatments (2%-4%).

Distribution of depression events over time suggests a linear accumulation over time.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No  psychiatric  AE  was  particularly  notable  for  causing  discontinuation  or  dose  reduction  among patients assigned I/R (24) or I/P (24) ( ≤ 1%). With I/R (48) on the contrary, depression caused more discontinuation  (3%)  or  dose  reduction  (2%)  than  any  other  AE,  also  when  compared  to  I/P(48). Anxiety and suicidal ideation were also more frequent reasons for discontinuation among patients who received I/R (48) when compared to I/R (24) and I/P (48).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

These findings suggest that Rebetol therapy should be contra-indicated in patients with a pre-existing history of severe psychiatric disorders (i.e. severe depression, history of suicidal ideation/attempt). Other  patients  receiving  extended  therapy  with  I/R  should  receive  careful  monitoring  by  the prescribing physician for depression, suicidal thoughts or ideation because of the potentially serious consequences. If symptoms persist or worsen, the patient should discontinue I/R therapy. The data submitted by the applicant not refer to the immunological consequences of the co-administration  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b.  These  data  indicate  that  the  follow-up  of lymphocytes subsets cannot alone ensure the absence of immunosuppressive effects of a co-administration of interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin. Dosage reductions Dosage  reductions  or  interruptions  because  of  adverse  events  occurred  in  12 %  of  patients  in  the interferon-relapse population treated for 24 weeks and 21 % of patients in the interferon-naive population treated with the combination for 48 weeks. Anaemia was the primary reason for dosage reduction. Therapy was discontinued due to adverse events in 6 %  of  patients  in  the  interferon-relapse  population  treated  for  24  weeks  and  20 %  of  patients  in  the interferon-naive population treated for 48 weeks. Severe AE Severe and life-threatening events pooled from the four phase III trials were experienced by 6.6% of relapse patients and 11% of naive. The most common were psychiatric, the category which occurred more frequently comparing I/R (2%) with I/P (1%). There were 6 deaths, 5 in the naive patients and 1 in the relapse patients trials: two myocardial infarctions, two cases of illicit drug overdose, and an intracranial haemorrhage. Of the 6 patients who died, 3 were randomised to combination therapy and 2 of the 3 deaths occurred during the follow-up period (16-20 weeks after dosing completion). Duration of therapy Careful  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  question  whether  extension  of  therapy  duration  to 48 weeks modifies the safety profile when compared to the 24 week regimen. AE were reported more frequently in the 48 week treatment groups. From these, psychiatric events, nausea  and  weight  decrease,  which  are,  in  the  exception  of  insomnia,  classically  associated  with interferon alfa-2b use, appear to be more frequent when ribavirin is added to interferon, as shown by the ∆ I/R (48) versus I/P (48). Extended treatment with I/R (48) resulted in an increase in treatment discontinuations as compared to treatment with interferon monotherapy I/P(48), and 6-month treatment with ribavirin I/R (24) (10% of treatment discontinuations during the first 6 months, another 10% discontinuation during the following 6 months of treatment). Medicinal product no longer authorised

There are three groups of AEs that appear to reflect the impact of extending the duration of treatment of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b:  psychiatric  events  (irritability,  depression,  insomnia,  anxiety), general malaise (infection viral, musculo-skeletal pain etc…) and gastrointestinal disorders.

In  naive  patients,  there  is  an  additional  risk  of  serious  psychiatric  events  associated  with  extended ribavirin therapy when compared to 6-month ribavirin therapy. The proportion of discontinuations due

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

to psychiatric events was higher with I/R (48) (9%) than with the other treatments (2%-4%), mainly due to depression (3%).

<!-- image -->

Regarding the effect of extending therapy duration to 48 weeks, distribution of depression events over time suggests a linear accumulation over time.

Pregnancies Ribavirin is a known teratogen and as such, all patients and their partners have to avoid pregnancy and take the precautions detailed in section 4.6 of the SPC. In the four controlled studies, 12 pregnancies were reported, four in female patients, and eight in partners of male patients. Three of the four patients did not receive ribavirin. The fourth miscarried. Of the eight partners, two miscarried (treatment group remained  blinded),  three  gave  birth  to  healthy  babies  (one  of  the  three  had  received  ribavirin  + interferon), and three outcomes are unknown. Concomitant medications Significant increases in some categories of medications used in the pre-treatment period compared to those used during treatment were noted, especially analgesics/antipyretics, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, and antihistamines. These increases were similar with both interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin and with interferon-2b + placebo. During the post-marketing surveillance phase, two new undesirable effects have been reported in the first  Periodic  Safety  Update  Report  covering  the  period  from  8  May  1999  to  7  November  1999: pancreatitis  and  aggressive  behaviour.  Cases  of  pancreatitis,  some  of  them  possibly  related  to  the combination ribavirin/interferon alfa 2b, and aggressive behaviour have been reported. Although the frequency of these effects is unknown, it was considered acceptable to update the SPC accordingly. Very rarely, cases of aplastic anaemia have also been reported when ribavirin is used in combination with  interferon  alfa-2b.  Further  to  evaluation  of  the  data  presented  in  the  Periodic  Safety  Update Reports, it was agreed to include an adequate statement in the Summary of the Product Characteristics. Summary and conclusions on clinical safety with ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b: Overall,  AE  reporting  was  more  frequent  in  the  naive  population  when  compared  to  the  relapse population. Given that their previous experience and tolerance to interferon had selected the relapse population,  this  difference  is  not  surprising.  No  new  types  of  AE  have  been  reported  in  the  naive population, or in the compassionate studies, as compared to the relapse population. There was a global decrease of treatment tolerance in patients treated with the combination compared with  those  treated  with  interferon  +  placebo,  as  showed  by  the  increase  of  concomitant  emergent drugs, treatment discontinuations and dose reductions due to adverse events. Anaemia and decrease in haemoglobin occurred more frequently with interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin than  with  interferon  alfa-2b  +  placebo.  Severe  anaemias  occurred  preferentially  in  ribavirin  treated patients. Cardio-vascular events were correlated with large haemoglobin drops. Severe and life threatening cardiovascular complications occurred slightly more frequently in patients who received the combined treatment. These adverse events were observed although patients with a severe  cardiac  history  have  been  excluded.  Using  the  strict  dosage  modifications  defined  in  the protocols,  there  were  seldom  discontinuations  due  to  decrease  in  Hb.  The  contribution  of  an  Hb decrease in the other adverse events such as cardio-vascular, respiratory, psychiatric and general ones cannot be excluded. The CPMP requests the applicant to further investigate the mechanism of haemolysis. Neuro-psychiatric  events,  in  particular  depressions  were  more  frequently  observed  in  patients  who received  the  combined  treatment,  in  whom  severe  complications  such  as  suicide  attempts  and overdose of illicit drugs were reported. Medicinal product no longer authorised

On the contrary, dose reductions because of anaemia generally occur during the first two months of treatment and are maintained thereafter, indicating that there is no further risk in extending therapy to 48 weeks with regard to anaemia.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Interestingly,  no  decrease  in  treatment  efficacy  was  shown  when  ribavirin  doses  were  reduced, indicating that the minimum efficient dose remains to be confirmed.

It can be concluded that: 1. The safety profile of ribavirin and interferon combination therapy in naive and relapse patients are close. This implies the need of: · careful management of haemolysis and anaemia, particularly in patients with a history of cardiovascular problems, · careful monitoring of depression and suicidal ideas, also in the follow-up period, 2. extending  therapy  from  24  to  48  weeks  markedly  worsen  the  safety  profile,  not  because  of anaemia, the defining toxicity of ribavirin, but due to increased risk of serious depression and suicide, together with increased risk of weight decrease due to general malaise and gastrointestinal disorders. In  view  of  those  findings,  it  is  recommended  that  the  risk  to  benefit  ratio  should  be  thoroughly evaluated by the prescribing physician: · before initiating ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b combination therapy in naive patients, · before deciding to extend therapy to 48 weeks Part B: Ribavirin in Combination with peginterferon alfa-2b Overall, the adverse events reported with the combination were as expected with interferon alfa-2b and/or  ribavirin.  The  combination  of  peginterferon  alfa-2b  with  ribavirin  had  a  safety  profile comparable to the combination of interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin. The  most  common  adverse  events  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  (fatigue,  fever,  headache, injection  site  reaction,  rigors,  myalgia,  insomnia)  were  also  those  most  frequently  reported  with  I/R. The increase in the incidence of some flu-like symptoms with peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5 micrograms/kg was  not  unexpected  given  the  higher  dose  of  interferon  alfa-2b  being  administered.  The  incidence  of psychiatric adverse events was similar among groups. Few adverse events, such as injection site reaction (58% vs. 36%), fever (46% vs. 33%) and nausea (43% vs. 33%) were more common with PEG 1.5/R than with I/R ( ≥ 10% difference between groups).  However, most of these events were mild to moderate in severity and did not limit treatment. Comparing peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5/R to I/R, the optimised dose of ribavirin  was  associated  with  a  higher  incidence  of  5  adverse  events  for  which  the  incidence  between treatments  was ≥ 10  %:  injection  site  reaction,  weight  decrease,  nausea,  asthenia  and  alopecia. The optimised dose of ribavirin resulted in a greater fall in hemoglobin levels when compared to those subjects not receiving the optimized dose. Neutropenia is interferon dose related and is slightly increased by co-administration of the optimised dose of ribavirin. Serious psychiatric adverse events are uncommon, but are recognised problem with interferon alpha treatment.  During  the  48-week  treatment  period,  adverse  events  broadly  classified  as  'psychiatric' were reported by approximately 75-77% of patients across all groups. The majority of these were mild or  moderate and not significantly psychiatric,  such  as insomnia  (40-41%) and irritability (34-35%). Depression was reported by 29-34% of patients, this compares with ≈ 28% reported in previous trials with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  monotherapy  and  I/R.  The  incidence  of  depression  was  similar  in  all 3 groups and remained relatively constant during the study period (66-68% in the second 24 weeks vs. 71-73%  in  the  first  24  weeks),  demonstrating  there  is  no  increased  risk  of  depression  with  longer treatment duration. There was no difference in the incidence of psychiatric adverse events between the per protocol PEG 1.5/R group and the optimised ribavirin dose group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Dosage Modifications and Discontinuations

The most common reasons for dose modification due to adverse events were anaemia and neutropenia. Dose modification for psychiatric adverse events was low in all groups (4-5 %).

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Discontinuation due to adverse events was similar among all treatment groups (13-14 %). The most frequent  reasons  for  discontinuations  in  all  treatment  groups  were  flu-like  symptoms  (2-3  %)  and psychiatric adverse events (5%).

Severe and life-threatening adverse events The incidence of severe AEs in every body system organ class category was similar with PEG 1.5/R and I/R, with the exception of 'body as a whole' and 'white cell and RES', where severe fatigue and neutropenia were more frequently reported with PEG 1.5/R than with I/R. The frequency of life threatening AEs reported in this study was low (1 %) and was similar between the  treatment  groups.  All  were  successfully  managed  with  treatment  discontinuation.  There  were 13 cases of neutropenia classified as WHO grade 4 (life-threatening), none of which was associated with  infection.  For  the  PEG  1.5/R  group  there  is  no  pattern  to  suggest  that  the  optimised  dose  of ribavirin  resulted  in  more  life-threatening  events.  The  incidence  of  suicidal  attempts  and  suicidal ideation during treatment with the combination ribavirin/peginterferon alfa-2b was low ( ≤ 1.2 %) and similar  in  all  groups.  Specific  reference  to  these  life-threatening  psychiatric  events  observed  during treatment in this clinical study has been added in the SPC. Laboratory values and relationship to infection There  was  a  clear  dose-relationship  in  the  frequency  of  neutropenia  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b. There  was  also  a  dose-effect  in  the  proportion  of  patients  who  had  a  dose  modification  due  to neutropenia (18 % with PEG 1.5/R compared with 10 and 8 % for PEG 0.5/R and I/R).  However, the incidence  of  discontinuation  for  neutropenia  was  low  in  all  groups  (0.2  -1  %).  In  this  study,  only 5 PEG 1.5/R subjects and 2 I/R subjects discontinued because of neutropenia suggesting that the dosemodification  schedule  included  in  the  protocol  provided  adequate  protection.  There  was  a  higher frequency of Grade 3/4 neutropenia when peginterferon alfa-2b was combined with the optimised of ribavirin; however, this was also seen with interferon alfa-2b. Among the subjects who had a Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia, the incidence of infections was similar: 47 % PEG 1.5/R, 39 % PEG 0.5/R; 55 % I/R. A mention on the risk of grade 3/4 neutropenia associated with peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin has been added to the SPC. Nine  subjects  reported  serious  infections.    These  serious  infections  were  neither  associated  with neutropenia  nor  life  threatening.    The  optimised  dose  of  ribavirin  did  not  influence  the  pattern  of infections. Anaemia is a well-recognised effect of ribavirin and the pattern previously observed with ribavirin in combination  with  interferon  alfa-2b  is  seen  in  this  study.  A  decrease  in  haemoglobin  to  less  than 10 g/dl, which mandates dose modification, occurred in approximately 10% of patients; discontinuation was rare (0.2 - 0.8 %).  Guidelines for dose reduction for anaemia are included in the Rebetol SPC. As would be expected, the higher (optimised) dose of ribavirin resulted in a greater number of patients having  a  decrease  in  haemoglobin  to  less  than  10  g/dl,  with  the  need  for  dose  modification. This occurred in approximately 12-14% of patients receiving the &gt;10.6 mg/kg dose of ribavirin. Grade  1-2  thrombocytopenia  was  significantly  higher  with  PEG1.5/R  than  with  I/R,  however,  no significant clinical consequences were observed during the study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

## Part B: Summary and conclusions on clinical safety with ribavirin and peginterferon alfa-2b

With respect to the combination peginterferon alfa-2b + ribavirin, there are no unique adverse events observed in study C/I98-580 that have not already been reported with interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin. With  the  exception  of  injection  site  reactions  and  some  flu-like  symptoms,  the  frequency  of  the common  adverse  events  was  essentially  the  same  with  the  two  combinations.  Furthermore,  the optimisation  of  the  ribavirin  dose  did  not  appear  to  adversely  affect  the  safety  profile.  Anaemia  is

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

ribavirin dose-related and, as would be expected, the higher optimised dose of ribavirin resulted in a greater  fall  in  the  haemoglobin  level  but  this  was  easily  managed  by  dose-modification  of  the ribavirin.  Neutropenia  is  interferon  dose-related,  and  was  increased  by  the  co-administration  of optimised dose of ribavirin.  But, as with anaemia, it was easily managed by dose-modification and did not appear to have clinical sequelae.

<!-- image -->

Part C: Postmarketing Assessment Based on review of the postmarketing database, the following text was recommended and approved for inclusion in the SPC: Combination  NRTI regimen and Ribavirin: Mitochondrial toxicity and lactic acidosis have been reported in HIV-positive patients receiving NRTI regimen and associated- ribavirin for co-HCV infection. 5. Overall Conclusions and benefit/risk assessment It has been  demonstrated  that  the addition of ribavirin to interferon alfa-2b resulted in an approximately  10-fold  enhancement  in  efficacy  in  the  relapse  population  compared  to  re-treatment with interferon alfa-2b alone. The enhancement compared to treatment with interferon alfa-2b alone was 3-fold in the naive population. The efficacy demonstrated with ribavirin in combination with interferon alfa-2b was surpassed when peginterferon alfa-2b was used with ribavirin.  The optimal dose of ribavirin, balancing for efficacy and safety, for use in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5 micrograms/kg is 13 ± 2 mg/kg for all patients. Conclusion A positive benefit/risk ratio has been determined for Rebetol in the following populations: I) Naive  patients  with  the  following  characteristics :  adult  patients  with  histologically  proven chronic  hepatitis  C  without  liver  decompensation,  with  elevated  ALT,  who  are  positive  for serum  HCV-RNA  and  who  have  fibrosis  or  high  inflammatory  activity.  Patients  with  only portal fibrosis (minimal fibrosis) should have a high inflammatory score. II) Relapse patients with the following characteristics: adult patients with chronic hepatitis C who have previously responded (with normalisation of  ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha therapy but who have subsequently relapsed. The optimal treatment duration was not established, however the following was indicated, according to the results of the clinical trials with interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin: I) Relapse patients : a course of treatment of 24 weeks is recommended. II) Naive  patients: it  is  recommended  that  patients  be  treated  for  at  least  24  weeks.  Treatment should be continued for another 24-week period (i.e. a total of 48 weeks) in patients who exhibit negative HCV-RNA at week 24, and with  viral  genotype 1 (as determined in a pre-treatment sample) and high pre-treatment viral load Based on the available data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of ribavirin in combination with interferon alfa-2b for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C was favourable, and recommended the granting of a marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

When  reviewing  the  clinical  data  of  ribavirin  in  combination  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  in  naive patients, which became later available, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of Rebetol was  still  favourable.  Indeed,  it  was  demonstrated  that  peginterferon  alfa-2b/ribavirin  offers  greater efficacy than the current standard of care interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin without the introduction of any new adverse events, although the frequency of a few of the interferon-related events was affected. All the AEs appeared to resolve with dose-modification or discontinuation, without clinical sequelae.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further  refinement  of  the  data  analyses  demonstrated  also  that  weight  adjusted  dosing  for  both peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin maximises the sustained virological response rate. It was concluded that the PEG 1.5/R regimen is adopted for all patients, but with the ribavirin dose modified to take account of the impact of body weight. The peginterferon alfa-2b regimen is already weight adjusted. The ribavirin dose of 13 ± 2 mg/kg/day is the optimal dose for use in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b  1.5 µ g/kg/week without  compromising  safety.    This  combination  will  provide  an  increased sustained response rate for all patients, particularly those infected with genotype 1. In addition, the optimisation  of  ribavirin  dose  had  an  effect  on  the  frequency  of  only  a  few  of  the  ribavirin-related events.

Hence, the CPMP agreed on the following dosing recommendations: Peginterferon alfa-2b: 1.5 µ g/kg/week Ribavirin 13 ± 2 mg/kg/day as: 800 mg/day for patients weighing &lt; 65 kg 1,000 mg/day for patients weighing 65 to 85 kg 1,200 mg/day for patients weighing &gt; 85 kg The optimal dose recommendations have been reconsidered and agreed upon. As far as the treatment duration  is  concerned,  the  CPMP  agreed  that  it  should  last  for  at  least  six  months.  In  genotype 1 patients with high baseline viral load, treatment should be continued for another six-month period in patients who exhibit negative HCV-RNA after the first six months treatment. For the other patients, the  possibility to extend the treatment period for another 6 months can be considered on individual basis.  The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  has  agreed  to  provide  the  CPMP  with  additional information  on  the  clinical  benefit  of  the  optimised  dosing  regimen  of  the  combined  treatment  for specific subgroups of hepatitis C patients. Therefore on the basis of the available efficacy and safety data available, the CPMP recommended the following indication for Rebetol: 'Rebetol is indicated for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C and must only be used as part of a combination regimen with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b. Rebetol monotherapy must not be used. There is no safety or efficacy information on the use of Rebetol with other forms of interferon (i.e., not alfa-2b). Please  refer  also  to  the  peginterferon  alfa-2b  or  interferon  alfa-2b  Summary  of  Product Characteristics (SPC) for prescribing information particular to that product. Naïve patients Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment  of  adult  patients  with  histologically  proven  chronic  hepatitis  C,  not  previously treated, without liver decompensation, with elevated ALT, who are positive for serum HCVRNA and who have fibrosis or high inflammatory activity. Patients with only portal fibrosis (minimal fibrosis) should have a high inflammatory score. Relapse patients Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment  of  adult  patients  with  chronic  hepatitis  C  who  have  previously  responded  (with normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha monotherapy but who have subsequently relapsed'. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Renewal of the Marketing Authorisation for Rebetol .

Based on the CPMP review of the available information, the CPMP on 22/04/2004 was of the opinion that the quality, the safety and the efficacy of this medicinal product continues to be adequately and sufficiently  demonstrated  and  therefore  considered  by  consensus  that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of Rebetol continues to be favourable for the following indication:

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Rebetol  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  and  must  only  be  used  as  part  of  a combination regimen with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b. Rebetol monotherapy must not be used.

<!-- image -->

There is no safety or efficacy information on the use of Rebetol with other forms of interferon (i.e., not alfa-2b). Please refer also to the peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) for prescribing information particular to that product. Naïve patients Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment of adult patients with chronic hepatitis C, not previously treated, without liver decompensation, with elevated ALT, who are positive for serum HCV-RNA (see section 4.4 ). Relapse patients Rebetol is indicated, in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b or interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment of adult patients with chronic hepatitis C who have previously responded (with normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha monotherapy but who have subsequently relapsed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->