---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:54:23
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/refludan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: refludan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.7051003
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-30 01:19:28.880029
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures which have been finalised before 1 August 2003. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

## I Introduction

Refludan contains Lepirudin ([Leu 1 -Thr 2 ]-63-desulfohirudin) as the active substance. Lepirudin is a hirudin analogue produced in yeast cells transfected with an expression vector containing the hirudin gene.

Refludan is presented as a powder to be reconstituted with water for injection or with isotonic saline for intravenous injection or infusion. It is supplied in one strength with a standardised content of 50 mg lepirudin per vial. The specific activity of lepirudin is approximately 16,000 (Antithrombin Units) ATU  per  mg,  where  one  ATU  is  the  amount  of  hirudin  that  neutralises  one  unit  of  the  WHO preparation of thrombin (89/588). Lepirudin is a specific direct inhibitor of free and clot-bound thrombin and the proposed therapeutic indication is anticoagulation in adult patients with heparin-associated thrombocytopenia (HAT) type II and thromboembolic disease mandating parenteral antithrombotic therapy. HAT type II is a complication of heparin therapy, with a probable incidence of the order of 1% of heparin-treated patients. The disorder is characterised by, sometimes profound, thrombocytopenia and a high propensity for venous and arterial thromboembolic complications occurring during continued heparin treatment. Mortality and amputation rates of 20-30% and 10-20%, respectively, are cited in the  more  recent  literature  reviews.  The  chief  underlying  pathogenic  mechanism  seems  to  be  a formation  of  antibodies  directed  mainly  against  a  complex  of  heparin  and  Platelet  Factor  4.  These antibodies crossreact with low-molecular-weight heparins and frequently also with available heparinoids. Through binding to the platelet Fc receptor and to heparin-like structures in the vascular endothelium, the antibodies induce platelet activation and endothelial damage,  leading to a prothrombotic state. The serious prognosis for patients with HAT type II and the current lack of therapy with established efficacy, support the need for new therapeutic agents for this thromboembolic complication. II Overview of Part II of the dossier: chemical, pharmaceutical, and biological aspects Composition of the medicinal product: Refludan is presented in 50 mg glass vials containing the active substance lepirudin. The excipients are D(-)-Mannitol (Ph Eur, USP), which is a bulking and tonicity agent, and sodium hydroxide (Ph Eur) for pH adjustment. The containers are colourless 2mL glass vials (Ph Eur) closed with grey rubber stoppers (Ph Eur) and sealed with aluminium crimp caps. The stoppers and the crimps are protected by plastic flip-off tabs. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Refludan  is  provided  as  a  lyophilised  powder  which  has  to  be  reconstituted  in  saline  or  water  for injection prior to administration. The package to be marketed does not contain diluent.

## Method of preparation:

Each  batch  of  Refludan  is  produced  from  a  single  batch  of  purified  drug  concentrate  (PDC).  The manufacture of the finished dosage form is performed at ambient temperature and consists of stirring and pH adjustment after the addition of mannitol to the PDC, and sterile filtration.

Adequate  tests  are  utilised  for  in-process  control  during  formulation  of  the  product.  A  test  for bioburden is performed prior to sterile filtration.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Validation of the process

The  procedures  employed  for  sterile  filtration  of  the  final  bulk  solution,  the  lyophilisation  and  the filling of vials are satisfactorily validated. The programs adapted for validation and revalidation of the Manufacturing and Shipment Department are considered acceptable.

## Control of starting materials

## Specifications and routine tests of the active substance

Each production batch of the active substance (PDC) is tested according to the specifications for:

1. identity i.e. RP-HPLC, amino acid composition and peptide mapping .
2. purity

a) clarity, coloration and pH, which are tested according to Ph Eur. b) amount of lepirudin-related proteins c) yeast proteins and d) microbial contamination (Ph Eur.) and bacterial endotoxines (LAL). 3. evaluation of potency; content of lepirudin , activityand the specific activity. All non Ph Eur methods have been satisfactorily validated and the specifications according to which the tests are performed are justified by batch data. Development genetics Hirudin  polypeptide  was  originally  isolated  from  the  leech Hirudin  medicinalis .  The  amino  acid sequence was determined and used as a template in the design of the synthetic lepirudin gene. The synthetic  lepirudin  gene  was  cloned  a  plasmid.  The  lepirudin  expression  vector  is  transfected  into Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain. Standard  techniques  were  applied  for  the  construction  of  the  expression  vector  and  the  cloned sequences  have  been  satisfactorily  verified.  The  integrity  of  the  expression  vector  is  confirmed  by restriction  enzyme  mapping  and  nucleotide  sequence  analysis  at  the  level  of  the  master  and  the working seed. The transfected cells are shown to be genetically stable and no significant change in cell viability,  plasmid  retention  or  lepirudin  yield  could  be  seen  after  5  years  of  storage  over  liquid nitrogen. Moreover, transfected yeast cells show the same phenotypic characteristics as the host strain. Cell Bank System The historic development, preparation and validation of the cell bank system are reported in detail. The consistency of the fermentation process has been shown for a time period which well exceeds the time period used in production. Production . Each fermentation run starts from one cryo-vial of the working cell bank. The fermentation is carried out  in  a  closed  system  and  is  described  briefly  in  four  steps;  preparation  of  the  seed  culture,  prefermentation, fermentation and harvesting of the yeast cells. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Basic purification.

At harvest, yeast cells are separated by filtration. Proteolytic enzymes are inactivated. The filtrate is subsequently  subjected  to  chromatography.  The  eluate  is  concentrated,  acidified  and  desalted  using serial dia- /ultrafiltration steps.

To ensure  an  acceptable  microbial  status,  tests  for  biobuden  are  performed  at  each  step  during  the basic  purification.  Acceptable  alarm  limits  for  these  tests  have  been  established  and  batches  that exceed an alarm limit will be discarded.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Final purification

Upon arrival, the product is further purified by severalchromatographic steps, followed by an ultra/diafiltration step.

Relevant in-process controls are applied throughout the partition process. Raw materials used during the process are specified and found acceptable. Methods used for sanitation/sterilisation of materials and equipment as well as for regeneration of columns are approved.

To minimise the risk for accumulation of related proteins during purification, storage of intermediates may only be performed under refrigerated conditions and for defined time periods. Furthermore, prior to  processing  through  the  final  purification  steps  the  crude  product  is  tested  for  compliance  with intermediate specifications which include a limit for the maximum content of related proteins.

## Characterisation

A wide range of studies of high quality have been presented to confirm the lepirudin structure.  To obtain  evidence  for  the  primary  and  secondary  structure,  the  amino  acid  composition,  amino  acid sequence,  molecular,  peptide  map,  and  the  protein  profiles  in  HPLC  and  HPCE  were  analysed. Localisation  of  disulphide  bonds  were  studied.  By-products  resulting  from  post-translational  events were identified and characterised. The biological, immunological and physico-chemical characterisation of the product was performed using several techniques. The  anticoagulant  activity  of  lepirudin  as  well  as  of  the  different  by-products  was  determined  by analysis of their antithrombin activity. A principal SOP for re-calibration of substandards is currently under preparation and will be submitted as a post licensing commitment. Data provided demonstrate the consistency of production and the purification process. Control test on the finished product The  specifications  and  routine  tests  have  been  provided.  With  regard  to  the  purity,  identity  and potency of the active ingredient basically the same specifications are applied at release as are applied for control of the PDC. The one exception is that, at the end of shelf-life, more relaxed limits for the sum of related proteins are accepted. The higher levels of related proteins have, however, also been identified in batches used in clinical trials. A test and a specification for the maximum content of aggregates is included. In addition, appropriate release tests are performed for control of the formulated product such as clarity of solution, coloration, dissolution time and content of excipients. Stability Studies on the stability of the active ingredient and the finished product were designed to comply with ICH  guidelines.  Full  time  data  from  the  real  time  studies  are  not  yet  available  from  all  batches analysed, but data so far submitted is consistent with a shelf-life for the active ingredient of 18 months at -20° C and for the finished product for 24 month at room temperature. However, data to prove the stability over the entire shelf-life should be submitted on an ongoing basis. Manufacturing plants and Inspection status Medicinal product no longer authorised

During  the  assessment  of  this  dossier  the  applicant  requested  to  add  Roussel  Uclaf,  France  as  an additional site responsible for the fermentation and the basic purification steps of the manufacture of the active substance. The CPMP requested an inspection. This inspection took place in June 1996, the inspection  report  provided  by  the  Agence  de  Medicaments  was  satisfactory  for  the  manufacturing (dated on 24 July 1996).

The final purification and the batch release of Refludan takes place in Behringwerke AG, Germany. The  Manufacturing  Authorisation  was  issued  on  31  July  1995  by  Regierungspräsidium,  Gießen, Germany, and is also satisfactory.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## III Overview of Part III of the dossier: toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

Aspects  of  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  Refludan  have  been  addressed  in  a  large  number  of  animal studies.

## Pharmacodynamics

The effects of lepirudin related to the thrombosis inhibitory action have been clearly demonstrated in several  animal  species,  including  rat  and  rabbit  venous  thrombosis  models.  An inhibitory action  on fibrin formation, and also on platelet function was shown and both are in line with current knowledge on  the  specific  binding  of  hirudin  molecules  to  thrombin.  However,  relatively  high  doses  were required  to  produce  an  appreciable  impact  on  platelet  function.  Several  in  vivo  models  revealed  a preventive action as well as interruption of clot formation, albeit lower dose levels were required to produce the former effect. A much weaker impact on thrombolysis was also shown. Furthermore, the clot inhibitory impact appears to persist longer than for bleeding time prolongation.

In  the  overall  package  of  toxicity  testing,  other  changes  also  occurred:  Weight  increments  in  the thyroid  glands  and  adrenal  glands  in  drug-exposed  animals  were  reported.  Moreover,  drug-exposed monkeys, in all  repeat-dose  trials,  showed  a  tendency  towards  reduced  mean  ovary  weights  and  in some of those trials the testes weights were lower in dosed individuals. On the assumption that some these differences could be connected to treatment, they may have a shared aetiology inasmuch as a disturbed pituitary function may cause such actions. However, the changes observed do not represent significant  differences  in  organ  weight;  the  variations  within  each  dosage  group  were  notable  and especially marked with respect to the testes and thyroid glands. Since rodents lack thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG), which serves as a thyroid hormone buffer, the rat data may not be best appropriate for risk assessment in human patients. Based on an extended assessment procedure the tendency towards ovary  weight  change  in  lepirudin-exposed  monkeys,  remains  as  a  possible  indication  of  (indirect) gonadal action in this species. However, with a view to the severity of the HAT type II syndrome and thromboembolic disease as well as the limited contemplated drug exposure in humans these findings should not compromise drug safety for the proposed indication.

Pharmacokinetics As regards the clearance, an appreciable consistency between the different species subjected to tests of pharmacodynamic action and toxicity of lepirudin, was reported. Renal elimination was predominant. The kidney was identified as the primary site for biotransformation but the enzymatic activity varied between  species.  A  prominent  proportion  of  administered  lepirudin  was  rapidly  distributed  to  the kidneys and the urinary bladder, but some lepirudin-associated activity could also be identified in the liver and lungs. A transient accumulation of considerable amounts in the stomach was also found. In repeat-dose  toxicity  trials,  however,  pathology  examinations  revealed  only  incidental  cases  of haemorrhage in kidneys and stomach and these organs do not appear to be at an exceptionally high risk of treatment-related damage. Toxicology Safety pharmacology No acute clinical signs were reported in investigations on secondary pharmacology conducted in rat, cat, dog, rabbit and monkey. Single- and repeat-dose toxicity trials In  rats,  the  single-dose  and  subchronic  trials  revealed  a  dose-dependent  reaction  (catarrh)  in  the regional  lymph  nodes,  increment  of  spleen  weight  as  well  as  anaemia  and  haemoperitoneum. Moreover, an increased erythropoiesis in bone marrow and spleen was also observed. Some monkeys, subjected  to  short-term  drug  exposure,  developed  uni-  and  bilateral  retinal  haemorrhages.  In  both species, bleedings in various other organs were also reported. With a view to the limited duration of the contemplated human exposure, the most salient findings in animal short-term testing represent the expected outcome from an enhanced pharmacodynamic effect of lepirudin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Antihirudin  antibodies  were  formed  during  repeated  dosing  which  increased  the  systemic  drug exposure (AUC). An apparent lack of appreciable impact on the pharmacodynamic action indicates a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

non-neutralising  character  of  these  antibodies.  The  induction  of  antihirudin  antibodies  by  lepirudin was not associated with any vascular or renal pathology in animals.

The  regional  lymph  nodes  commonly  became  reddened  and  enlarged  upon  exposure  to  the  test substance and quite frequently led to the identification of sinus histiocytosis at this site. This effect was explained by the transport of destroyed erythrocytes to this location. However, lepirudin may also have induced an immunological reaction contributing to, or leading to, hypersensitive reactions.

## Local tolerance

The  test  substance  was  relatively  well  tolerated  locally,  following  intravenous  administration. However, reactions, such as thickened tissue, oedema and yellowish nodules occurred in some dosed animals.  Bleeding  at  the  injection  site,  after  dosing,  was  a  common  event.  Other  routes  of administration (s.c., i.a., p.v.) induced a more severe and increased incidence of untoward effects.

Reproduction toxicity and Embryotoxicity/Teratogenicity studies Low placental transfer of lepirudin was demonstrated. Nevertheless, a developmental study in rabbits showed an embryotoxic action at 30 mg/kg/day. In rats, administered with 30 mg lepirudin/kg (i.v.) in the peri- and postnatal period, the survival of the pups was slightly reduced and the incidence of pups with dilatation of the renal pelvis was increased. The major effect at that dose in rats was an increased maternal  mortality  during  parturition.  The  proposed  SPC  statement  that  Refludan  should  not  be administered to pregnant women or nursing mothers (paragraph 4.6) is appropriate. Genotoxicity and carcinogenicity Comprehensive  testing  showed  no  mutagenic  or  clastogenic  activity  and,  recognising  the  short duration of clinical use, there is no requirement for carcinogenicity data. Impurities The  batches  used  in  the  pivotal  toxicity  testing  have  been  analysed  for  their  impurity  profile.  The amount  present suggests that the higher doses tested for an exaggerated  pharmacodynamic effect/toxicity would have covered any significant effects due to such impurities although more subtle effects would be masked by the toxicity of lepirudin itself. IV Overview of Part IV of the dossier: clinical aspects Clinical Pharmacology A total of 15 pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic studies were performed. The studies involved mostly volunteers,  but  also  special  groups  such  as  the  elderly  and  patients  with  impaired  renal  function. Further pharmacological data were collected in the clinical trials in patients. Pharmacodynamic studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

Phase I trials showed that lepirudin is a fairly selective thrombin inhibitor and that the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is a sensitive indicator of its anticoagulant effect. Maximum effect on the aPTT was observed in the first blood sample collected after bolus i.v. administration (0.17h) and at 2 h after s.c. administration and continuous i.v. infusion. The aPTT remained elevated for at least 2 hrs after the end of the infusion, but returned to normal by 24 hours after the start of the infusion. The aPTT  is  dependent  upon  the  concentration  of  lepirudin.  The  lepirudin  plasma  concentration/aPTT effect relationship is different between healthy volunteers and HAT type II patients; patients exhibit a shallower concentration response curve than do healthy volunteers. However, given that patients have a  lower  total  clearance  of  lepirudin  and  achieve  higher  plasma  levels  for  the  same  dose,  the prolongation of aPTT with respect to dose is similar for healthy volunteers and HAT type II patients.

The initial evaluation of studies in patients with HAT type II gave rise to several questions regarding dose-effect relationships and the usefulness of the aPTT for clinical monitoring. In the responses, the company  presented complementary,  retrospective analyses that characterised the relationships between plasma lepirudin levels and aPTT ratios, and the relationship between aPTT ratio classes and markers of clinical efficacy and safety. These analyses support the proposed dosage regimen in HAT type II and provide acceptable reassurance that the proposed aPTT ratio of 1.5-3 is associated with the best risk/benefit balance in this patient population.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Lepirudin does not affect platelet counts or bleeding time in healthy subjects. Other potential effects on  the  coagulation  system,  as  well  as  any  interactions  with  other  drugs,  have  been  only  sparingly documented. For the specific therapeutic indication of HAT type II, no further investigations in these areas were considered absolutely essential, however.

## Pharmacokinetics studies

The pharmacokinetics of lepirudin following intravenous administration have been well described and were  characterised  in healthy  volunteers, patients  with  renal  impairment,  patients  with  acute myocardial infarction, and, patients with HAT type II.

The  analytical  assays  used  to  quantify  lepirudin  in  plasma  and  urine  are  unspecific  in  that  they quantify  all  active  moieties  (lepirudin  bioassay,  lepirudin  ELISA).  Lepirudin  levels  measured  by ELISA or bioassay correlate well.

Normal  volunteers  were  studied  both  after  intravenous  and  subcutaneous  administration.  The intravenous dosing route is the most relevant to the requested indication and has been studied in three single bolus dose studies at doses from 0.01-0.5 mg/kg, one study using a 6 hour infusion and two multiple  dose  studies  (one  q.d.  and  one  b.i.d.).  Pharmacokinetic  parameters  are  similar  after intravenous and subcutaneous administration. Lepirudin pharmacokinetics are linear over the range of doses studied. Plasma concentrations returned to baseline 5 hours after single doses. Distribution is confined to the extracellular fluid. Elimination is biphasic,  the  terminal  half  life  is  around  1  hour  in  healthy  volunteers  and  is  independent  of  dose. Multiple dosing of 0.1mg/kg every 12 or 24 hours for 5 days did not lead to accumulation. Clearance of lepirudin is predominantly renal and between 35-60% of the dose is recovered in the urine during the first 24 hours. Total clearance is closely related to creatinine clearance. In healthy volunteers mean total clearance is approximately 195±45 ml/min and mean renal clearance ranged between 65 to 115 ml/min. In patients with HAT type II, mean total clearance is lower, of the order of 114±48 ml/min. The kidney is also proposed to be the sight of metabolism of the compound since total clearance is almost zero in patients with extreme renal impairment. In renally impaired but otherwise healthy patients, clearance of lepirudin was decreased and half life was  prolonged  with  increasing  degree  of  renal  impairment.  Dosage  adjustments  for  HAT  type  II patients  were  proposed  on  the  basis  of  these  results  obtained  in  non-cardiovascularly  impaired patients. The single major pharmacokinetic concern during the first assessment of the application was that  dosage  recommendations  for  renal  impairment  derived  from  non-cardiovascularly  impaired patients may not be appropriate for patients with HAT type II. The Applicant addressed this question by submitting a population pharmacokinetic analysis of all the studies in which plasma concentrations for lepirudin were available and which showed, indirectly, that the original dosage recommendations are appropriate Two  studies  were  performed  in  elderly  volunteers,  one  using  the  intravenous  and  one  using  the subcutaneous  route  of  administration.  The  pharmacokinetics  were  altered  similarly  for  both  routes studied, with increased exposure as measured by AUC and a longer half life. On the basis of the data provided, it is likely that the pharmacokinetics are more affected by renal function than by age and, thus,  there  is  no  need  for  a  dose  adjustment  in  elderly  with  normal  renal  function.  Clearance  is moderately reduced in females and again this difference can be attributed to renal function. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The pharmacokinetic questions have been dealt with satisfactorily.

## Clinical Efficacy and Safety

Data  from  four  Phase  II  trials  of  lepirudin  in  other  indications  (acute  myocardial  infarction  with thrombolysis, acute coronary syndromes and deep venous thrombosis) were included in the dossier and provided information regarding the potential general usefulness of lepirudin as an anticoagulant. The  experience  gained  in  these  indications  was  not  considered  to  be  immediately  relevant  to  the current application, but it was accepted that the Phase II trials were used by the company to provide guidance for the dosage of lepirudin in patients with HAT type II. This approach was further justified by the complementary analyses of pharmacodynamic data, referred to above.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

After submission of additional data, the part of the dossier dealing specifically with clinical experience in patients with HAT type II provided information from two clinical trials (B7 and NR13), involving 198 patients in prospective, noncomparative investigations, and 120 historical patients for comparison. Of  the  prospectively  studied  patients,  altogether  125  represented  the  approved  target  population  of HAT type II with thromboembolic disease mandating parenteral antihrombotic therapy. In view of the rarity and clinical severity of the disorder, and since no therapy with documented efficacy has been available, the overall clinical study design was accepted.

## Prospectively studied patients

Both clinical trials were executed as multicentre studies. The patients represented a wide spectrum of underlying medical and surgical disorders; their mean age was 58 years and there was a slight female preponderance. Study therapy allocation was to four different groups, according to Table 1.

| Group   |   No.of patients | Description                                                                                                      |
|---------|------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| A1      |              114 | Patients with acute HAT type II and thromboembolic complications (TEC)                                           |
| A2      |               11 | Patients with acute HAT type II and TEC who required thrombolytic therapy                                        |
| B       |               61 | Patients with present or past HAT type II, who required prophylaxis of arterial or venous thromboembolism longer |
| C       |               12 | Patients with present or past HAT type II, who required anticoagulation during cardiopulmonary bypass surgery    |

Altogether  120  evaluable  patients  were  collected  from  available  registries  and  represented  cases diagnosed  during  the  last  10-year  period.  These  patients  all  had  a  serologic  confirmation  of  HAT antibodies; approximately 95% had overt thrombocytopenia, while the incidence of TEC attributed to heparin therapy was very similar to that observed in the prospectively studied patients with acute HAT type  II.  Similar  to  the  prospectively  studied  patients,  they  had  received  a  number  of  theraputic regimens  after  the  diagnosis  of  HAT  type  II,  including  LMWH,  heparinoids,  oral  anticoagulants, aspirin, thrombolytics, and no anticoagulant treatment.

Table 1: Treatment groups, trials B7 and NR13 Group A1 A2 B C The diagnosis of acute HAT type II was based on the occurrence of thromboembolic complications (TEC) during heparin therapy (identified in 82% and 86% in trials B7 and NR13, respectively) and on the  appearance  of  a  &gt;30%  drop  in  platelet  counts  or  platelet  counts  &lt;100  G/l  during  heparin administration (identified in 89% and 75% in trials B7 and NR 13). The presence of thrombocytopenia and/or TEC during heparin therapy was documented in 95% of patients. The diagnosis was further substantiated in all but very few patients by a positive serologic assay, which was almost exclusively the  heparin-induced  platelet  aggregation  assay  (HIPAA).  Patients  with  (atypically)  early-onset thrombocytopenia, or without documented thrombocytopenia, were specifically analysed in complementary  data  submissions  and  found  to  have  the  same  clinical  characteristics  as  those  with overtly reduced platelet counts. The diagnosis of HAT type II was, thus, found to be well documented in the presented patient material. Historical control patients Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Lepirudin therapy

The intravenous route was used in all treatments. Patients in group A1 received the approved dosage regimen, but the initial bolus dose was omitted for safety reasons in some patients switching directly from other forms of anticoagulant therapy or in an immediately postoperative condition. The median duration of therapy was 10 days. The aPTT was used for monitoring, with the aim to keep values at 1.5-3 times the patient's baseline. A reduced dose was used in patients on concomitant thrombolytic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

therapy  (group  A2),  but  experience  is  still  too  limited  to  issue  definite  recommendations  in  this situation.

## Efficacy evaluation

The  primary  efficacy  variable  was  a  composite  of  adequate  anticoagulation  and  response  of thrombocytopenia.  Stable  anticoagulation  within  the  aPTT  ratio  window  of  1.5-3  was  regularly achievable with moderately  frequent dose adjustments.  As  already  mentioned,  supplementary documentation was provided by the Applicant to characterise the relationship between aPTT ratio and clinical efficacy and safety outcomes. These data showed that the recommended aPTT ratio window was associated with a lower incidence of clinical events than an aPTT ratio &lt;1.5, and that an aPTT ratio  &gt;3  did  not  seem  to  confer  additional  clinical  benefit.  The  risk  of  bleeding  increased  with increasing aPTT ratio.

| Event n (%)   | Trial B7 (n=56)   | Trial NR13 (n=69)   | Hist. Control (n=120)   | Comparison B7/NR13 vs hist. control*   |
|---------------|-------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Death         | 3 (5.4%)          | 8 (11.6%) no        | 21 (18%)                | p=0.057                                |
| Amputation    | 2 (3.6%)          | 5 (7.2%)            | 8 (6.7%)                | p>0.5                                  |
| New TEC       | 3 (5.4%)          | 9 (13%)             | 30 (25%)                | p=0.002                                |
| Combined      | 7 (13%)           | 18 (26%)            | 52 (43%)                | p=0.001                                |

Thrombocytopenic patients regularly normalised their platelet counts during lepirudin therapy and no patient developed de novo thrombocytopenia during such treatment. In a complementary analysis of samples from 83 patients, no evidence of cross-reactivity could be found between HAT antibodies and lepirudin. The  clinical  efficacy  evaluation  focused  on  the  incidences  during  the  study  period  (defined  as  the treatment  period  plus  two  weeks)  of  new  thromboembolic  complications  (TEC),  limb  amputations, deaths, and a composite of these. Crude incidences in the target population of acute HAT type II with thromboembolic disease (groups A1 and A2) are given in Table 2, together with a comparison with historical controls. Table 2: Crude incidences of clinical endpoints, studies B7 and NR13 Event n (%) Death Amputation New TEC Combined * Fisher's exact test (2-sided) In the comparison with historical controls, the two prospective trials taken together showed significant benefit of lepirudin regarding the incidence of new TEC and the combined endpoint, and a trend to benefit regarding survival. There was no discernible effect on the need for amputations, which may largely  have  been  determined  by  TEC  occurring  before  the  start  of  study  therapy.  Time-to-event analyses generated similar results, and, overall, the event incidences during lepirudin treatment were low in comparison with published materials on HAT type II. There was no obvious explanation for the, nominal, differences in clinical outcomes between trials B7 and NR13. In both studies, daily event rates were lower during lepirudin therapy than during the period between confirmation of HAT type II and start of lepirudin therapy, or after cessation of this therapy, respectively. There were, however, no indications of a rebound phenomenon with a clustering of TEC immediately after the termination of lepirudin treatment. Mortality was related to underlying disease and no deaths could be attributed to lepirudin therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Safety considerations

The safety data base on the use of lepirudin in patients comprises some 1,000 cases, of whom 198 were patients with HAT type II. The safety problems of lepirudin relate specifically to bleeding and to the antigenicity of the drug. In patients with HAT type II and thromboembolic disease, studied in trials B7 and NR13, the overall incidence of documented bleeds was 39%, very similar between the two studies.  In  the  historical  controls,  bleedings  were  documented  in  32%.  Major  bleeding,  defined  as bleeding  demanding  transfusion  of  c2  units,  causing  a  drop  in  hemoglobin  c20  g/l,  being  overt  or demanding surgery  or  cessation  of  anticoagulant  therapy,  was  reported  in  11%  of  lepirudin-treated

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients. There were no cases of fatal or intracranial haemorrhage. Documented bleedings were most frequently  related  to  puncture  sites  and  surgical  wounds.  Haematuria  and  rectal  bleedings  were reported  in  7%  and  3%  of  patients,  respectively.  In  a  regression  analysis  that  compared  bleeding events  in  prospectively  studied  patients  and  historical  controls,  the  risk  o f bleeding  was  clearly increased  with  an  aPTT  ratio  &gt;3,  compared  with  the  recommended  range  of  1.5-3.  Concomitant thrombolytic  therapy  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  high  age  were  associated  with  trends  to  increased bleeding risk with lepirudin, while no obvious influence was seen of sex or type of underlying disease.

In both trials in HAT type II, the formation of specific, IgG-class, anti-hirudin antibodies was recorded in approximately 40% of patients, and follow-up analyses in a limited number of cases showed that positive  titres  may  persist  at  least  up  to  two  years  after  therapy.  Post-marketing,  anti-hirudin antibodies have been reported especially with treatment periods exceeding 5 days. Antibodies could not  be  related  to  clinical  symptoms  and  there  were  no  observations  to  suggest  that  they  have neutralising  activity.  In  a  few  patients,  the  appearance  of  antibodies  seemed  to  be  related  to  an enhanced and prolonged effect of lepirudin on aPTT that mandated dose adjustments. A small number of  patients  with  documented  positive  antibody  titres  were  reexposed  to  lepirudin  during  a  second course of treatment without untoward effects. Since the experience with reexposure is very limited, it should  be  undertaken  with  caution,  but  in  view  of  the  severity  of  the  disorder  and  the  lack  of alternative therapy, repeated therapy has not been contraindicated.

The  overall  incidence  of  recorded  adverse  events  in  patients  with  HAT  type  II  was  similar  to  that found in patients studied in other indications. The incidences of serious adverse events (SAE's) and of probably lepirudin-associated SAE's were, however, higher in patients with HAT type II than in other studied indications, due mainly to a higher frequency of haemorrages in HAT type II. 5. Conclusions Acute HAT type II is a clinical emergency, where, so far, no therapy with documented efficacy and tolerability has been available. In the strict sense, the noncomparative design of the performed studies with lepirudin precludes a firm conclusion whether, or, to what extent, lepirudin confers true benefit with respect to the evolution of the disease process in patients with HAT type II. It is, however, the opinion of the Committee that it has been acceptably documented that lepirudin is a clinically usable anticoagulant in adult patients with HAT type II and prevalent thromboembolic disease that mandates parenteral  antithrombotic  therapy.  In  view  of  the  severity  of  the  disorder  and  the  current  lack  of alternative treatment with established efficacy, the Committee recommended a favourable opinion for granting a marketing authorisation for Refludan in this specific indication. 6. Post-Authorisation Patients with renal impairment Post-marketing  data,  mainly  arising  from  a  specific  Drug  Monitoring  Programme,  indicate  a  high incidence of severe bleeding events in patients with severe renal impairment, and also that lepirudin was commonly overdosed (compared with the approved posology). The MAH proposed to intensify aPTT-monitoring in patients with bleeding events and impaired renal function (section 4.2), and to strengthen the relevant warning in section 4.4. In the light of these findings, treating physicians should carefully weigh the risk of Refludan administration versus its anticipated benefit. It may be necessary to exclude patients with renal impairment from treatment with lepirudin regimen. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Anaphylactic reactions including fatal shock

Further  to  the  report  of  7  cases  of  typical  or  suspected  acute  anaphylactic  reaction  with  immediate onset reaction following re-exposure to Refludan, 5 of which were fatal, an Urgent Safety Procedure procedure was used to implement changes in the product information in an expedited manner. During a  subsequent assessment, the MAH identified altogether 26 cases of suspected serious anaphylactic reactions in a cumulative database of approximately 35,000 patients (including clinical trials).

The  possibility  of  introducing  a  contraindication  to  repeated  exposure  to  Refludan  was  rejected  in view of the lack of alternatives licensed throughout the EU for this indication. Therefore, the SPC was updated to reflect the Refludan may cause allergic reactions including anaphylaxis and shock, and that fatal  anaphylactic  reactions  have  been  reported  in  patients  re-exposed  to  Refludan  in  a  second  or subsequent  treatment  course.  Hence,  alternative  treatment  options  must  be  considered  before  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

decision  to  re-expose  a  patient  to  Refludan.  As  these  reactions  are  immune-mediated,  patients  with recent exposure to hirudin or hirudin analogue may be at an increased risk. Treatment initiation with Refludan  should  be  undertaken  only in  a  setting  where  medical  assistance  is  readily  available  and where there is access to treatment for anaphylactic reactions, and patients should be informed that they have received Refludan.

The  recommendations  for  use  in  patients  scheduled  for  a  switch  to  orally  administered  coumarin derivatives (vitamin K antagonists) have been updated. Thus, coumarin derivatives should be initiated only when platelet counts are normalising. The intended maintenance dose should be started with no loading  dose.To  avoid  prothrombotic  effects  when  initiating  coumarin,  parenteral  anticoagulation should be continued for 4 - 5 days. The parenteral agent can be discontinued when the INR stabilises within the desired target range.

<!-- image -->