---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:30:17
document_pages: 15
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/regranex-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: regranex-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.199695
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-25 01:48:13.073864
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Regranex. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 October 2003. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Regranex  0.01  %  gel  contains  becaplermin,  recombinant  human  platelet-derived  growth  factor  (rhPDGF-BB), at a concentration of 100 µg/g (0.01 %). It is supplied in multi-use tubes as a non-sterile, preserved colourless to straw coloured gel for topical use, containing 15 g of gel.

The formulation used in Phase I/II has not substantially changed, with the exception of the amount of active ingredient used where two new strengths (100 and 300 µg/g) were introduced into the Phase II studies.

Regranex  0.01  %  gel  is  intended  for  topical  use  only,  to  promote  the  granulation  and  thereby  the healing of full thickness chronic diabetic ulcers less than or equal to 5 cm², in association with 'good wound  care'.  Good  wound  care  consists  of  initial  debridement  (to  remove  all  the  necrotic  and/or infected tissues), additional debridement as necessary and a non-weight-bearing regimen to alleviate pressure  on  the  ulcer.  Wound-related  infections  should  be  identified  and  treated  with  appropriate antimicrobial therapy prior to the use of Regranex. Chronic, full-thickness diabetic ulcers are currently treated with wound care practices which include debridement, frequent dressing changes, infection control and a non-weight-bearing regimen. When this  standard  therapy  fails,  alternative  treatment  regimens  for  chronic  ulcers  are  limited  to  rigorous treatment modalities (e.g. skin-grafting or total contact casting). For patients not responding to these treatments,  long  standing  diabetic  ulcers  often  are  complicated  by  infections  which  will  eventually result in a need for amputation. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition and product development Regranex is provided as a gel. The composition is the following: becaplermin (active ingredient, 0.100 mg/g),  sodium carboxymethyl-cellulose,  sodium  chloride,  sodium  acetate  trihydrate,  glacial  acetic acid, methylparahydroxy benzoate, propylparahydroxy benzoate, m-cresol 99%, L-lysine hydrochloride, water for injections. Methylparaben,  propylparaben  and  m-cresol  are  included  as  preservatives  because  Regranex  is presented as a non-sterile multidose gel product. The combination of these preservatives is based on the experimental data for preservative efficacy (USP and BP acceptance criteria for topical products) and  is  optimal  for  the  requisite  biological  activity.  The  company  provided  data  proving  that  the finished product is adequately preserved. The sodium chloride content and pH are chosen to resemble physiological salt concentrations and to establish maximal  stability of the active substance respectively.  L-lysine  hydrochloride  concentration  has  proven  to  stabilise  the  protein  in  the  gel formulation. The gel is filled into laminated aluminium tubes with a polyethylene liner. Full specifications of the primary packaging and full justification for its use have been satisfactory addressed with respect to minimisation of potential interactions between the active ingredient and metal ions. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In vitro release characteristics and in vivo preclinical data indicate that the becaplermin is available from the gel formulation.

A  report  has  been  submitted  to  simulate  the  in-use  situation  of  the  product  by  patients.  The  data provide reassurance that the in-use product is adequately preserved.

As  a  post  authorisation  commitment,  the  company  investigated  the  development  of  a  sterile formulation, which was to replace the present preserved formulation. The company submitted progress reports,  indicating  that  the  sterile  formulation  failed  to  demonstrate  adequate  evidence  of  clinical

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

efficacy in 2 controlled studies of large sample size. The CPMP concluded that the failure to develop an  efficacious  sterile  unpreserved  product  was  disappointing,  but  did  not  impact  on  the  favourable benefit/risk  balance  previously  demonstrated  for  the  marketed  product  formulation.  The  CPMP considered that the company should be released from this post marketing commitment.

## Active substance

Becaplermin  has  a  molecular  weight  of  approximately  24.5  kDa  and  is  composed  of  two  identical polypeptide chains, each composed of 109 amino acids, bound together by an inter-chain disulphide bridge.  The  molecule  is  produced  by  Saccharomyces  cerevisae  in  which  a  plasmid  encoding  the sequence for the human B-chain of platelet derived growth factor (PDGF-B) is inserted.

Plasmid identity is tested by restriction profile analysis and the sequence of the expression cassette (including regulatory regions) is adequately controlled. Adequate  cell  banks  have  been  established  and  adequate  cell  bank  characterisation  has  been performed.  Stability  of  the  cell  banks  during  storage  has  been  addressed  with  respect  to  purity, viability and retention of the expression plasmid. Maintenance and storage conditions of the cell banks have been detailed. The cells are expanded through three different stages in a shake flask, batch seed fermentor and fedbatch  production  fermentor.  In-process  controls  are  in  place,  including  checks  for  sterility,  culture purity,  restriction  endonuclease  mapping (plasmid identification) and PDGF-BB content by ELISA. Consistency of the fermentation process has been demonstrated. Quantitative and qualitative genetic stability has been shown. The sterilisation of the culture media was adequately validated. The only animal derived reagent used in the fermentation process is hydrolysed casein, produced from milk from Australia or New Zealand, countries that have no reported cases of BSE. The downstream processing of the active substance is a sequence of validated standard chromatographic and ultrafiltration steps. The  company  has  provided the procedure for the performance and maintenance of the purification systems. The routine tests ensure quality and consistency of the active substance. The mature rhPDGF-BB is composed of 2 identical antiparallel glycosylated polypeptide chains of 109 amino acids with two interchain disulphide bonds between cysteine 43 and 52. Three intrachain disulphide bonds are also present in each monomeric  rhPDGF-B  molecule. Post-translation modification of the active substance results in a mixture of related species of the homodimer rhPDGFBB molecule. The active substance has been characterised adequately. The  company  provided  substantiation  that  the  quality  of  the  pre-clinical/clinical  batches  and  the commercial batches are comparable. Excipients and packaging material All excipients and the packaging material (tubes) are adequately controlled. Finished product The active substance, manufactured by Chiron, USA is transported to OMJ Pharmaceuticals Inc., San German,  Puerto  Rico,  where  the  finished  product  is  manufactured.  Packaging  and  labelling  is performed in the Cilag manufacturing plant in Schaffhausen, Switzerland. The manufacturing process has been validated in accordance with the pre-set acceptance criteria. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Routine  test  ensure  the  quality  of  the  finished  product.  All  control  tests  have  been  adequately validated. Three conformance batch analyses have been provided. Reasonable batch consistency has been demonstrated.

## Stability

The stability of the rhPDGF-BB active substance (ultrafiltrate after purification) has been adequately investigated and established.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The stability  protocol  for  the  finished  product  was  designed  to  provide  information  of  the  finished product at 2 - 8 °C in inverted tube position. A shelf life of 12 months at 2 - 8 °C was granted. In addition,  a  simulated  patient  use  study  was  performed  to  evaluate  the  stability  of  the  multi-dose preserved drug product after opening. An in-use stability after opening of 6 weeks has been granted.

## 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects

The estimated maximum exposure to becaplermin is 14 µg/kg/day, based on the treatment of diabetic ulcer with 700 µg/ulcer (100 cm² ulcer receiving 7 µg becaplermin/cm²) or 700 µg/50 kg patient. The duration of the treatment can be up to 20 weeks.

## Pharmacodynamics

Interactions: Drug interactions were conducted with other growth factors. Interactions with other drugs likely to be administered topically (e.g. antibiotics) were not performed.

Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) consists of 2 peptide chains (A and B). Platelets contain all 3 isoforms (AA, AB and BB). PDGF is produced in low or undetectable levels in normal cells, but its production can be increased by factors released at the site of injury (e.g. TGF-ß, TNF-a, thrombin). PDGF receptors are found on mesenchymal cells, including fibroblasts, osteoblasts, chrondroblasts, smooth muscle cells, glial cells and some leukocytes and endothelial cells. A wide range of neoplastic cells also express the PDGF receptor. PDGF may have a direct mitogenic effect on cells or it may induce the target cell to produce a second factor  that  is  mitogenic.  In  addition  to  mitogenesis,  other  properties  of  PDGF  include  cell-directed migration,  chemotaxis,  modification  of  cellular  matrix  constituents  and  vasoconstriction.  PDGF activates  mesenchymal  cells  to  secrete  collagen  and  collagenase,  thus  mediating  processes  such  as wound healing and tissue repair. A  large  number  of  studies  using  the  guinea  pig  partial  thickness  wound  excision  model  were performed, using various formulations, treatment schedules, concentrations and volumes. Becaplermin increased granulation, but not epithelialisation or wound contraction at concentrations  3 µg/g. PDGF-B (100 µg/g) also increased granulation tissue in full and partial thickness pig wound model and the full thickness diabetic (db/db) mouse wound model. Other parameters (epithelialisation and contraction) were generally unaffected. In the hairless guinea pig full thickness wound model, PDGFB  increased  granulation  but  tended  to  inhibit  wound  contraction  and  epithelialisation.  Absorbent wound dressing applied over the PDGF-B gel appeared to reduce the granulation response. Overall wound strength was unaffected by PDGF-B treatment. Yorkshire pigs with partial thickness burns or excisions  showed  a  reduction  in  the  wound  healing  time  when  treated  with  PDGF-B  compared  to controls. In general, the only data that were presented that would indicate that PDGF-B is likely to influence wound  healing  was  an  increase  in  granulation  tissue  thickness;  other  parameters  (epithelialisation, wound  contraction  or  strength)  were  not  influenced.  The  majority  of  wound  models  investigated effects on normal wound healing and consequently there was little change in overall wound healing. The  enhanced  granulation  tissue  produced  by  PDGF-B  is  probably  sufficient  to  indicate  that becaplermin may be efficacious in the treatment of diabetic ulcers. Secondary  pharmacology:  Doses  up  to  45  µg/kg,  s.c.  had  no  significant  effect  on  cardiovascular parameters. No other secondary pharmacological studies were presented. This was considered to be acceptable for a topical product with little absorption. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

## Table 1 : Overview of pharmacokinetic studies.

| Species/ Strain/Sex     | Dose µg/kg/day x days, route                | C max pg eq/ml   | T max h   | AUC 0-(h) ng eq.h/ml   | T 1/2 (ß) Min   | Comments                                                                      |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------|-----------|------------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Rat, Fisher,M           | 127 x 1, FTW* (20.1 µg/cm²)                 | 53.6             | 8-24      | 655.6                  | -               | ELISA, Mean untreated control plasma level = 37.3 pg/ml                       |
| Rat, Fisher,M           | 1.15 x 1; i.v.                              | 4158.6           | 0         | 218.7                  | 2.5             | ELISA                                                                         |
| Rat, Fisher,M           | 181.4 x 5, FTW* (17.2 mg/cm²)               | 17.5             | 8 (Day 5) | -                      | -               | Only 1/36 samples were above the LOQ                                          |
| Anaesthetised dog       | 45 x 1, s.c.                                | 282.4            | 3         | -                      | -               | ELISA                                                                         |
| Monkey, cynomolgus, M+F | 15 x 1, s.c. 1.5 x 1, i.v.                  | 125.6 1462       | 1 0       | 375.8 177.2            | - 4.2           | ELISA ; pretreatment control plasma levels were 0 pg/ml                       |
| Monkey, cynomolgus, M+F | 30 x 1, s.c. 100 x 1, s.c. 300 x 1, s.c.    | 140.6 309 495.7  | 2 2 2     | - - -                  | - - -           | ELISA ; only two time points : 0.5 and 2 hr.                                  |
| Monkey, cynomolgus, M+F | 1.5 x 92, s.c. 15 x 92, s.c. 150 x 92, s.c. | 42 87.1 >250     | 2 2 2     | - - -                  | - - -           | Corrected for endogenous PDGF-B (74.1 pg/ml). 2 h last time point. authorised |

* FTW = Full Thickness wound application The only pharmacokinetic study that was conducted to GLP standards was the 13 week monkey study. Levels of PDGF-B were determined by a double antibody capture ELISA with a quantification limit of 62.5 pg/ml and was specific to PDGF-BB and demonstrated no cross-reactivity for PDGF-AA and 3 % with PDGF-AB. In  rats  the  amount  of  PDGF-B  absorbed  from  a  full  thickness  wound  was  about  3  %  compared  to intravenous injection and plasma levels were no much greater than those of untreated controls. Repeat dosing in monkeys (s.c.) did not indicate accumulation after 13 weeks treatment at doses &lt; 15 µg/kg but there was evidence of accumulation at 150 µg/kg as both trough and peak PDGF-B values were &gt; 250 µg/kg. Available kinetic data are presented in the table above. The likely route of absorption of becaplermin when applied topically is by lymphatics; becaplermin possibly  binds  to α -macroglobulin,  which  appears  to  prevent  its  binding  to  cell  surface  mitogenic receptors. No data were presented regarding the distribution, metabolism and excretion of PDGF-B. Due  to  the  lack  of  the  ADME  data,  exposure  in  the  toxicological  studies  is  best  expressed  on  a mg/kg/day basis, on the assumption that absorption by the routes of administration used in animals will be far greater than that by the topical route used clinically. Toxicology Single dose toxicity Acute toxicity studies were performed using mice, rats and monkey, 3 mg/kg s.c. and/or i.v. PDGF-B had no effect on mortality and the only evidence of toxicity was in the mouse i.v. study in which this dose produced a decrease in spontaneous activity and hunched posture for 1 hour after dosing. Intravenous doses up to 100 µg/kg resulted in two deaths. No target organs were identified and effects were limited to reversible peripheral vasodilatation and CNS depression. These data indicate a huge margin of safety. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Repeated dose toxicity

None  of  the  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  showed  evidence  of  systemic  toxicity  except  a  mouse intravenous  study  where  doses  1  mg/kg/day  produced  clinical  signs  (vasodilatation  and  CNS depression). In a dermal rabbit study, becaplermin (100 µg/ml) was applied to intact and abraded skin and the only finding was dermatitis, which was attributed to the excessive hydration of the skin by the vehicle, and was not becaplermin related. However, as the formulation used in this study was not the same as that intended for marketing, the significance of this finding is unknown.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the pivotal 13 week monkey study, becaplermin (1.5 to 150 µg/kg/day, s.c.) resulted in injection site  reactions  (fibroplasia  with  mixed  chronic  perivascular  inflammation  and/or  diffuse  eosinophilic infiltration)  which  were  considered  to  be  related  to  the  pharmacology  of  PDGF.  From  this  pivotal safety study there is little evidence that would indicate that PDGF is likely to be carcinogenic.

In the 13 week monkey study, antibodies to PDGF-B were detected in all treatment groups from week 5 to 15; only in 1 of the 20 animals neutralising antibodies (inhibited mitogenesis) were demonstrated at a concentration of becaplermin of 625 ng/ml.  Antibodies were also detected in the 1 month rat, s.c. study : the higher the dose, the greater the antibody titre and affinity and only rats (4/15) from the high dose  (150  µg/kg)  produced  neutralising  antibodies  (30-60  %  inhibition)  against  a  concentration  of 62.5 ng/ml becaplermin.

The formulation of all the becaplermin preparations used in the toxicological studies was dissimilar to that intended for marketing (becaplermin produced by means of other plasmid and a gel formulation including preservative could not be used for the i.v. and s.c studies and was not even used in the rabbit dermal study).  The  main  point  arising  from  the  animal  studies  is  that  becaplermin  has  no  systemic toxicity. The lack of systemic toxicity could be due to the production of antibodies that are capable of neutralising the concentrations that were found in the plasma of animals or due to plasma components (possibly α -macroglobulin)  which  prevent  the  binding  of  PDGF-B  to  its  cell  surface  mitogen receptors. The applicant has presented, as a response to questions raised, a 28 day dermal rabbit toxicity study with the formulation intended for marketing. This study reaffirms the lack of toxicity observed in the previous  21  day  study.  This  study  also  addresses  the  contribution  of  the  other  components (parabens...) to the toxicity and percutaneous absorption of Regranex. Reproductive toxicology No studies  have  been  performed,  which  was  justified  on  the  basis  that  PDGF-B  is  an  endogenous protein  with  a  short  half  life,  is  applied  topically  and  is  poorly  absorbed.  The  lack  of  reproductive studies is acceptable, however use of the product during pregnancy and lactation is not recommended. Mutagenicity The mutagenicity of becaplermin was studied in the following assay systems: Ames  test, CHO/HGPRT,  mouse  lymphoma  L5178Y  TK +/-assay, CHO  chromosome  aberration assay, unscheduled DNA synthesis in primary rat hepatocytes and in vivo mouse bone marrow micronucleus assay. All studies were negative. Carcinogenicity Carcinogenicity  studies  have  not  been  performed.  This  is  justified  because  becaplermin  is  an endogenous protein with a short half life, it is applied topically and is poorly absorbed, it is negative in the mutagenicity testing, long term s.c. administration of rodents/non rodents to a protein would elicit a  significant immune response that would compromise such a study and conventional bioassays are not deemed appropriate for biotechnology products with immunogenic properties. As  it  is  possible  that  becaplermin  could  be  administered  to  a  patient  with  newly  formed  tumour thereby accelerating the tumour growth, the applicant has contraindicated the use of becaplermin in patients  with  known  neoplasms  at  the  site  of  application  and  advised  cautious  use  in  patients  with known malignancies. The duration of the treatment should also be limited to 20 weeks. Other studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

Various irritancy tests in rabbits did not indicate that becaplermin gel is irritant to intact or abraded skin  when  applied  for  14  days  or  to  the  eye  after  a  single  application.  These  data  would  seem  of minimal  value  to  the  intended  indication.  Becaplermin  produced  delayed  contact  hypersensitivity following intradermal challenge in the guinea pig using the maximisation method  and the Landsteiner/Draize test, which is not unexpected for a large MW protein injected with and without Freund's  complete  adjuvant.  Topical  challenge  resulted  in  an  equivocal  hypersensitivity  reaction. Administration  of  becaplermin  as  near  to  a  bone  surface  as  possible  resulted  in  accelerated  bone remodelling. This finding could be relevant in certain clinical situations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Summary and conclusion on preclinical pharmacology and toxicology

The majority of the studies to investigate the effect of becaplermin on wound healing were in normal animals and consequently it was difficult to show improvement in healing other than an increase in granulation tissue thickness. Pharmacokinetic data were very limited, but this is considered acceptable bearing  in  mind  the  very  limited  absorption  in  man.  The  toxicological  studies  did  not  raise  any concerns; it was apparent that animals do produce antibodies to PDGF-B which could be neutralising at the plasma levels of PDGF-B found in these studies. The toxicological studies were short (max. 13 weeks)  and  the  number  of  animals  used  was  small,  however  for  a  topical  product  the  data  was considered sufficient. Mutagenicity studies gave no causes for concern and the lack of carcinogenicity and reproductive studies was considered acceptable due to the very limited absorption, the production of neutralising antibodies in animals and the fact that PDGF-B is an endogenous protein. The potential concern of the possible carcinogenic potential of PDGF could be considered resolved if the treatment is to be limited to 20 weeks and to small ulcers.

The  applicant  discussed  during  the  oral  presentation  what  further  pre-clinical  studies  could  be undertaken to research  the  tumorigenic  potential  of  becaplermin.  From  the  information  provided,  it seems that there are no suitable tests that the applicant could employ that would produce unequivocal evidence that becaplermin is or is not carcinogenic. Human data to date has produced no indication that becaplermin is tumorigenic at the site of application. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects REGRANEX is indicated, in association with other good wound care measures, to promote granulation and thereby the healing of full-thickness, neuropathic, chronic, diabetic ulcers less than or equal to 5 cm 2 . Human pharmacology Pharmacodynamics No studies  in  humans  formally  researching  the  effect  of  becaplermin  on  the  growth  of  granulation tissue have been undertaken. The potential of the product to cause skin irritancy has, however, been assessed in 3 small studies on a total of 45 male volunteers (Studies 90-22120-A, 90-22120-B and 9022120-C). At a concentration of 30µg/g, becaplermin gel appears non irritant to normal human skin. Pharmacokinetics No conventional pharmacokinetic studies have been performed, but 3 trials (Studies PDGF-PH10-005, PDGF-PH1-007  and  90-22120-E)  are  included  which  have  assessed  whether  significant  systemic absorption of becaplermin takes place when the product is used in its clinical setting, which is as a topical agent to ulcerated skin.  In addition to these, a study is included which assesses the longevity of the active ingredient in the presence of wound fluid (Study PDGF-WFA-001). When applied topically to diabetic ulcers, becaplermin does not appear, on the evidence presented, to be significantly systemically absorbed at a dose concentration up to 100 µg/g. The active ingredient has a longevity in the presence of wound fluid, of at least 12 hours in vivo and 48 hours in vitro, which support the once daily dosing frequency proposed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2: Overview of the efficacy trials in the indication of diabetic foot ulcers.

| Study                    | Study design                                                                                     | Number of patients   | Duration of treatment                | Dosage regimen                                                   | Objectives/Endpoints                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 92-22120-K Pivotal study | Phase 3, double blind randomised, parallel group, vehicle controlled efficacy and safety study   | 382 Diabetic ulcers  | 20 weeks                             | Once daily Vehicle or becaplermin gel 30 µg/g or 100 µg/g        | Efficacy : complete healing, time to healing, relative ulcer area at endpoint Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs            |
| 90-22120-F               | Phase 2, double blind randomised, parallel group, vehicle controlled efficacy and safety study   | 118 Diabetic ulcers  | 20 weeks                             | Once daily Vehicle or becaplermin gel 30 µg/g                    | Efficacy : complete healing, time to healing, relative ulcer area at endpoint Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs authorised |
| PDGF-DBFT- 001           | Phase 2, third-party- blind randomised, parallel group, vehicle controlled, vehicle-effect study | 172 Diabetic ulcers  | 20 weeks                             | Once daily Vehicle, becaplermin gel 100 µg/g or standard therapy | Efficacy : complete healing, time to healing, relative ulcer area at endpoint Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs            |
| PDGF-DBFT- 002           | Phase 3, third-party- blind randomised, parallel group, controlled, safety and efficacy study    | 250 Diabetic ulcers  | 20 weeks + 16 weeks standard therapy | Once daily Becaplermin gel 100 µg/g or standard therapy          | Efficacy : complete healing, time to healing, relative ulcer area at endpoint Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs            |

| Study      | Study design                                                                                                  |   Number of patients | Duration of treatment   | Dosage regimen                                                                                            | Objectives/Endpoints                                                           |
|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 90-22120-A | Phase 1, randomised, open label, local irritation study in healthy volunteers                                 |                   10 | 10 days                 | Once daily Becaplermin gel 30 µg/g                                                                        | Safety : local skin irritation, AEs, lab values, vital signs                   |
| 90-22120-B | Phase 1, randomised, open label, local irritation (chamber scarification) study in healthy volunteers product |                   10 | 3 days                  | Once daily Becaplermin gel 30 µg/g                                                                        | Safety : local (scarified) skin irritation, AEs, lab values, vital signs       |
| 90-22120-C | Phase 1, randomised, open label, local irritation (Maximisation Test) study in healthy volunteers Medicinal   |                   25 | 10 days                 | Single topical dose of Becaplermin gel 30 µg/g or vehicle following application of sodium lauryl sulphate | Safety : local skin irritation and sensitisation, AEs, lab values, vital signs |

Table 3 : Overview of the pharmacodynamic studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4 : Overview of the pharmacokinetic studies

| Study          | Study design                                                                                | Number of patients            | Duration of treatment   | Dosage regimen                      | Objectives/Endpoints                                                                                                                          |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| PDGF-PH10- 005 | Phase 1, open label pharmacokinetic (absorption) study                                      | 10 Diabetic ulcers            | 14 days                 | Once daily Becaplermin gel 100 µg/g | Absorption : ELISA determination of plasma PDGF- BB levels, AUC. Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs                                        |
| PDGF-PH1- 007  | Phase 1, open label pharmacokinetic (absorption) study                                      | 10 Diabetic ulcers            | 14 days                 | Once daily Becaplermin gel 100 µg/g | Absorption : Immunoassay determination of plasma PDGF- BB levels, AUC. Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs                                  |
| 90-22120-E     | Phase 1, open label pharmacokinetic (absorption) study                                      | 17 Pressure ulcer             | 7 days                  | Once daily Becaplermin gel 30 µg/g  | Absorption : Immunoassay determination of plasma PDGF- BB levels, AUC. Safety : AEs, lab values, vital signs                                  |
| PDGF-WFA- 001  | Phase 1, double- blind, randomised, parallel group, vehicle controlled wound fluid analysis | 12 Diabetic or pressure ulcer | Single dose             | Becaplermin gel 100 µg/g or vehicle | Wound fluid analysis : quantity, immunoreactivity, biological activity of becaplermin in wound fluid. Safety : AEs and vital signs authorised |

The primary objectives of this study were to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of two different doses (30  and  100  µg/g)  of  becaplermin  gel  compared  with  vehicle  in  the  healing  of  chronic,  lower extremity,  diabetic  ulcers  during  a  20-week  treatment  period.  395  diabetic  patients  from  24  centres with an ulcer area between 1.0 and 40 cm 2   were recruited and were randomised 1:1:1 to be treated with  one  of  the  following  modalities:  vehicle  gel  (n=127),  becaplermin  gel  30  µg/g  (n=132)  or becaplermin gel 100 µg/g (n=123). Wounds were dressed twice daily, but the test product was applied once daily.  Ulcers  received  \"good  wound care\" in addition to the study medication which included debridement and systemic antibiotics,  if  and  when  necessary,  together  with  a  non  -  weight  bearing regimen and dressings appropriate to maintain a moist wound environment.

90-22120-E PDGF-WFA001 Efficacy Choice of dose The presented data are heterogeneous and, with the exception of studies 92-22120-M and 92-22120-K, are from small trials in patients with a different disease (i.e. decubitus ulceration) from that requested in the marketing authorisation application, or utilising formulations different from that requested for marketing. On basis of the data provided in diabetic ulcers, 100 µg/g once daily appeared to be the optimum dose concentration of those studied. Efficacy studies The clinical studies 92-22120-K, 90-22120-F, PDGF-DBFT-001 and PDGF-DBFT-002 (see table 2) employed  a  similar  design  (i.e.  a  multicentre,  blinded,  parallel  group  design).  In  particular,  the recruitment criteria, treatment schedules and evaluation criteria were similar. All employed a 20 week treatment phase. Patients recruited were adult diabetics. The target ulcer was required to have a target limb  transcutaneous  partial  pressure  of  oxygen  (T c pO 2   of  30  mm  Hg),  suggesting  that  the pathogenesis of the ulcers was of neuropathic and not ischaemic aetiology. Efficacy endpoints were similar;  the  primary  one  being  complete  ulcer  healing  without  drainage  or  the  need  for  a  dressing. These studies recruited some 920 patients in toto. The applicants have combined data from these four studies and have undertaken an efficacy \"meta-analysis\" on this combined group. (a) Pivotal Study (Study 92-22120-K) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The chief efficacy endpoint was the frequency of complete ulcer healing. Other endpoints were the time  to  healing,  relative  ulcer  area  at  endpoint  and  weekly  healing  rate.  The  groups  appear  to  be comparable at baseline with regard to age, ulcer area etc. 49.6% of patients treated with becaplermin 100 µg/g achieved ulcer healing at endpoint, compared to 36.4% treated with becaplermin 30 µg/g and 34.6% on vehicle alone. The 1 sided p value for the 100 µg/g: vehicle difference is stated as 0.007. Becaplermin appeared particularly effective in healing smaller ulcers.

Days to healing are expressed in percentiles. For the 25 th percentile, the time to healing was 79 days for vehicle alone, 91 days for becaplermin 30 µg/g and 71 days for becaplermin 100 µg/g. For the 35 th percentile, the time to healing was 127 days for vehicle alone and 86 days for becaplermin 100 µg/g.

The relative ulcer area (i.e. ulcer area at endpoint/ulcer area at baseline) was not significantly different between the groups, nor was the weekly ulcer healing rate.

(b) Supporting Studies (i) Study 90-22120-F The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of becaplermin 30 µg/g in the treatment of lower extremity diabetic ulcers by examination of the proportion of subjects with completely healed target ulcers, compared with vehicle treatment. A similar design was used to the pivotal study, but the concentration of becaplermin proposed for marketing (i.e. 100 µg/g) was not evaluated. 118 patients were  recruited  and  were  randomised  to  receive  either  placebo  (n=57)  or  becaplermin  gel  30  µg/g (n=61). 47.5% of patients receiving becaplermin 30 µg/g achieved healing at 20 weeks compared with 24.6% on vehicle alone.  (p = 0.016 by logistic regression analysis). (ii) Study PDGF-DBFT-001 This trial  also  employed a similar design to the pivotal trial. 172 patients with diabetic ulcers were recruited  and  were  randomised  to  receive  either  standard  therapy  (n=68),  vehicle  alone  (n=70)  or becaplermin gel 100 µg/g (n=34). The purpose of this study was to determine whether the vehicle gel had any untoward effect on wound healing relative to standard wound care. Therefore the becaplermin group in this study is smaller than the two other treatment groups. After 20 weeks, 44.1% of patients on becaplermin gel 100 µg/g achieved healing, compared to 35.7% who were treated on vehicle alone and 22.1% who received standard therapy. These results show that the  vehicle  gel  formulation  does  not  adversely  affect  wound  healing.  In  this  study,  the  number  of patients healed on becaplermin gel treatment was not statistically different from treatment with vehicle gel or standard treatment. (iii) Study PDGF-DBFT-002 The primary objective of study PDGF-DBFT-002 was to evaluate the efficacy of becaplermin gel 100 µg/g as compared to standard therapy when applied topically to chronic, lower extremity diabetic ulcers for up to 20 weeks. A similar study design to that in the pivotal trial was employed. 252 patients with diabetic ulcers were recruited and were randomised to receive standard therapy (n=122) or becaplermin gel 100 µg/g (n=128). 35.9% of patients achieved healing at endpoint on active treatment compared with 32% on standard therapy. This difference was not statistically significant. One centre achieved no healers on standard therapy. The incidence of complete healing in the 4 efficacy studies is shown in figure 1. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1: Incidence of Complete Healing (Intent-to-Treat Patients in Four 20-Week Diabetic Ulcer Studies)

<!-- image -->

* Significantly different than vehicle group. Combined Analysis A \"meta-analysis\" using combined data from these four studies has been performed. In this analysis, a modest  dose  response  relationship  for  becaplermin  over  vehicle  alone  is  apparent.  The  100  µg/g concentration  heals  about  10%  more  ulcers  at  20  weeks  than  vehicle  alone.  Becaplermin  100  µg/g appears more efficacious for small ulcers than for larger ones. The  integrated  analysis  was  judged  to  be  valid  (despite  the  use  of  different  comparators  in  the  4 efficacy  trials):  the  combining  of  the  4  efficacy  studies  is  justified  since  the  study  endpoints  were similar and the relative treatment effect across the studies homogeneous. There was concern regarding the observed variability with regard to the primary efficacy endpoint of complete  ulcer  healing  for  vehicle  alone,  the  30µg/g  dose  concentration  of  becaplermin  and  the 100µg/g dose concentration of becaplermin in the clinical trials. In the view of the CPMP the causes for  this  variability  observed  in  the  clinical  trials  remain  hypothetical  apart  from  the  effect  of unbalanced infection control and ulcer size across the database. Further analyses of the efficacy were conducted, utilising the endpoint of complete ulcer healing for the following cohorts based on baseline ulcer area of less than or equal to 5 cm², of more than 5 but less or equal to 10 cm² and of more than 10 cm². In the cohort of ulcer size  5 cm², complete healing rates  after  20  weeks  of  treatment  were  30  %  on  standard  therapy,  35  %  on  vehicle  gel,  42  %  on becaplermin 30 µg/g gel and 47 % on becaplermin 100 µg/g gel. The p-values of complete healing on becaplermin 100 µg/g gel versus vehicle gel and on becaplermin 100 µg/g gel versus standard therapy were p = 0.012 and p = 0.001 respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  relative  increase  in  the  incidence  of  healing  in  the  becaplermin 100 µg/g treatment group for ulcers &gt; 5 cm² at baseline. It should be pointed out, however, that the data are relatively sparse for ulcers &gt; 5 cm² and the true healing rate for larger ulcers may be obscured by the 20 week limitation for the four studies.

The  company  provided  a  further  analysis  to  determine  to  what  extent  the  efficacy  of  the  product depends upon the duration of existence of the ulcer treated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For ulcer sizes with a baseline wound area of  10 cm² using all four efficacy studies combined, the difference  in  complete  wound  healing  between  the  100  µg/g  becaplermin  gel  and  vehicle  gel diminished slightly from 13.0 % for ulcers existing for 8 weeks to 11.7 % for ulcers existing for 188 weeks.  Thus,  although  the  analysis  showed  that  the  duration  of  the  target  ulcer  had  a  negative association  with  the  outcome  (ulcers  of  longer  duration  ware  less  likely  to  heal),  the  efficacy  of Regranex compared to control treatments was shown similarly superior regardless of the duration of the ulcer prior to treatment.

The choice of standard therapy including most saline gauze appeared outdated. The company provided expert depositions to refute this contention and to advise against the use of the product with occlusive dressings. The standard therapy (moist saline gauze dressings) as used by the applicant was considered appropriate and section 4.2 of the SPC was modified to include statements that Regranex and moist saline dressings should be applied once daily, together with a statement to advise against the use of the product in conjunction with occlusive dressings.

The concerns raised regarding the observed variability with regard to the primary efficacy endpoint of complete healing for vehicle alone, the 30 µg/g and the 100 µg/g becaplermin concentration in the clinical  trials  were  discussed  by  the  applicant.  Study-to-study  results  and  the  differences  among treatment groups are more consistent when only ulcers with sizes  5 cm² are included in the analysis. Furthermore,  for  ulcers  &gt;  5  cm²  at  baseline,  no  valid  conclusion  could  be  drawn  from  the  clinical studies: the subgroup of patients with ulcers &gt; 5 cm² was too small and the limitation of the treatment to  20  weeks  may  have  influenced  the  rate  of  complete  healing  (primary  endpoint  of  all  efficacy studies) of these larger wounds. Restriction of the use of Regranex to ulcers with a baseline area  5 cm² is therefore included in the SPC and PL.

Significant  longterm  safety  and  efficacy  data  in  excess  of  a  20  week  treatment  phase  were  not available, nor were data concerning the repeated use of the product. However, data were provided to demonstrate  that  ulcers  healed  with  the  aid  of  this  product  remain  healed.  There  appears  to  be  no significant difference in ulcer recurrence frequency or in the time to recurrence following the use of either Regranex or comparator therapy in the first 3 months following wound healing. A number of patients received treatment with Regranex for longer than 20 weeks in open label extensions of the double-blind  efficacy  studies;  but  is  it  the  CPMP's  view  that  the  treatment  by  Regranex  should  be limited to 20 weeks in any individual until significant additional data become available. Additional data are also necessary before any retreatment with Regranex can be allowed. Conclusions on efficacy Following  the  assessment  of  the  dossier  submitted  by  the  company,  and  the  assessment  of  the responses  to  the  list  of  questions,  the  company  was  asked  to  present  further  explanations  to outstanding efficacy questions during an oral explanation, held at the December CPMP meeting. The issues listed below were discussed, and the CPMP conclusions are given: The appropriateness of moist saline gauze as a standard reference therapy and as a dressing regimen is resolved, and appropriate amendments to the SPC have been made in this area. The frequency of wound breakdown is not different from the reference therapies. The  issue  on  the  justification  of  the  dose  concentration  (100  µg/g)  was  discussed  and  is  resolved. Additional support for the efficacy of the 100 µg/g concentration of becaplermin was provided from studies in patients with pressure ulcers. Pressure ulcer trial PDGF-PULC-001 also included a 300 µg/g treatment arm, which did not show greater efficacy than the becaplermin 100 µg/g treatment arm. The data presented are considered adequate to demonstrate the efficacy of the product. The product possesses modest efficacy. Over a 20 weeks treatment course, Regranex heals some 10-15 % more ulcers than a placebo gel. The efficacy database in excess of 900 patients is of an adequate size. A further  randomised  study  in  this  indication  would  provide  no  significant  clarification  of  our knowledge concerning efficacy in this indication. The validity and relevance of the combined analysis was discussed. Combining the 4 efficacy studies was found justified. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In absence of sufficient long-term data in excess of a 20 week treatment phase and in absence of data on retreatment, the treatment duration was limited to 20 weeks in any individual patient. The company will provide further long term efficacy and retreatment data as a post licensing commitment.

## Safety

Safety data is available on 1016 subjects from completed clinical trials. Of these, 697 were treated for diabetic neuropathic ulcers, of whom 538 received becaplermin. A further 218 patients were treated for  pressure  ulcers  of  whom  164  received  becaplermin.  308  subjects  treated  for  diabetic  ulcers received becaplermin at the dose concentration proposed for marketing (i.e. 100 µg/g).

## Adverse events

66% of patients  with  diabetic  ulcers,  treated  with  becaplermin  reported  at  least  one  adverse  event, compared to 67% on vehicle alone and 81% on standard therapy. The most frequently reported adverse events to becaplermin were infection (18 %), skin ulceration (12 %), cellulitis (10 %), osteomyelitis (7 %), upper respiratory tract infection (5 %), pain (6 %) and bullous eruption (5 %). The quality and frequency of reported adverse events is similar between becaplermin treated and the control groups. The applicants argue that these events are related to the underlying disease condition. Infection The frequency and nature of the infectious events appears similar in both becaplermin treated and control groups.  Analysis for time to first infection reveals no difference between becaplermin and vehicle treated groups. Compared to patients who received standard therapy, infections tended to occur later in the gel treated groups. There was concern that the product is presented in a multi-use tube. In view of the potential use of this product on a certainly infected ulcer base, and the potential therefore for contamination of the contents of the tube, and the possibility of cross infection between patients, the company committed to modify the  product  presentation  as  soon  as  possible  to  a  single-use  presentation.  A  statement  has  been included in the SPC and package leaflet stating that a tube should be used on a single patient only. Application Site Reactions The observed frequency of application site reactions was around 1% in all groups. Allergy was not reported as a significant adverse reaction. Rash occurred in 1% of treated patients; bullous eruption in &lt;1%. It  should  be  noted  that  some  of  the  excipients  in  the  product,  such  as  m-cresol  and  parabens,  are associated with skin reactions. The preservatives in questions have been used in all the clinical studies. The company committed to provide a single dose sterile formulation to replace the current product. Removal  of  the  preservatives  may  enhance  the  local  tolerability  of  the  product.  The  company  is encouraged to introduce a sterile formulation as soon as possible. Neoplasms 12  neoplasms  were  reported  in  patients  recruited  into  the  clinical  trials.  6  occurred  in  becaplermin treated individuals and 6 in the control groups. The nature of these neoplasms is listed in table 5. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5: Nature of neoplasms reported in the clinical trials *.

|                         |   Control Gel or Standard Therapy n=468 |   Becaplermin 30 µg/g or 100 µg/g n=520 |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| Carcinoma (unspecified) |                                       1 |                                       2 |
| Skin neoplasm malignant |                                       0 |                                       2 |
| Basal cell carcinoma    |                                       0 |                                       1 |
| Benign breast tumours   |                                       1 |                                       1 |
| Lipoma                  |                                       1 |                                       0 |
| Bronchial Carcinoma     |                                       1 |                                       0 |
| Neoplasm NOS            |                                       2 |                                       0 |
| Neoplasm malignant      |                                       1 |                                       0 |

* Two additional cases were reported post study therapy (becaplermin 100 µg/g): one case of basal cell carcinoma and one case of adenocarcinoma. Although the numbers are small, the slightly higher number of skin cancer in patients exposed to becaplermin gave rise to concern. It should be noted that the SPC urges caution to prescribers when using Regranex in patients known to have tumours. The company provided information regarding the relationship between these skin tumours and the length and extent of exposure to becaplermin: in the randomised clinical trials 3 skin tumours were reported in patients receiving Regranex. All these neoplasms were remote from the ulcer site and were detected between 16-36 days after the commencement of the therapy. One skin neoplasm and 4 other tumours have been reported following treatment with becaplermin. Seven other tumours were reported in patients receiving reference treatments other than Regranex. Once again, these tumours were all remote from the site of the ulcer. This clarification was reassuring. Long-term follow up data concerning the development of neoplasms after exposure to this product are very limited. A post-marketing follow-up will be conducted by the company (at least 1 year) to obtain additional long term safety data with particular emphasis on the incidence of tumour formation. Cardiovascular Events 45 patients (8%) who received becaplermin suffered a cardiovascular event compared to 33 (7%) in the  control  groups.  This  was  not  a  significant  difference.  7  patients  suffered  from  cerebrovascular disorders in the becaplermin treated group compared with 2 patients in the control group. However, 5 of  the  cases  in  the  becaplermin  treated  group  were  in  patients  treated  at  the  30  µg/g  dose concentration. There were only 2 cases in patients who received 100 µg/g. The numbers of these cases are too  small  for  any  conclusion  to  be  drawn  concerning  the  effect  of becaplermin  on  this  disorder.  However,  the  lack  of  significant  absorption  of  the  active  ingredient results  in  a  difficulty  in  providing  a  biologically  plausible  hypothesis  for  the  relationship  between exposure to becaplermin and the development of cerebrovascular disorders. Serious Adverse Events The adverse events which have been classified as serious are generally those which are commonly associated with the diabetic condition or with ulceration. There are no significant differences between the becaplermin treated and the control treated groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Deaths

37 patients died in the clinical trial programme, 18 of whom had received becaplermin. The causes of death are generally those associated with diabetes. There are no appreciable differences in the causes of death between becaplermin treated and control treated patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Withdrawals

20% of patients on standard therapy withdrew from the clinical trials compared to 18% on vehicle alone  and  15%  on  any  dose  concentration  of  becaplermin.  The  reasons  for  discontinuations  due  to adverse events appeared similar across the groups.

## Laboratory Monitoring

No significantly different frequencies in abnormal haematological, biochemical or urinalysis results in post  treatment  readings  compared  to  pre-treatment  values  were  observed  between  becaplermin  and control treated groups.

Antibody Formation 475  becaplermin  treated  patients  in  the  diabetic  ulcer  studies  were  investigated  for  antibody development. 2 patients only are said to have developed positive titres, and these were of low affinity, suggesting  that  topically  applied  becaplermin  has  no  significant  propensity  to  induce  a  systemic antibody response. Conclusions on safety Topical  becaplermin  at  a  dose  level  of  100  µg/g  applied  to  diabetic  ulcers  is  associated  with  no significant excess of adverse reactions overall compared to the placebo gel vehicle. Some  of  the  excipients  in  the  product,  such  as  m-cresol  and  parabens,  are  associated  with  skin reactions. The use of these preservatives is not considered justified. The product is currently presented in a multi-use tube. In view of the potential use of this product on a certainly infected ulcer base, and the potential therefore for contamination of the contents of the tube, and the possibility of cross infection between patients, the company was encouraged to introduce a sterile formulation as soon as possible. The company submitted progress reports, indicating that the sterile formulation failed to demonstrate adequate evidence of clinical efficacy in 2 controlled studies of  large  sample  size.  The  CPMP  concluded  that  the  failure  to  develop  an  efficacious  sterile unpreserved  product  was  disappointing,  but  did  not  impact  on  the  favourable  benefit/risk  balance previously shown for the marketed product formulation. The data which appear to show an excess of skin tumours in exposed individuals gave rise to concern, but the company provided evidence that: -there is no temporal relationship between the exposure and the development of the malignancy ; -there was no relation of the anatomical proximity of the tumours to the exposed area. There was concern that the long term data supporting this application (i.e. beyond 20 weeks in any individual)  were  inadequate;  in  particular  with  regard  to  a  possible  association  with  the  use  of Regranex in the development of skin tumours (theoretical carcinogenic potential of growth factors). There are also no data available concerning the repeated use of Regranex. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The duration of use of Regranex has therefore been limited to 20 weeks in any individual ; the SPC has  been  amended  to  include  statements  contraindicating  use  in  those  patients  with  tumours  at  the application site and urging caution in those with remote malignancies. As there are no data concerning the repeated use of Regranex and limited long term safety and efficacy data, a statement is included in the SPC to limit the total exposure to treatment with Regranex to 20 weeks. The company will provide further long term safety data and data on repeated use of Regranex as post-licensing commitments.

## Post marketing

In the assessment of the fourth PSUR it was found that in the Regranex post-marketing database there were 37 reports coded as skin hypertrophy. On further review, 2 cases of the 37 appeared to possibly represent hypertrophic changes at the margins of the treated ulcer.

Of the rest, 29 described cases that have hypergranulation in the base of the ulcer, 3 others are described as hypertrophic granulation or hyperkeratinisation. Two others reported callus formation, 1 distant from the treated lesion and 1within the treated lesion.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Hypertrophic granulation tissue formation or hypergranulation was defined by the finding of granulation tissue extending beyond the periwound area. There was no reported association of hypertrophic granulation to hypertrophic scarring or hypertrophic skin.

## Risk / Benefit Assessment

The CPMP requested the company to provide a further analysis of the efficacy, utilising the primary endpoint of complete healing, for cohorts based on baseline ulcer area of  5  cm² and &gt; 5 cm². For ulcers  5 cm² a dose related increase in the incidence of healing was demonstrated, with the greatest efficacy with becaplermin 100 µg/g gel: from data combined from the 4 clinical trials conducted over a 20 week treatment phase for ulcers  5 cm², 47 % of the ulcer treated with becaplermin 100 µg/g gel completely healed, compared with 35 % which were treated with gel alone.

The CPMP considered that the efficacy was proven for diabetic ulcers  5 cm². The indication was restricted to full-thickness, neuropathic, chronic diabetic ulcers less than or equal to 5 cm². The adverse events reported in the clinical trials were similar across all treatment groups and include infection,  skin  ulceration,  skin  disorder  including  erythema,  pain  and  rarely  bullous  eruption  and oedema.  These  application  site  reactions  were  1  %  in  all  groups.  The  company  addressed  the concerns on the possible tumorigenic action of becaplermin. The CPMP agreed that the risk of skin tumours  or  other  malignancies  was  limited,  although  a  theoretical  concern  remains,  the  active substance  being  a  growth  factor.  The  SPC  contraindicates  use  the  product  if  there  are  known neoplasms at or near the site of application (Section 4.3: Contraindications), and urges caution in the use the product in patients with known malignancies (section 4.4). Regranex is indicated for neuropathic diabetic ulcers: In section 4.2 and 4.4 of the SPC is mentioned that  underlying  conditions  such  as  osteomyelitis  and  peripheral  arteriopathy  should  be  excluded  or treated if present. As the analysis of the clinical trials demonstrated that infection of the wounds negatively influence the healing process, additional statements were included in sections 4.2 and 4.4 (special warnings) of the SPC to recommend the identification and treatment of infections prior to the use of Regranex and if a wound becomes infected to discontinue treatment. At present, insufficient efficacy and safety data are available for reassurance concerning the longterm use or repeated use of Regranex. A clinical trial studying this will be initiated. Therefore, the SPC includes statements limiting the use of Regranex to a maximum of 20 weeks in any individual patient, and that Regranex is not intended for retreatment. It  was  the  opinion  of  the  CPMP  that  a  positive  risk/benefit  was  demonstrated  for  Regranex  for  the indication as included in the SPC. 5. Conclusion In view of the positive risk/benefit ratio, the CPMP adopted a positive opinion for Regranex. The approved indication for Regranex is: Regranex is indicated, in association with other good wound care measures, to promote granulation and thereby the healing of full-thickness, neuropathic chronic diabetic ulcers less than or equal to 5 cm². Medicinal product no longer authorised