---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:50:54
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/revasc-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: revasc-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.0200034
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-17 09:42:53.666747
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initital  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures, which  have  been  finalised  before  1  February  2004.  For  scientific  information  on  procedures after this date please refer to module 8B.

<!-- image -->

Each  solvent  ampoule  contains  15  mg  of  mannitol  in  0.5  ml  water  for  injection  (pyrogen  free) strength. The solvent has an overage of 20%. The solvent ampoules are 1 ml colourless glass of 1 ml volume, hydrolytic glass, type I Eur.Ph.

1. Introduction Deep  vein  thrombosis  (DVT)  and  pulmonary  embolism  (PE)  are  common  complications  of orthopaedic surgery and other major surgery. The principal factors leading to DVT are believed to be thrombin generation during surgery, stasis and vein wall injury. The most widely used anticoagulant is heparin,  which  is  often  used  in  combination  with  other  pharmacological  or  mechanical  methods  to enhance  efficacy  in  high-risk  patients.  Thus,  there  is  considerable  scope  for  improvement  of  the existing preventive therapies for DVT and PE. Desirudin is a synthetic analogue of hirudin, manufactured by recombinant DNA technology, using a yeast  vector.  Hirudin  is  a  natural  anticoagulant  found  in  the  saliva  of  the  European  leech  (Hirudo medicinalis).  Desirudin  is  a  single-chain  polypeptide  consisting  of  65  amino  acids  containing  3 disulphide  bridges.  It  is  nearly  identical  in  structure  and  amino  acid  sequence  to  the  natural anticoagulant hirudin with the exception that it lacks a sulphate group on amino acid Tyr 63. The therapeutic indication claimed for desirudin is: 'Prevention of deep venous thrombosis in patients undergoing elective hip or knee replacement surgery'. The recommended dose is 15 mg twice daily post-operatively by subcutaneous injection for 9-12 days or until the patient is fully ambulant. Desirudin  has  been  found  to  be  an  active,  specific  and  selective  thrombin  inhibitor,  which  offers pharmacological advantages over other anticoagulants: · it does not require antithrombin III to exert its effect · it can inactivate clot-bound as well as free thrombin · it has no direct pro-aggregatory effects on platelets · it is unlikely to be inactivated by anti-heparin proteins For these reasons, desirudin has been selected for development in prophylaxis against postoperative thromboembolic complications. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical, and biological aspects Composition of the medicinal product The pharmaceutical form of Revasc (15 mg) is a ' is presented as powder and solvent for solution for injection'. The  active  substance  of  Revasc  is  is  presented  as  15  mg  of  desirudin  (15  mg)  presented  as  a lyophilised  powder  in  vials.  The  excipient  is  for  Revasc  includes  magnesium  chloride  present  as  a stabiliser (after lyophilisation). The pH is adjusted to 7.4 with a solution of sodium hydroxide. There is an overage of 5% to enable withdrawal of 15 mg of desirudin after reconstitution with 0.5 ml mannitol solution.  The  containers  for  the  lyophilised  powder  areis  2  mla  colourless,  hydrolytic  glass,  type  I Eur.Ph. vials with butyl rubber stoppers covered with a fluoropolymer film on the product side. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Method of preparation

The active substance is manufactured by NOVARTIS, (formerly Ciba Geigy), Basel, and Switzerland.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Three  different  methods  have  been  used  in  the  production  of  desirudin.  The  two  earlier  methods suffered  from low yields and degradation at the C-terminus of the desirudin by host cell carboxypeptidase activity during fermentation and purification. The current method III, using a yeast host strain TR 1456, demonstrated better yields, less degradation and an improved impurity profile. utilising a yeast host strain TR 1456.

A production batch of desirudin has been defined as the amount of active ingredient obtained from 3 consecutive fermentation batches, which have been partially purified separately. They are pooled and subject to further purification as a single batch.

Desirudin is produced in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain 1454 transformed with expression plasmid pDP34/GAPFL-YHIR. A single yeast transformant is used for subsequent master and working cell banks.  Its  coding  sequence  was  synthesised  chemically  using  the  known  aminoacid  sequence  of hirudin variant I (HVI) from the leech Hirudo medicinalis and includeding the signal sequence of the yeast  acid  phosphatase  (PH05).  The  expression  of  desirudin  in  yeast  is  controlled  by  the  GAPFL promoter ligated to the coding sequence of the PH05 signal sequence., whereas Tthe 1.1 kb expression cassette was cloned into the high copy number yeast vector pDP34.

The  manufacturing  procedure  for  Revasc  15  mg  vials  involves  standard  pharmaceutical  procedures summarised  in  several  steps:  preparation  of  solution,  adjustment  of  pH-value,  sterile  filtration  (as terminal steam sterilisation is not possible), filling, prestoppering with sterilised stoppers, lyophilisation, insertion of stoppers, securing with aluminium caps and visual inspection. Adequate tests are described for in-process controls during manufactureformulation of the product. During the review of the product dossier, Ciba requested a transfer of the manufacture of the finished product and the diluent from Ciba-Geigy Stein, Basle, Switzerland to Dr. Madaus GmbH, Germany. In the manufacturing process carried out in Dr. Madaus' plant, the following modifications have been made:  an  increase  in  the  batch  size  (from  40,000  to  60,000  vials ), pre-filtration  prior  to  sterile filtration,  steam  sterilisation  of  the  stoppers  and  the  shortening  of  the  primary  drying  phase  in  the lyophilisation cycle. One batch of Revasc lyophilisate 17/389/4 has been manufactured in the Madaus facility and meets the specifications. The process will be validated by further batches and the complete validation report will be available by May 1997. The  manufacturing  process  for  the  diluent  has  2  minor  changes:  a  decrease  of  the  batch  size  from 115,000  to  80,000  ampoules  and  the  filtration  of  the  solution  during  the  ampoule  filling  in  a continuous process. The modifications to the manufacturing process, carried out during the review procedure, are deemed to have no discernible effect on the quality of the product and, as such, are acceptable. Control of starting materials Each production batch of the active substance is tested according to the specifications for: identity (i.e. description, SDS gel electrophoresis, amino acid sequence and peptide mapping), purity (isoelectric point, clarity, pH, water content and absorbance at 420 nm, sulphated ash, heavy metals, dimmer and related  substances,  yeast  proteins,  DNA,  microbial  contamination  and  bacterial  endotoxines)  and potency (protein content and biological activity per mg). During  the  evaluation  of  the  dossier  the  company  has  summarised  and  re-examined  the  related substances  limits  and  has  agreed  to  tighten  them  following  further  manufacturing  experience.  Data provided on the revised limits are acceptable. The active substance specifications have been amended in  order  to  reflect  all  changes  requested  by  the  CPMP  during  the  assessment  process.  These amendments include limits for ammonium, CGP 51 013 and CGP 51 012, other related substances and total dimmer content. Development genetics Medicinal product no longer authorised

The signal sequence targets the newly synthesised protein (desirudin) to the endoplasmic reticulum where,  on  entry  to  the  lumen,  a  peptidase  cleaves  the  signal  sequence  and  the  desirudin  is  then secreted into the culture broth. The mature desirudin is secreted into the culture broth after cleavage of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  signal  sequence  by  the  entry  of  a  peptidase  to  the  lumen.All  the  elements  required  for  the expression and secretion of desirudin in S. cerevisiae have been described adequately and a diagram of the expression cassette has been included by the Company.

A  detailed  description  of  the  shuttle  vector  pDP34  has  been  provided.  Satisfactory  details  of characterisation are given up to, and beyond, the normal population doubling level to be used in full scale production. The Company has adequately characterised the plasmid by restriction mapping and DNA sequence analysis to monitor its structural stability.

The biological, immunological and physico-chemical characterisation of the product was performed using several techniques. Desirudin has an isoelectric point of 3.8 -4.3, is highly soluble in aqueous solution and has an elementary composition as expected.is reported

The applicant has argued that the repeated isolation of single yeast colonies and routine checking of the strain's auxotrophic markers and its specific protease deficiencies rule out microbial contamination. Preparation and description of master cell bank (MCB) and working cell bank (WCB) The preparation and validation of the master cell bank (comprising 50 vials stable for at least 5 years in liquid nitrogen) is adequately described. Full details of the validation tests have been submitted. The production of the WCB represents 8 doublings in relation to the MCB. Sufficient number of WCB vials has been produced to sustain a production campaign for 1-2 years. A sample of WCB vials is Quality Control tested to the MCB specification before being released for use in production. The Company provided additional satisfactory clarification of the Quality Control test regarding proof of absence of fungal contamination. Fermentation In  process  parameters  are  adequately  described  and  the  manufacturing  site  of  the  active  substance appears to be in compliance with GMP regulations. During the review procedure, the Company, following a CPMP request, replaced meat peptone with soya in the fermentation medium. The Company has produced 2 validation batches 00796 and 00896 with this new medium. Product from these batches has been compared with product from bovine derived peptone fermentation. The results  of  the  peptide  mapping,  microheterogenicity,  amino  acids  sequencing,  physio-chemical analyses etc, demonstrate that the active ingredient is identical in both cases. These batches were put on a stability programme in December 1996. Purification The  description  of  the  purification  process  is  comprehensive.  It  consists  of  9  stages  leading  to  the active substance. The host cell proteins and other impurities of higher and lower molecular weights are removed by gGel filtration  during  this  process.  The  applicant  has  tabulated  further  data  for  the  inprocess limits for down stream processing and the results of the validation batches. Active substance characterisation The  active  ingredient  (CGP  39393)  and  related  substances  (CGP51012  and  CGP  51013)  can  be detected by HPLC. A wide range of studies of high quality has been presented to confirm the structure of desirudin. It has been characterised by amino acid composition, location of disulphide bonds, N and C terminal amino acid sequence analysiswere studied, confirmationevidence of primary and secondary structure,  (by  peptide  mapping  and  digestion  with  S.  aureus  protease),  and  elucidation  of  tertiary structure (by NMR in solution and by X-Ray Crystallography). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The specific biological activity of desirudinCGP 39393 is approximately 18 000 antithrombin units (ATU)  per  mg  of  desirudin  with  reference  to  the  WHO  Second  International  Standard  for α -thrombin(12.000 ± 1500 antithrombin units (ATU) mg determined by the useof the 1st international std of thrombin) is comparable to the activity of highly purified authentic hirudin. . The HPLC content

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

is  ~  92%.  This  estimation  of  biological  activity  is  based  on  the  inhibition  of  thrombin-induced fibrinogen aggregation with the assessment of the strength of the resulting gel.  The company indicates in  the  SPC  that  the  specific  activity  is  an  approximate  value.The  tests  used  during  analytical development have been adequately described and validated.

Further  details  submitted  by  the  Company  demonstrated  the  consistency  of  production  and  the purification  process.  Satisfactory  data  regarding  improvement  of  the  reproducibility  of  the  SDS  gel electrophoresis is used as an identification test was provided.

The active ingredient specification has been updated (PW-367H2) to take into account all requested changes, which arose throughout the assessment. Control of the finished medicinal product The proposed specifications and control methods for the finished product are mainly based on tests and limits defined for the active ingredient. These methods have been validated. During the assessment procedure, the Company was asked to clarify aspects such as the proposed limit for 'visible foreign particles', test for magnesium,  test  for  bacterial endotoxins  and  sterility compliance with the Ph. Eur. Other points for clarification concerned pH and endotoxin limits for the diluent. The company still is requested to address post-authorisation a validation report on the batches used in the manufacturing proces at Dr. Madaus GmbH, Germany and to amend the specification for the foreign particles test. The applicant has provided a new edition of the Ciba Monograph (PD-860H2) taking into account all requested changes. A validation report on the manufacturing batches produced at Dr. Madaus GmbH, Germany will be submitted in May 1997. Stability Stability of active ingredient The stability of desirudin was examined under normal and accelerated storage conditions (temperature,  light  [200,000  Lux  for  1  day]  and  75%  relative  humidity)  and  under  normal  storage conditions. The results obtained showed that the proposed storage conditions of ≤ 8 ° C, protected from light, humidity and microbial contamination with a retest period of 18 months is justified. Stability of the finished product Data provided on 3 batches of the final formulation (F. 4) showed good stability i.e. product remaining within specification under normal storage conditions (8 ' C and 25 ' C) for up to 24 months. Updated stability data have been supplied and support a 24-month shelf life for the finished product (6 batchesmonths of bovine derived active ingredient). Batches 00796 and 00896, using the soya derived peptone, were placed on stability trials in December 1996. The results from these ongoing trials will be available by the end of 1997. The  proposed  shelf  life  of  24  months  is  justified  on  the  basis  of  the  satisfactory  additional  data provided by the applicant. However, the appropriate shelf life for the proposed marketing formulation of the solvent is only 18 months as data are limited to this time period. A common expirye date of 18 months is therefore considered necessary for Revasc powder and the mannitol solvent. A variation to extend the shelf life can be made when further satisfactory data become available. The  reconstituted  solution  should  be  used  as  soon  as  possible  after  preparation.  It  has  been demonstrated,  however,  to  be  stable  for  24  hours  when  stored  in  a  refrigerator  (2-8°  C);  after  this period, the reconstituted solution should be discarded. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Inspection status

In  June  1995,  the  applicant  requested  the  following  manufacturing  sites  to  be  considered  when  the dossier was submitted:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Manufacturer of the active substance:

Former Ciba-Geigy Ltd (now called NOVARTIS), Klybeckstrasse 141, Ch-4002 Basel, Switzerland.

## Manufacturer of the finished product and storage of the finished product:

Ciba-Geigy Ltd,Ch 4332 Stein, Switzerland.

## Manufacturer responsible for batch release and import in the EEA:

Ciba Pharmaceuticals, Wimblehurst Road, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 4AB, UK. In February 1996, following the inspection report of the manufacturing site of the active substance and finished product, the applicant was notified of failures to comply with GMP in Stein, Switzerland. In  November  1996,  the  company  requested  to  transfer  the  site  of  change  of  manufactureing  site responsible  for  the  finished  product  from  Stein  in  Switzerland  to  Dr.  Madaus,  Germany  and  the manufacturer responsible for batch release from Horsham in UK toin Ciba, Huningue, France. In  January  1997,  following  the  amended  administrative  part  IA  for  the  manufacturing  sites,  the applicant  provided  a  timetable  for  validation  of  the  transfer  from  Ciba-Stein  to  Dr.  Madaus  and  a description of the manufacturing process (updated part IIB) for the finished product. Clarification of some points arisingen from the assessment of the additional pharmaceutical and biological data were verified during the inspection. The German Authorities in a product related inspection during 17 and 18 of February 1997 inspected the facilities of Dr. Madaus and a satisfactory report was issued on 13 March 1997. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Desirudin was shown to be a specific and potent inhibitor of human thrombin and inactivates both free and  fibrin-bound  thrombin.  The  following  pharmacological  and  toxicological  studies  have  been carried out and detailed in Part III of the dossier. Pharmacodynamics The anticoagulant potential and mechanism of action of desirudin have been explored in vitro, ex-vivo and in  vivo and  desirudin  is  found  to  affect  both  primary  haemostasis  (platelet  aggregation)  and secondary haemostasis (fibrin generation). The pre-clinical data are confirmed in the clinical section, where convincing inhibition of platelet aggregation is demonstrated in healthy volunteers. Primary  haemostasis  studies  showed  that  thrombin-induced  platelet  aggregation  was  inhibited  by desirudin at an A2 value of 0.003 µM, the corresponding value for platelet activating-factor-induced aggregation was &gt;0.55 µM, and for collagen was &gt; 5.5 µM. In secondary  haemostasis, prothrombin  time (PT), thrombin  time  (TT)  and activated partial thromboplastin  time  (APTT)  were  assessed  in  vitro  as  indices  of  anticoagulation  by  studying  the inhibition  of  CaCl2  generated  thrombosis  in  platelet-free  plasma.  APTT  was  shown  to  be  of intermediate sensitivity and gave an approximately linear response at concentrations of desirudin from 0.01 to 0.1 µM, therefore, it was adopted for the animal studies. Desirudin was found to be a potent and specific inhibitor of both the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation cascade,  with  a  Ki  of  the  order  of  0.0002  µM.  In  vivo  studies  using  several  animal  models  of hypercoagulability have shown prolongation of APTT. Desirudin  was  shown  to  have  no  significant  effect  on  other  enzymes  involved  in  the  process  of haemostasis, or on other serine protease enzymes such as trypsin or chymotrypsin, or on complement activation by the classical or alternative pathways. Medicinal product no longer authorised

General (secondary) pharmacodynamic studies were limited to an investigation of cardiovascular and respiratory parameters in cats and guinea pigs and no significant findings were observed.

Limited  preclinical  data  are  available  regarding  drug  interactions  but  this  issue  has  been  studied  in humans and, therefore, no further animal work is necessary.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetic behaviour of desirudin was comparable in the animal species used in toxicity tests (rat, dog, cynomolgus monkeys) and in humans.

## Absorption

The  absolute  bioavailability  of  desirudin  in  the  rat,  after  a  dose  of  5.5  mg/kg  (subcutaneous administration) was approximately 83%. The mean residence time (MRT) of desirudin for rat, dog and man  is  0.49,  0.78  and  1.55hr  respectively  and  is  similar  to  the  half-life  reported  in  the  published literature.  Dose  proportionality  has  been  convincingly  demonstrated  in  rat  and  dog,  although  there appear to be minor divergences from strict proportionality in the monkey.

No target organ or unexpected systemic toxicity was identified except in the 3-month dog i.v study, where  vasculitis  and  fibrinoid  necrosis  of  the  vessel  wall  in  numerous  organs  and  tissues  were observed in 5 animals (at 10-25 mg/kg). The frequency and severity of this event were shown to be greater in the treated than in the control groups: it was considered to be related to the immunogenic response to desirudin as 16/19 of the dogs tested had high titres of anti-desirudin antibodies. Desirudin was present in plasma both in free form and in a form of high molecular mass, which was identified as antibody complex based on its behaviour on a gel filtration column. The elimination half-life of the antibody  complex was estimated to be &gt;20  hours.  The  antibodies  formed  against  desirudin  did  not appear  to  have  neutralising  activity,  as  the  antibody  complex  inhibited  blood  coagulation.  The occurrence of vasculitis and antibodies observed in the dog is referred to in the SPC under pre-clinical information.

Distribution in normal and pregnant animals There  is  little  tissue  uptake.  That  which  does  occur  is  predominantly  by  the  kidney,  with  levels  in other  organs  at  or  below  the  threshold  of  detection.  There  is  transfer  to  the  foetus,  in  the  rabbit,  at concentrations of 0.015 to 0.1% of the dose administered. It is not known whether transfer in milk occurs. Metabolism In  the  intact  rat,  no  unchanged  desirudin  was  found  after  administration  of  a  30-mg/kg  dose.  The occurrence  of  metabolites,  in  the  isolated  perfused  rat  kidney,  indicates  intrinsic  capacity  for  renal metabolism of desirudin in this species. The rat liver is also found to be metabolically active, with the kidney having a 100 fold greater capacity than the liver. In the dog, it is thought that the disappearance of 26-36% of the administered dose may have represented metabolism and sequestration, possibly in the renal tube. Neither liver nor kidney was metabolically active in any other species studied. Elimination Desirudin is  rapidly  eliminated,  with  an  overall  half-life  in  the  region  of  1-2  hrs  in  all  species.  It's clearance  is  predominantly  or  totally  renal,  based  on  the  observation  that  the  plasma  clearance coincides with the glomerular filtration rate. Toxicology Single dose toxicity Single dose intravenous studies were conducted in rats, mice, monkeys and dogs. No major bleeding episodes were observed at the doses employed. The findings were limited to those expected from the pharmacological activity of the drug. Repeated dose toxicity Repeated dose toxicity studies up to 3 months duration were conducted in rats (s.c route) and dogs (i.v route).  In  addition,  toxicity  studies  with  drug  administration  by  continuous  i.v  infusion  were conducted in dogs (7 days treatment duration) and cynomolgus monkeys (14 days treatment duration). The  findings  in  species  other  than  the  dog  were  limited  to  enhanced  pharmacological  effects  (its intended  anticoagulant  effect).  Serious  bleeding  seems  to  occur  at  doses  above  5  mg/kg,  as  a  very rough approximation the recommended human therapeutic dose is 15 mg 12 hourly i.e. 0.25 mg/kg for a 60 kg patient, or 0.5 mg/kg if calculated on a daily rather than a 12 hourly basis. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Immunogenicity

Studies of the species specificity of desirudin antigenicity were carried out. Animals were given low dose  i.v  exposure,  followed  by  a  booster  exposure,  a  regimen  likely  to  generate  hypersensitivity. Desirudin specific antibody formation and skin test responses to an interdermal injection of desirudin were evaluated. In the dog, skin tests were negative. In the rabbit both antibodies and skin responses were  negative.  In  the  baboon  skin  test  responses  were  negative  and  antibody  formation  was  not documented.  In  man,  low  levels  of  antibodies  have  been  recorded  in  some  subjects  and  very  high levels in one subject exhibiting urticaria after exposure.

- Enzyme-Linked  Immunosorbent  Assay  (ELISA);  used  to  determine  desirudin  in  plasma  and urine, and also to recognise the thrombin-desirudin complex.

Reproduction studies There was no evidence of adverse effects on general reproductive performance, fertility, or postnatal development in rats given desirudin by s.c injection. The highest dose administered (10 mg/kg) was limited by the pharmacological effect of desirudin. Four developmental toxicity studies were conducted (two in the rat by the s.c route and two in the rabbit by the i.v route), all complied with GLP. Desirudin was considered to be teratogenic in rats (low incidence of omphaloceole and incomplete closure of the abdominal wall) and rabbits (spina bifida, malrotated limbs, cranial changes and gastroschisis). Mutagenic potential A complete battery of genotoxicity tests was carried out. There was no evidence of mutagenic activity in three in vitro assays (bacterial mutation test, in vitro gene mutation assay in Chinese hamster V79 cells, in vitro cytogenetic assay in Chinese hamster ovary cells). The results of an in vivo assay (rat micronucleus)  were  also  negative.  All  studies  were  conducted  according  to  satisfactory  protocols, using GLP. Carcinogenic potential Carcinogenicity  studies  have  not  been  conducted  and  are  not  required  for  the  proposed  clinical indication. Local tolerance A  5  day  subcutaneous  local  tolerance  study  in  rabbits  comparing  formulations  containing  calcium chloride and magnesium chloride showed that the latter (the proposed clinical formulation) was better tolerated. Microscopic changes of minimal fibrosis and haemorrhage were similar to those seen with desirudin alone. No ecotoxicity studies have been carried out with desirudin. This does not appear to be necessary for this  recombinant  protein  product  which  has  no  unusual  peptide  bonds  or  amino  acid  residues  and which will undergo enzyme proteolysis by microorganisms in waste water systems. Neither the active substance desirudin nor the excipients present an environmental risk and no further data are required. It  is  concluded  that  the  studies  reported  in  Part  III  of  the  dossier  are  appropriate  and  support  the marketing authorisation application for this product. 4. Clinical aspects The standards used in the conduct of the clinical studies were considered to be good and those after 1991 were conducted according to the CPMP standards of GCP. The following assay methods were used in the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic studies: Medicinal product no longer authorised

- High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC); used to determine desirudin in urine.
- Thrombin Chromogenic Assay (TCA); measures the inhibitory activity of desirudin containing fluids on exogenous thrombin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Human pharmacology (Phase I studies)

The human pharmacology of desirudin was investigated in 445 subjects, mainly healthy volunteers. Both i.v and s.c dosing regimens were used ranging from 0.1-1.0 mg/kg; s.c dosing regimens for up to 6 days and i.v up to 72 h were included. The recommended dose of 15 mg is equivalent to 0.2 mg/kg for a 70 kg, or 0.3 mg/kg for a 50 kg patient.

- Pharmacodynamics. The activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) gave a linear response at plasma concentrations of desirudin from 0.01 to 1mM and is used to monitor therapy. Thrombin time is too sensitive to be useful as a monitoring test. Plasma levels of desirudin (by ELISA) are closely  related  to  biological  effect.  Desirudin  has  no  clinically  significant  effect  on  platelet count or on the bleeding time.

· Pharmacokinetics. Bioavailability after s.c administration is 100% that of the i.v route. Kinetics are  dose  dependent  and  excretion  is  primarily  renal.  Although  in  the  healthy  elderly  the bioavailability  was  somewhat greater  than in the  young, this does not translate into a  greater pharmacodynamic effect, and is therefore unlikely to be of clinical significance. With moderate to severe renal impairment (GFR&lt;31/mL/min) patients studied showed that there is increasing pharmacodynamic  activity  with  decreasing  renal  function.  Patients  with  hepatic  impairment have not been studied. The proposal by the applicant to contraindicate desirudin in patients with severe  hepatic  impairment  and  to  monitor  APTT  in  patients  with  lesser  degrees  of  hepatic impairment is considered satisfactory. · Interaction studies. The potential for interaction between desirudin and warfarin was evaluated in a three-day study in healthy volunteers, anticoagulation had not stabilised by the end of the study.  No  interaction  was  seen  with  aspirin  and  piroxicam.  The  ability  of  desmopressin  to reverse anticoagulation generated by desirudin was tested: although a small fall in APTT was observed,  desmopressin  cannot  be  considered  to  reverse  the  effect  of  desirudin  in  a  manner which would be therapeutically useful. · Bioequivalence. The clinical trials of desirudin were conducted using a formulation known as F1.  In  order  to  improve  stability  F4,  the  market  formulation,  contains  magnesium  chloride instead of mannitol. Bioequivalence was demonstrated between F1 and F4 in a study carried out in 12 healthy male volunteers. Clinical trials (Phases II and III) In  Part  IV  of  the  initial  dossier,  data  are  provided  on  1621  patients  included  in  clinical  studies  of whom 1120 received desirudin and 501 unfractionated heparin.  Five hundred and  nineteen patients received the recommended dose of 15 mg. During the evaluation of the dossier additional data from a multicentre double blind comparative study were provided in order to compare desirudin to enoxaparin - a low molecular weight heparin. In the clinical studies diagnosis of DVT was by ascending phlebography 4-12 days post-operatively, or  earlier  if  there  were  clinical  signs.  Pulmonary  embolism  (PE)  was  confirmed  by  ventilation/ perfusion scanning or pulmonary angiography. The majority of the patients entered into the trials were over 60 years of age. Women of child bearing potential were excluded (entry was restricted to post menopausal females or those who had hysterectomy or tubal ligation). This is because desirudin is teratogenic in two animal species. Comments on efficacy: · Study  RH/PT3;  an  open,  pilot,  dose  ranging  clinical  trial:  desirudin  at  a  dose  of  15  mg  was effective  in  the  prevention  of  DVT  after  elective  hip  replacement  and  more  so  than  standard doses of unfractionated heparin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Study  RH/E23;  a  pivotal  study  which  involves  both  dose  ranging  (3  doses  of  desirudin)  and comparator elements (i.e. unfractionated heparin). The conclusion drawn from the trial was that all doses of desirudin were superior to heparin and that the 15 mg and 20 mg doses of desirudin were equivalent.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Study RH/E 28; a heparin controlled comparator trial similar to RH/E23 but omitting the dose ranging  arm.  The  results  confirm  those  of  RH/E23;  again  desirudin  was  significantly  more effective.
- Study RH/E 25; a multicentre double blind study comparative with enoxaparin. Efficacy was demonstrated in reducing the frequency of major thrombotic events (death, proximal DVT, or pulmonary  embolism  -PE).  The  results  significantly  confirm  the  efficacy  in  the  primary criterion (p&lt;0.02) and the second criterion (p&lt;0.01), respectively.

The applicant has demonstrated that desirudin is more effective than both unfractionated heparin and enoxaparin  in  the  prophylaxis  of  thromboembolic  disease  after  orthopaedic  surgery.  Bleeding  was slightly more frequent and slightly more profuse than with the comparative products. The risk benefit balance in the proposed clinical indication is considered to be favourable.

Comments on safety: Desirudin was well tolerated by healthy subjects (n=445) during the Phase I clinical development. Three  subjects  had  reactions,  which  might  have  been  allergic  responses;  in  one  case  the  subject developed urticaria in close temporal relationship to the administration of desirudin. The overall incidence of recorded adverse events in patients treated for the proposed indication was similar to that found in patients studied in other indications (PTCA and acute myocardial infarction). In  cardiac  indications  at  the  time  of  submission,  four  out  of  1247  patients  experienced  adverse cerebrovascular events in clinical trials, none were haemorragic. In the indication prophylaxis of thromboembolism-orthopaedic surgery the safety database relates to 1120  patients  treated  with  desirudin  and  501  comparator  patients  treated  with  heparin.  The  overall adverse  event  rate  was  65.5%  for  desirudin  and  65.3%  for  heparin.  The  studies  provided  by  the company,  RH/E  23,  RH/E  28  and  RH/E  25  showed  very  similar  results for  haemorrhagic complications  for  desirudin,  unfractionated  heparin  and  enoxaparin.  It  seems  likely  that  relatively minor bleeding episodes such as injection site and wound haematoma are commoner with desirudin. At  the  dosage  regimens  used  in  clinical  studies,  desirudin  did  not  induce  major  haemorrhagic complications. The  applicant  provided  additional  safety  information  of  desirudin  in  comparison  to  low  molecular weight heparin. Data showed that adverse experiences were noted in 71% of patients in both treatment groups and, in general, had similar severity. Three patients on desirudin and two on enoxaparin had an allergic reaction, considered to be treatment related. Minor  bleeding  episodes,  such  as  haematoma,  were  more  common  in  desirudin  treated  patients. Injection  site  haematoma  was  also  more  frequent  in  desirudin  treated  patients  29(2.8%)  than  in enoxaparin patients 6(0.6%). The frequency and quantity of blood loss and tranfusion requirements are both equivalent between treatment groups. The company has satisfactorily addressed the following issues related to Part IV of the initial dossier during  the  assessment  of  the  product.  The  coadministration  of  coumarin  in  prophylaxis  of  venous thromboembolism; the potential for interaction with ticlopidine and the potential of desirudin to cause thrombocytopenia; immunogenic potential and second exposure; the dose suitability according to body weight and the duration of treatment. The SPC was revised accordingly. The clinical studies in support of the application were conducted solely in patients undergoing elective hip replacement surgery. The CPMP considered, on the basis of the applicant's reasoned argument, that the risk benefit profile in the hip replacement studies was likely to be similar to that for elective knee replacement, and has consequently accepted that therapeutic indication. 5. Conclusion Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 6. Post-Authorisation

In  post  marketing  surveillance,  rare  reports  of  major  haemorrhages,  some  of  which  were  fatal,  and anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reactions leading to shock have been reported.

## Anaphylactic reactions

Following a review of the safety database triggered by recently reported severe and fatal anaphylactic/oid  reactions  with  a  similar  hirudin  analogue,  the  MAH  identified  cases  of  possible anaphylactic shock occurring in close temporal association with the use of desirudin. Given that these reactions are immune-mediated, patients with previous exposure to hirudin or a hirudin analogue may be at an increased risk. Consequently, the SPC has been update to reflect these findings. Alternative treatment options must be considered before the decision to re-expose a patient to Revasc. Treatment with  Revasc  should  be  initiated  under  the  guidance  of  a  physician  with  experienced  coagulation disorders and should be undertaken only in a setting where medical assistance is readily available and where there is access to treatment for anaphylactic reactions. Patients should be informed that they have received Revasc. Medicinal product no longer authorised