---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:05:56
document_pages: 16
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/sonata-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: sonata-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 9.5783605
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 23:29:59.452213
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Sonata. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2003. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Zaleplon is a new chemical entity, a pyrazolopyrimidine hypnotic structurally different from currently authorised benzodiazepines. The proposed therapeutic indication is  'for the treatment of patients with insomnia who have difficulty falling asleep. It is indicated only when the disorder is severe, disabling or subjecting the individual to extreme distress' It  is  not  yet  authorised in any country. The dossier presented was considered to be of good overall quality, and the development has been conducted in accordance with the relevant CPMP guideline. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical, and biological aspects Composition Zaleplon is presented as 5 mg and 10 mg capsules, containing a new active ingredient, zaleplon.  As the drug substance is only very slightly soluble in water, it is micronised to give a consistent particle size.    Other  ingredients  include  microcrystalline  cellulose;  pregelatinised  starch,  silicon  dioxide, sodium lauryl sulphate, magnesium stearate, lactose monohydrate, indigo carmine (E132) and titanium dioxide (E171) are standard.  The opaque capsule shell is composed of gelatin and titanium dioxide, contains sodium lauryl sulphate and silicon dioxide and is printed using pink ink for the 10mg strength and a gold ink for the 5mg strength. The opaque light brown capsule of the 5mg capsule also contains red, yellow, and black iron oxides (E172). Due to  CPMP  concerns  about  the  possibility  of  covert  administration  of  the  product  to  others,  the originally proposed formulation has been varied to include an intense blue colorant (indigo carmine) and  an  opacifier  (titanium  dioxide).  The  latter  initially  forms  a  noticeable  film  on  the  surface  of liquids, disperses readily and makes clear drink opaque, so those beverages, which are hard to colour, may still show evidence of tampering from the opacifier. Manufacturing process Ayerst-Wyeth Pharmaceutical Inc. in Guayama, Puerto Rico, manufactures the capsule formulations; a site  inspection  by  the  UK  authorities  in  January  1997  found  it  to  be  satisfactory.  The  manufacturing process is simple; process optimisation and validation studies have been carried out and the results were  considered  satisfactory.  In  April  1999,  the  name  of  the  manufacturer  was  changed  to  Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Company (WPC). Control on starting materials The  applicant  agreed  to  re-consider  the  limits  for  impurities  in  the  active  substance  as  further experience  is  gained  with  future  batches  manufactured  using  the  current  process.  The  proposed specification for the active substance was considered acceptable, as each of the known impurities has been qualified in toxicology studies. Zambon Group SpA manufactures Zaleplon and a Drug Master File has been submitted. Control of excipients was considered satisfactory. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Control on finished product

The  finished  product  specification  was  considered  acceptable  once  a  number  of  modifications proposed by the CPMP were implemented. The limit for total degradation products was tightened and a  commitment received from the applicant to review the limit once 36-month stability data became available. The applicant also committed to develop a second method for identity testing of zalepon in the capsule formulation. The applicant further agreed to introduce the Ph. Eur. test for uniformity of weight to tighten the dissolution specification and to limit the dissolution acceptance criteria to stage 2

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

for  both  release  and  end-of-shelf  life.  The  analytical  methods  have  been  well  validated.  Batch analytical data comply with the specification.

## Stability

Zaleplon drug substance shows good stability and supports the proposed storage period of 12 months for the active substance. The stability profile of both strengths of capsules remains good for up to 24 months  with  all  the  results  within  specification  at  25C/60%  RH.  There  is  little  evidence  of degradation. All impurities except one remained below the level of 0.1%. Dissolution results remained high after 24 months storage. These results were considered sufficient to support a shelf life of two years for the capsules when stored below 30 o C in opaque blister packs. In September 2001, the shelf life was extended from 2 years to 3 years as foreseen at the time of the authorisation.

General  pharmacodynamics: Zaleplon  produced  a  similar  inhibition  of  activity,  pain  and  writhing response  and  fall  in  temperature  in  mice  and  rats  as  compared  to  triazolam,  flurazepam,  zolpidem, pentobarbitone, and phenobarbitone. Zalepon had no effect on charcoal meal transit times in mice or acetylcholine,  histamine  or  barium  induced  contractions  in  isolated  guinea  pig  ileum.  Zaleplon induced  no  adverse  vasomotor  or  respiratory  effects  in  rabbits.  Respiratory  rates  and  tidal  volume were  reduced  following  administration  of  high  doses  of  zaleplon  to  monkeys  breathing  air  or  CO2 enriched air indicating a potential muscle relaxant effect. Heart rate and blood pressure fell in both normotensive, conscious rats and spontaneously hypertensive rats. Zaleplon reduced urinary volume and Na + and Cl -concentrations in rats. No effect was recorded on in vitro human renin activity.

The applicant provided sufficient data to demonstrate that the additional excipients (indigo carmine and titanium dioxide) had no adverse effect on the quality of the product. Compatibility studies on the active  and  unmarked  formulation  blends  with  the  two  new  excipients  did  not  show  any  problems. Batch analytical results and preliminary stability data on the new formulation have been reviewed and considered sufficient to allow approval. The applicant has committed to supply regular updates on the stability testing of the new formulation at specific intervals. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics Primary pharmacology : Zaleplon is a novel pyrazolopyrimidine hypnotic agent that binds weakly but specifically to the cerebral  GABAA benzodiazepine (BDZ)  receptor complex. The IC50 for displacement of (3H)-flunitrazepam in rat cortical tissue, an inverse measure of its affinity for BDZ receptors  was  200nM  (400-fold  that  of  triazolam,  2-fold  that  of  flurazepam  and  50-fold  that  of diazepam). In addition zaleplon enhancement of GABA-induced TBPS binding (IC 50 = 200nM, Imax = 73%) was similar in magnitude to the enhancement by triazolam, flurazepam and diazepam (IC50 = 0.5, 114, 17nM, Imax = 78, 71, 65% respectively). Zaleplon showed selectivity for the BZ1 or alpha 1 receptor subunit of the GABAA complex. Based on these data a fast receptor off rate and an improved therapeutic ratio for zaleplon has been postulated. Zaleplon  was  active  in  several  behavioural  studies  in  rats  and  monkeys.  Zaleplon,  triazolam  and flurazepam showed anxiolytic activity as measured by anti-conflict effects in both rats (ED50 = 1.1,0.4 and 3.2 mg/kg respectively) and squirrel monkeys. Zalepon, triazolam and flurazapam induced EEG changes in monkeys and rats compatible with reduced time to sleep and increased sleep time. Studies  were  conducted  to  assess  tolerance  and  the  dependence/addiction  potential  of  zaleplon compared with triazolam and zolpidem in rats and baboons. Moderate withdrawal symptoms (tremor, retching) were seen after two weeks and increased in severity with time. Results also indicated that zaleplon is slightly less likely to induce tolerance and as likely to induce dependence/addiction as the comparators tested. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Drug interactions :  Studies of potential interaction with ethanol and next day residual effect showed that  although  zaleplon  was  approximately  equipotent  to  triazolam  in  sedation,  triazolam  was considerably more active in potentiating the impairing effects of ethanol.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

Absorption :  Zaleplon  is  rapidly  and  completely  absorbed  in  all  species  tested  (mice,  rats,  dogs  and monkeys).

Distribution : Zaleplon is rapidly distributed to all tissues but primarily the liver, kidney, gastrointestinal  tract  (GIT),  adrenal  glands  and  pancreas  of  rats.  Passage  of  the  blood-brain  barrier appears to be limited.  Studies  in  pregnant  and  lactating  rats  indicate  slightly  lower  exposure  in  the foetus than the dam; zaleplon concentrates 3-fold in milk compared to plasma. Plasma protein binding is 50%, 34%, 44% and 60% in the mouse rat dog and man respectively.

Metabolism :  Zaleplon  is  metabolised  mainly  in  the  liver  with  involvement  of  CYP  3A4  enzymes, although the main catalyst for 5-oxo-zaleplon formation in man is thought to be aldehyde oxidase. The main metabolites have been studied and found to be without pharmacological or toxicological activity. They are  present  in  the  animal  species  used  in  pivotal  studies,  although  in  different  proportions  to man. Elimination : Excretion studies showed a high recovery in rat and dog with recovery of radiolabelled dose as metabolites rather than parent compound. Biliary excretion appears to predominate. Repeat Administration : Studies in rats and dogs showed that steady state is reached rapidly with little or no accumulation and exposure being the same on day 1 and day 14. Toxicology Single dose toxicity Studies were conducted in the mouse, rat and dog at doses up to 1000 mg/kg p.o. All adverse events were either pharmacological in origin or occurred only at extremely high doses. Given the proposed indication and dosage in man no acute toxic events are anticipated. Repeated dose toxicity Repeated dose studies were conducted in the mouse, rat and dog with one year studies in the rat (0-50 mg/kg/day p.o. and the dog 0-40 mg/kg/day p.o.). CNS and GIT effects were noted in all studies as before, increasing in severity with time and dose. Most adverse events were similar to the single dose studies and were either pharmacological in origin or occurred only at extremely high doses. There was a good recovery from these effects in a four-week withdrawal period. An  additional  finding  in  the  three-month  study  was  of  testicular  and  prostate  atrophy.  Zaleplon induced irreversible changes in the male reproductive system in beagle dogs after three months e.g. decrease  in  prostate  weight,  degeneration  of  spermatogenic  epithelium,  atrophy  of  seminiferous tubules, decrease in number of sperm. In response to a request to discuss the relevance of these finding to human treatment the applicant proposed that full recovery was thought to be possible since there were  no  pathological  changes  in  spermatogonia,  spermatocytes  or  Sertoli  cells  and  that  the  study recovery period (4 weeks) encompasses only 2 cycles of the seminiferous epithelium and only half of the duration of spermatogenesis. It was also proposed that the test animals were pre-pubescent at the start  of  dosing  and  that  the  observed  changes  were  consistent  with  delayed  onset  of  maturity.  The applicant considered that the evidence of studies in more mature dogs supported this hypothesis for similar time periods where no adverse effects on the reproductive organs were observed. The CPMP considered that a specific reference to these findings should be included in the preclinical safety data section of the SPC. Reproductive toxicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

Adverse effects were noted on fertility and foetal development following zaleplon administration but only at toxic doses.

## Genotoxicity

Zaleplon is positive at doses over 550µg/ml in the CHO chromosome aberration assay in the presence of  S9  fraction,  but  negative  in  all  other in  vitro and in  vivo genotoxicity  tests,  including  a  human lymphocyte chromosome aberration assay. The balance of evidence was considered to suggest that zaleplon is non-genotoxic.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Carcinogenicity

Carcinogenicity  studies  were  carried  out  in  both  mice  and  rats.  There  was  no  increase  in  tumour burden compared to the controls and no carcinogenic risk is anticipated given the proposed indication in man.

## Local tolerance

No adverse effects were noted following primary skin irritation and eye irritation assays in rabbits.

## Environmental risk

An environmental risk assessment was  carried out based on anticipated  use  of  zaleplon  throughout Europe over a five-year period. No adverse effects are anticipated. Overall assessment toxico-pharmacological aspects Zaleplon has been subjected to an exhaustive series of pre-clinical studies.  Zaleplon is, in vitro and in vivo ,  a  GABAA  receptor  agonist,  similar  to  the  benzodiazepines,  whose  activity  is  inhibited  by  the GABAA  antagonists,  e.g.  flumazenil.    Zaleplon  is  metabolised  by  the  liver  and  subject  to  biliary excretion.    The  main  metabolites  have  been  studied  and  found  to  be  without  pharmacological  or toxicological  activity,  they  are  present  in  the  animal  species  used  in  pivotal  studies,  although  in different proportions to man.  There is no significant target organ toxicity.  Zaleplon is positive in the CHO chromosome aberration assay, but negative in all other in  vitro and in vivo genotoxicity tests, including a human lymphocyte chromosome aberration assay, and in carcinogenicity studies. 4. Clinical aspects Clinical Pharmacology Pharmacodynamics : The  secondary  pharmacodynamic actions of zaleplon have been studied in 19 clinical trials (18 Phase I and one phase II) designed to characterise the effects on psychomotor and cognitive function, memory and learning ability, EEG, drug interaction influences on pharmacodynamic  measures.    These  studies  concentrated  on  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  a hypnotic/anxiolytic  agent  i.e.  on  motor  co-ordination,  memory  and  mental  function,  respiratory depression and abuse potential. Effects  on  mental  and  psychomotor  function: In  studies  in  which  the  effects  of  zaleplon  on psychomotor  performance  and  cognitive  function  were  evaluated  no  significant  impairment  of psychomotor, cognitive or memory tests was observed at dose levelsup to 10 mg, either at the time of peak activity or at any subsequent time points. In studies that were designed to evaluate the effects of zaleplon  on  memory,  results  showed  that  zaleplon  primarily  affected  the  semantic/explicit  memory and had some effects on working memory. The memory effects paralleled the effects on psychomotor performance both in terms of dose relationship and time course. At the 10-mg dose level zaleplon had little  measurable  effect  on  memory  whilst  at  20  mg  definite  impairment  of  explicit  memory  was observed. In an integrated analysis performed on data from selected tests for memory function in 11 studies  the  frequency  of  memory  impairment  for  20  mg  of  zaleplon  was  comparable  with  that observed for 10 mg zolpidem, 2 mg lorazepam or 7.5 mg zopiclone. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Residual  effects  on  cognitive  function: A  6-period  cross-over  study  (04)  compared  the  effects  on learning and mental function of zaleplon 10 mg, 20 mg, zolpidem 10 mg, 20 mg triazolam 0.25 mg and placebo.  Subjects  were  woken  1.25  and  8.25  hr  later  and  a  battery  of  tests  were  administered. Immediate and delayed word recall was impaired compared to placebo in a dose response manner and with  the  order  of  increasing  impairment  zaleplon  10  mg  &lt;  zaleplon  20  mg  =  triazolam  0.25  mg= zolpidem 10 mg &lt; zolpidem 20 mg.

Next  day  sedation  (hang-over  effect)  was  assessed  (05)  in  healthy  volunteers  after  10  or  20  mg zaleplon, 30 mg flurazepam or placebo. MSLT times for both zaleplon groups was slightly though non-significantly  shorter  than  that  for  the  placebo  group  whereas  MSLT  times  were  significantly shorter for the flurazepam group. A similar study (14) in patients with sleep maintenance insomnia showed  that  sleep  latency  was  15  minutes  after  placebo,  17  minutes  after  zaleplon  10  mg  and  5 minutes after flurazepam 30 mg (a statistically significant shortening for the latter).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Effects on respiratory function: In a study in patients with insomnia and mild to moderate chronic obstructive disease (FEV1 35-80% predicted normal) single doses of zaleplon 10 mg or zolpidem 10 mg  did  not  lead  to  clinically  important  changes  in  oxygen  saturation.  Similarly  in  patients  with obstructive  or  mixed  sleep  apnoea  results  were  very  similar  to  placebo.  Nevertheless,  sleep  apnoea remains a contraindication  to the  use of  zaleplon as  per  the  CPMP  guideline  (see  section  4.2  SPC, Posology and method of administration ).

Anxiety: Several studies examined the possible occurrence of daytime anxiety and anxiety associated with discontinuation of treatment. The results showed that administration of zaleplon doses of 5, 10, 20mg for up to 29 days did not result in daytime anxiety or anxiety associated with discontinuation of treatment.

The  Elderly: In  two  studies  comparing  elderly  to  young  subjects,  the  pharmacokinetic  profile  of zaleplon in elderly subjects was not significantly different from those in young subjects. In the study with elderly subjects 65-75 yrs, Cmax and AUC were 11% and 8% lower whereas in the study with elderly subjects aged 75 yrs and over Cmax and AUC were 12% and 28% higher as compared with the young subjects.  Despite  these  results  a  reduction  in  the  starting  dose  is  proposed  for  the  elderly  in view of their generally recognised greater sensitivity to sedative and hypnotic agents.

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics of zaleplon have been investigated in 30 studies involving a total of more than 500 healthy subjects (young and elderly), nursing mothers, and patients with renal or hepatic disease. In healthy subjects the pharmacokinetic profile has been examined after single doses up to 60 mg and multiple doses up to 30 mg, administered daily for up to 10 days. Absorption: Zaleplon is rapidly and almost completely absorbed after oral administration with Tmax in the region of 1 hour. However, because zaleplon undergoes significant pre-systemic metabolism, its absolute  bioavailability  is  approximately  30%.  Dose  linearity  of  plasma  pharmacokinetics  has  been confirmed  in  two  studies.  Food  prolonged  the  absorption  of  zaleplon  thereby  delaying  Tmax  by approximately 2 hrs (1.4 to 3.7hrs) and reducing Cmax by approximately 35%. AUC and t1/2 were not affected. To maintain rapid sleep onset, administration of zaleplon with or immediately after food is not recommended. Distribution: Zaleplon is a lipophilic compound with a volume of distribution of ~ 1.3 l/kg at steady state including substantial distribution into extravascular tissues. The in vitro plasma protein binding for zaleplon is ~ 60% (~77% for the N-desmethyl metabolite) and is not concentration-dependent. The blood to plasma ratio for zaleplon is ~ 1. Zaleplon is present in human milk with a plasma milk ratio of ~ 0.5 and zaleplon is not recommended for use in nursing mothers. Metabolism: After oral administration zaleplon is extensively metabolised with less than 1% of the dose excreted unchanged in the urine. Metabolism is primarily by the aldehyde-oxidase to form 5-oxozaleplon, which accounts for 22% and its glucuronide, which accounts for an additional 35% of drug related  substance.  Zaleplon  is  also  metabolised  to  a  lesser  extent  by  CYP3A4  to  from  desethylzaleplon,  which  is  quickly  transformed  to  5-oxo-desethyl-zaleplon  before  glucuronidation.  It  is probable, on the basis of animal studies that the metabolites are pharmacologically inactive but this assumption has not been tested in man. Elimination: After both oral and iv administration zaleplon is rapidly eliminated with a mean half-life of ~1 hr. Approximately 88% of radiolabelled drug was recovered within 5 days, 71% in the urine and 17% in the faeces. The urinary recovery of drug related substance was as 5-oxo-zaleplon (~22%) its glucuronide metabolite (~35%), 5-oxo-desethylzaleplon (~6%) and its glucuronide metabolite (~3%) with  other  unidentified  minor  metabolites  (~4%).  No  unchanged  zaleplon  or  desethyl-zaleplon  was recovered in the urine. Special Populations Medicinal product no longer authorised

Hepatic  Impairment: A study  was  conducted  in  subjects  with  biopsy-proven  hepatic  cirrhosis  and healthy controls and showed that with decreasing hepatic function there is reduced metabolism and clearance of zaleplon with consequential greater exposure. Zaleplon is contraindicated patients with severe  hepatic  insufficiency  and  a  lower  starting  dose  (5  mg)  is  indicated  with  mild  to  moderate hepatic impairment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Renal Impairment : The plasma concentrations of zaleplon were not significantly different in patients with varying degrees of renal insufficiency as renal excretion of unchanged zaleplon accounts for less than  1% of the administered dose. No specific dosage adjustment is required in patients with renal insufficiency.

## Drug Interactions

Zaleplon  was  evaluated  in  healthy  volunteers  for  drug-drug  interactions  with  CNS  active  drugs (ethanol, imipramine, thioridazine and paroxetine), drugs that are likely to alter the biotransformation of  zaleplon  by  enzyme  induction  (rifampicin)  or  inhibition  (cimetidine  and  diphenhydramine)  and drugs that are likely to affect renal excretion (ibuprofen). Likewise, the effects of zaleplon on drugs that are likely to be taken concomitantly was also investigated.

CNS active drugs : The interaction of ethanol (0.75 mg/kg) and zaleplon 10 mg, triazolam 0.25 mg with and without ethanol as a control was measured in healthy subjects. Complex reaction times were increased 2% in the presence of ethanol, 11% in presence of zaleplon, 94% with triazolam and 27% for zaleplon and ethanol. In  order  to  assess  the  sedative  effects  of  zaleplon  and  imipramine  taken  in  combination,  healthy subjects were given a single 75-mg dose of imipramine concomitantly with a single 20-mg oral dose of  zaleplon.  Three  psychomotor  tests  showed  an  interaction,  which  was  additive  for  two  tests  and more that additive for one. The interaction was entirely pharmacodynamic with no alteration of the pharmacokinetic profile of the drug. In  studies  with  thioridazine  an  additive  effect  was  observed  on  two  psychomotor  tests,  which  was purely pharmacodynamic with no alteration of the pharmacokinetic profile of either drug. Similarly, paroxetine did not significantly affect the pharmacodynamic or pharmacokinetic profile of zaleplon. In 2002, section 4.5 of the SPC was updated following a multiple dose study between zaleplon and venlafaxine (extended release) with the information that no interaction on psychomotor performance or pharmacokinetic parameters was observed. Enzyme  Inducers/Inhibitors : Rifampicin  600  mg  was  given  to  healthy  volunteers  for  14  days. Zaleplon Cmax and AUC were four-fold lower compared to baseline suggesting induction of hepatic and  intestinal  metabolism.  Although  oxidation  by  CYP3A4  is  a  minor  metabolising  pathway  for zaleplon  these  results  indicated  that  co-administration  of  CYP3A4  inducers  although  not  posing  a safety concern would reduce the hypnotic effect of zalpelon. Cimetidine is unique in that it has the potential to inhibit both aldehyde oxidase and CPY3A4. Coadministration of cimetidine 800 mg increased the mean Cmax and AUC of zaleplon by 85% associated with a 44% decrease in oral dose clearance and significant change in t1/2 terminal. However based on the safety profile for zaleplon and its short half-life, adjustment of the 10 mg therapeutic dose should not be necessary. A caution was also introduced to the SPC regarding the concomitant use of strong selective CYP3A4 inhibitors such as ketoconazole or erythromycin. In  2000,  the  MAH  demonstrated  that  co-administration  of  zaleplon  and  erythromycin,  a  strong selective CYP3A4 inhibitor, results in a mean increase of approximately one third in the Cmax and one  fifth  in  AUC  of  zaleplon.  No  safety  concern  was  envisaged  given  that  zaleplon  seems  well tolerated,  and  has  an  elimination  half-life  of  approximately  one  hour.  Therefore,  a  routine  dosage adjustment  of  Sonata  is  not  considered  necessary,  but  patients  should  be  advised  that  the  sedative effects might be enhanced. In December 2000, information was included in section 4.5 of the SPC that patients should be advised that the sedative effects might be enhanced. Medicinal product no longer authorised

There was no pharmacokinetic interaction between zaleplon (10 mg) and diphenhydramine (50 mg) after single dose administration. Because both of these compounds have a sedative/hypnotic effect, coadministration should be approached with caution.

Drugs affecting renal excretion : There was no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction in studies with ibuprofen.

Drugs with a narrow therapeutic index : There was no apparent pharmacokinetic interaction in studies with digoxin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The potential for drug interaction between warfarin (25 mg days 1-13) and zaleplon (20 mg days 6-17) was  studied  over  a  17-day  period.  The  mean  AUC  of  the  prothrombin  time  expressed  as  the international normalised ratio (INR) was ~5% less than for warfarin treatment alone.

## Clinical experience

The applicant has conducted a series of 14 Phase II and III studies, five of which have non-blinded long  term  safety  extensions.    The  studies  are  of  excellent  overall  quality  and  have  been  conducted using methods, which change very little from trial to trial, and are described briefly below.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria: The great majority of patients studied had primary insomnia, or insomnia associated  with  mild  non-psychotic  psychiatric  disorders,  as  defined  by  the  American  Psychiatric Association  DSM-III-R  criteria.  In  addition  to  satisfying  the  diagnostic  criteria  patients  should experience symptoms of daytime impairment attributable to the sleep disturbance; typical time to sleep onset of &gt; 30 minutes; prolonged or frequent nocturnal awakenings, or total sleep time of &lt; 6 ½ hours on average.

The list of exclusion criteria for the Phase III studies runs to 19 items designed to exclude patients with secondary insomnia, sleep apnoea syndrome and other non-related serious illness or drug abuse. Efficacy criteria: The Phase II clinical trials were sleep clinic studies using polysomnography (PSG) to record Latency to Persistent Sleep (LPS); Total Sleep Time (TST); Number of Awakenings After Sleep  Onset  (NAASO);  and  Sleep  Architecture.  The  primary  outcome  in  Phase  III  studies  was questionnaire-elicited change in reported time to sleep onset (TSO). This is a commonly used variable and directly assesses the primary sleep complaint of difficulty falling asleep; a wide range of other variables were also assessed and evaluated as secondary criteria. Statistical  methods: Data  handling  and  statistical  analyses  followed  standard  practice  and  relevant CPMP  guidelines.  Efficacy  variables  were  analysed  for  the  intent-to-treat  population  (those  who received  any  trial  medication)  and  for  the  efficacy-evaluable  population  (those  receiving  trial medication  and  having  no  major  protocol  violations).  Secondary  analyses  included  last  observation carried  forward  for  drop-outs  and  the  efficacy  evaluable  population.  Inference  testing  was  by Dunnett's Test, which is intended for comparing a number of treatments with a single control, and the Jonckheere-Terpstra test for detecting departures from independence in a contingency table. Results: The organisation of the phase II and II studies are indicated in Table 1. Table 2 provides a summary of the TSO comparisons with placebo in outpatient and sleep laboratory studies and Table 3 provides a summary of the TTS comparisons in the same studies. Phase II Dose ranging studies: Study 12 can be taken as representative of several clinical trials aimed at defining the optimal dose. It was a 5-night parallel group trial of zaleplon 2, 5, 10 and 20 mg and placebo in patients with primary insomnia. Twenty-seven to twenty-eight patients completed the study in  each  dosage  group.    Sleep  latency  was  significantly  decreased  for  patients  receiving  zaleplon 10 mg and 20 mg but not for 2 mg and 5 mg, which with the exception of elderly patients seems too low a dose. Phase III studies have also been conducted with dose response and dose definition in mind and indicate that 10 mg seems an appropriate usual dose. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1  ORGANIZATIONAL GROUPINGS OF STUDIES

## Placebo-Controlled Studies

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TABLE 2. SUMMARY TSO--COMPARISONS WITH PLACEBO a  IN OUTPATIENT AND SLEEP LABORATORY STUDIES

| Study Period     | Protocol 0897A1-   | Zaleplon 2 mg b   | Zaleplon 5 mg b   | Zaleplon 10 mg b   | Zaleplon 20 mg b   | Triazolam 0.25 mg c   | Zolpidem 5 mg c   | Zolpidem 10 mg c   |
|------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Outpatient       |                    |                   |                   |                    |                    |                       |                   |                    |
| Week 1           | 17                 | -                 | 0.044             | 0.002              | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | 0.008              |
| Week 1           | 19                 | -                 | 0.014             | 0.001              | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | 0.047              |
| Week 1           | 22                 | -                 | -                 | <0.001             | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 1           | 21 d               | -                 | ns                | <0.001             | -                  | -                     | 0.021             | -                  |
| Week 1           | 23                 | -                 | 0.001             | < 0.001            | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 2           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | ns authorised      |
| Week 2           | 19                 | -                 | 0.006             | 0.003              | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | 0.006              |
| Week 2           | 22                 | -                 | -                 | <0.001             | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 2           | 21                 | -                 | <0.001            | <0.001             | -                  | -                     | 0.004             | -                  |
| Week 2           | 23                 | -                 | < 0.001           | <0.001             | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 3           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | 0.014              | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | ns                 |
| Week 3           | 19                 | -                 | 0.010             | 0.010              | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | 0.043              |
| Week 4           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | 0.033              |
| Week 4           | 19                 | -                 | ns                | 0.028              | 0.006              | -                     | -                 | ns                 |
| Sleep laboratory |                    |                   |                   |                    | longer             |                       |                   |                    |
| Nights 1-2       | 10                 | -                 | ns                | 0.003              | -                  | 0.015                 | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 1-2       | 11                 | -                 | -                 | ns no              | 0.006              | -                     | -                 | 0.006              |
| Nights 1-2       | 12                 | ns                | ns                | ns                 | 0.005              | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 1-2       | 13 e               | ns                | 0.043             | <0.001             | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 4-5       | 12                 | ns                | 0.017 product     | <0.001             | <0.001             | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 13- 14    | 10                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | -                  | ns                    | -                 | -                  |
|                  | 11                 | -                 | -                 | <0.001             | 0.006              | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Nights 27- 28    | 11                 | -                 | -                 | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | ns                 |

<!-- image -->

a:  P-values indicate significantly different from placebo, 'ns' indicates not significantly different from placebo, '-' indicates that the dose was not given in that study. b:  From Dunnett's test, which adjusts by the number of zaleplon treatments in the study. c:  From unadjusted pairwise comparisons. d:  Studies in elderly patients are indicated by italics. e:  Study 13 was a crossover study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TABLE3. SUMMARY TTS--COMPARISONS WITH PLACEBO a  IN OUTPATIENT AND SLEEP LABORATORY STUDIES

| Study Period     | Protocol 0897A1-   | Zaleplon 2 mg b   | Zaleplon 5 mg b   | Zaleplon 10 mg b   | Zaleplon 20 mg b   | Triazolam 0.25 mg c   | Zolpidem 5 mg c   | Zolpidem 10 mg c   |
|------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Outpatient       |                    |                   |                   |                    |                    |                       |                   |                    |
| Week 1           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | 0.011              | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Week 1           | 19                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | 0.026              | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Week 1           | 22                 | -                 | -                 | 0.006              | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 1           | 21 d               | -                 | ns                | 0.024              | -                  | -                     | <0.001            | -                  |
| Week 1           | 23                 | -                 | ns                | 0.042              | -                  | -                     | -                 | - authorised       |
| Week 2           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | 0.013              |
| Week 2           | 19                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | 0.029              | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Week 2           | 22                 | -                 | -                 | 0.009              | 0.001              | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 2           | 21                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | -                  | -                     | 0.010             | -                  |
| Week 2           | 23                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Week 3           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | 0.047              | -                     | -                 | 0.003              |
| Week 3           | 19                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Week 4           | 17                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | 0.009              |
| Week 4           | 19                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | 0.044              | -                     | -                 | <0.001             |
| Sleep laboratory |                    |                   |                   |                    | longer             |                       |                   |                    |
| Nights 1-2       | 10                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | -                  | 0.049                 | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 1-2       | 11                 | -                 | -                 | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | ns                 |
| Nights 1-2       | 12                 | ns                | 0.050             | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 1-2       | 13 e               | ns                | ns                | 0.028 no           | -                  | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 4-5       | 12                 | ns                | 0.033 product     | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | -                  |
| Nights 13-14     | 10                 | -                 | ns                | ns                 | -                  | ns                    | -                 | -                  |
|                  | 11                 | -                 | -                 | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | 0.012              |
| Nights 27-28     | 11                 | -                 | -                 | ns                 | ns                 | -                     | -                 | ns                 |

Study 17. Was a parallel-group dose ranging study with zolpidem 10 mg as an active comparator and placebo  as  a  negative  control?  After  a  one-week  run  in  (baseline)  patients  received  zaleplon  5,  10, 20 mg for four weeks followed by one week off treatment. The principal efficacy criteria were Time to Sleep Onset (TSO) and Total Time Slept (TTS). For the zaleplon 5-mg, dose statistical significance against placebo was intermittent for TSO indicating that it is probably a sub-optimal dose. The 10 and 20-mg dose retained significance at weeks one and three. For TTS the lower two doses of zaleplon did not achieve significance against placebo, the 20-mg dose achieved intermittent significance (weeks 1 and 3). Zolpidem 10 mg was significantly better than placebo over the four treatment weeks for TTS and at weeks one and four for TSO. Zolpidem was significantly worse in the run-off period indicating a probable withdrawal effect.

a:  P-values indicate significantly different from placebo, 'ns' indicates not significantly different from placebo, '-' indicates that the dose was not given in that study. b:  From Dunnett's test, which adjusts by the number of zaleplon treatments in the study. c:  From unadjusted pairwise comparisons. d:  Studies in elderly patients are indicated by italics. e:  Study 13 was a crossover study. Phase III studies - active comparator controlled Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

The applicant has demonstrated through a series of well-conducted clinical trials that zaleplon is a safe and  effective  hypnotic.  It  has  advantages  over  comparable  treatments  in  its  rapid  onset  and  low propensity to cause carryover effects on the following day. The 10-mg and 20-mg doses of zaleplon are effective for sleep induction in non-elderly insomniacs and this effect is maintained for 2-4 weeks. The 5-mg dose of zaleplon is similarly effective for sleep induction in elderly insomniacs. It has a disadvantage  in  that  it  did  not  show  statistically  significant  differences  from  placebo  for  sleep maintenance  measures.    With  respect  to  sleep  continuity  no advantage  over  placebo  was  shown  in 3 out of 4 studies reviewed whereas with sleep duration superiority over placebo was demonstrated in 4/8 studies though in some the increase of 10 minutes was considered of limited clinical relevance. The 5-mg and 10-mg doses of zaleplon in non-elderly insomniacs do not appear to be effective for sleep maintenance. However, the 10-mg dose is efficacious in this respect for the elderly insomniacs whilst the 20 mg is effective even for the non-elderly. There was insufficient data on functions other than sleep induction in the published literature to allow worthwhile comparisons to be made between zaleplon and other short acting hypnotics e.g. zolpidem and triazolam.

T O T A L  T IM E  S L E P T 3 0 0 3 2 0 3 4 0 3 6 0 3 8 0 4 0 0 P l a c e b o Zal 5 Zal 1 0 TTS (min) Study  19 was  a  study  of  almost  identical  design  to  Study  17,  described  above,  but  conducted  in Europe  and  Canada.  One  investigative  centre  was  excluded  from  analysis  prior  to  the  code  being broken and five others afterwards, because of poor quality of data relating to poor data recording and poor  compliance  with  procedures  on  behalf  of  the  investigators  at  the  centres  excluded.  However analyses with and without those centres were concordant. For TSO with the exception of the 5-mg dose at week 4 all comparisons indicated a significant advantage for zaleplon over placebo; zolpidem had a significant advantage over placebo during weeks 1-3 but this was lost in week 4. For TTS the 5-mg dose of zaleplon had a non-significant advantage, the two higher doses of zaleplon and the single dose of zolpidem achieved statistical significance at most time points. Study  23 was  a  14-day  study  of  5  and  10  mg  zaleplon  in  elderly  outpatients  with  insomnia. Differences from placebo are statistically significant (p &lt; 0.001) for TSO but not for TTS. Study 21 was a 14-day study of 5 and 10 mg zaleplon and 5 mg of zolpidem in elderly outpatients with insomnia. For TSO the 10-mg dose of zaleplon was significantly better than placebo over the two treatment weeks (p &lt; 0.001). For TTS the lower dose of zaleplon did not attain a significant difference and for the higher dose significance was lost after week one. Overall assessment of efficacy Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  order  to  address  the  above  concern  the  therapeutic  indication  (section  4.1  SPC, Therapeutic indications )  has  been  modified  to  show  that  zaleplon  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  patients  who have difficulty falling asleep as follows:

'Zaleplon is indicated for the treatment of patients with insomnia who have difficulty falling asleep. It is indicated only when the disorder is severe, disabling or subjecting the individual to extreme distress.'

and  the  section  4.4  of  the  SPC, Special  warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use has  also  been modified to include:

|                          |   Zaleplon |   Active comparator |   Placebo |
|--------------------------|------------|---------------------|-----------|
| Healthy volunteers       |        748 |                 346 |       318 |
| High-risk special groups |         97 |                  49 |        49 |
| Phase II/III             |       2831 |                 560 |      1028 |

<!-- image -->

'Due to zaleplon's short plasma half-life alternative  therapy  should  be  considered  if  early  morning awakening is experienced. Patients should be advised not to take a second dose within a single night.' In line with previous CPMP guidance with respect to the use of benzodiazepine and benzodiazepinelike agents treatment with zaleplon should be as short as possible.  In the SPC the maximum duration of treatment is specified as two weeks. Safety The safety database is comprised of patients exposed to treatments in clinical trials as shown in Table 4. Exposure to zaleplon by dose is illustrated below. Table 4 Numbers of patients in clinical trials according to treatment EXPOSURE TO ZALEPLON BY DOSE AND DURATION Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Abuse potential

The abuse potential of zaleplon and triazolam were compared in two clinical studies.  In study 01 six subjects with a history of sedative drug misuse took ascending single doses of 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 75 mg zaleplon and 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 mg triazolam. Due to the small number of patients Addiction Research Centre  data  (ARCI)  were  not  analysed  and  equivalence  of  doses  was  determined  by  psychomotor testing. The impairment in psychomotor skills increased with dose and apart from minor differences in the time course was similar between the two treatments.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In study 02 in fourteen subject's psychomotor performance was similar between the two drugs in 4/8 tests;  in  1/8  performance  was  better  after  zaleplon  and  in  3/8  was  better  after  triazolam.  The phenobarbitone/chlorpromazine/alcohol  sub-scale  of  ARCI  was  significantly  different  from  placebo for the mid and high doses of zaleplon and for the high dose of triazolam. This study was considered not sufficiently powerful to discriminate between the two drugs and the results indicate that there is some risk of abuse for both products examined.

Concern  was  expressed  by  the  CPMP  regarding  the  potential  misuse  of  zaleplon  by  covert administration to others. Zaleplon is quick acting, short-lived, is in a capsule formulation and has little taste.  Thus  it  could  be  easily  administered  to  an  unknowing  victim  in  a  drink.  In  response  to  this concern  the  applicant  reformulated  the  product  to  introduce  two  markers  so  that  if  the  capsule  is dissolved  in  liquid  the  liquid  changes  colour  and  becomes  cloudy.  A  statement  to  this  effect  is included in the patient information leaflet.

|          |   Zal 5 mg |   Zal 10 mg |   Zal 20 mg |   Zal > 20 mg |   Pbo |   Active comp |   Other |
|----------|------------|-------------|-------------|---------------|-------|---------------|---------|
| Body     |          9 |          17 |           3 |             0 |     3 |             0 |       3 |
| CVS      |         10 |          13 |           4 |             0 |     7 |             2 |       7 |
| GIT      |          6 |           2 |           4 |             0 |     1 |             0 |       2 |
| Endo     |          0 |           1 |           0 |             0 |     0 |             0 |       0 |
| Haematol |          1 |           2 |           0 |             0 |     0 |             0 |       0 |
| CNS      |          1 |          13 |          15 |             4 |     3 |             8 |       2 |
| Resp     |          3 |           5 |           0 |             0 |     0 |             1 |       1 |
| Cutan    |          2 |           2 |           0 |             0 |     0 |             1 |       1 |
| Sp Sens  |          0 |           1 |           1 |             0 |     0 |             0 |       0 |
| Urogen   |          3 |          11 |           2 |             0 |     2 |             0 |       1 |
| Misc     |          2 |          12 |           1 |             0 |     5 |             0 |       0 |

Clinical safety Deaths: One patient, a 57-year old man, died by suicide shortly after a clinical trial. Although it is possible that he may have had occult depression aggravated by a sedative treatment the event is unique and is more likely to be due to coincidence than cause and effect. Another patient died suddenly from an unknown cause during the placebo run-in phase. Withdrawal from studies due to adverse events: Withdrawal from placebo-controlled clinical trials due to  adverse  events  occurred  in  3%  of  patients  taking  zaleplon  5  mg;  2%  of  patients  taking  zaleplon 10  mg  and  in  4%  of  patients  on  zaleplon  20  mg.  The  corresponding  rates  for  active  comparator treatments  and  placebo  were  4% and  3%  respectively.  It  was  considered  that  there  were  no  safetyrelated  reasons  for  dropouts,  which  differed  significantly  among  the  various  doses  of  zaleplon,  the active comparators and placebo. Serious adverse events: The definition of a serious adverse event used by the applicant includes one causing, but not explicitly prolonging hospitalisation, nevertheless the martial included was considered to be within the usual regulatory meaning and is shown in Table 5. It should be noted that the figures are numbers (not percentage) of patients and do not give an indication of the frequency of events. Of particular interest are CNS events of which amnesia, depersonalisation, and paraesthesia occurred in  a  dose-related  manner  and  were  statistically  more  frequent  for  zaleplon  20  mg  than  for  placebo. Hallucination and hypaesthesia were also significantly more frequent with zaleplon 20mg but with less evidence of a dose response relationship. Five  patients  experienced  syncopal  episodes  and  eleven  experienced  other  cardiovascular  events, which were  of  a  heterogeneous  nature  and  did  not  occur  in  a  dose-related  manner.  They  are  more likely to be related to the patient's age and the presence of underlying disease than to therapy. Cancer: The applicant indicates that twelve patients in Phase II/III studies were diagnosed as having cancer  while  in  zaleplon  studies  or  shortly  thereafter.  Although  the  applicant  did  not  make  any assessment of causality most cancers are known to have silent growth phases of years before clinical presentation and given the short exposure to zaleplon any causal association was considered extremely unlikely. Table 5 shows numbers of patients - by treatment -  experiencing serious adverse events Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Adverse events :  In placebo-controlled trials, 6% of patients treated with zaleplon and 4% of patients treated with placebo experienced somnolence. Overall based on the results of clinical studies the most apparent undesirable effects that might be expected from zaleplon involve mild headache, asthenia, somnolence and dizziness.

Laboratory Abnormalities: In  the  parallel  group  placebo-controlled  studies,  8  patients  had  clinically important  changes  in  transaminase  levels.  One  tested  positive  for  hepatitis  C  and  two  had  elevated values  at  screening.  In  the  remaining  5  patients,  3  had  been  treated  with  zaleplon  5  mg,  one  with zolpidem 10 mg, and one with placebo. In extended open-label studies, three of the 1088 patients had increases in AST or ALT; two were hepatitis C positive: no cause was found for one patient. Sporadic increases in bilirubin levels were noted, amounting to 0.6% of patients exposed to zaleplon, 0.3% of patients treated with active comparators and 0.3% of placebo treated patients. Many of the elevations were found to pre-date exposure to treatment and no pattern was found. Abnormalities of ECG were found in 0.7% of zaleplon treated patients. No consistent pattern emerges; many of the patients were over sixty-five and had risk factors for cardiac disease. One patient is listed as discontinuing the study for  abnormalities  of  the  'haemic  and  lymphatic'  systems  but  no  other  details  are  readily  available. Minor and inconsistent abnormalities of urea and electrolytes emerge but do not appear to have any relationship to treatment.

Zaleplon is, in  vitro and in  vivo ,  a  GABAA receptor agonist, similar to the benzodiazepines, whose activity is inhibited by the GABAA antagonists, e.g. flumazenil.

Rebound  insomnia  and  other  withdrawal  effects :  Rebound  insomnia  did  not  occur  with  the  5  and 10-mg doses of zaleplon. There was subjective evidence for the occurrence of rebound insomnia with zaleplon 20 mg, triazolam 0.25 mg and zolpidem 5 mg following abrupt discontinuation of treatment after 2 weeks of administration. In  2002,  a  statement  was  added  to  section  4.4  of  the  SPC  alerting  the  physician  to  the  fact  that insomnia  may  be  secondary  to  underlying  physical  or  psychiatric  disorder  and  that  insomnia  that persists or worsens after a short course of zaleplon treatment may indicate a need to re-evaluate the patient. In addition, to reduce the risk of psychomotor impairment following use of benzodiazepines and  benzodiazepine-like  agents,  patients  should  not  undertake  unexpected  activities,  e.g.  driving where potential psychomotor impairment might be dangerous for 4 hours or more after taking Sonata. The paragraph on psychiatric and 'paradoxical' reactions were updated with the information that these reactions  may  be  drug-induced,  spontaneous  in  origin,  or  a  result  of  an  underlying  psychiatric  or physical  disorder  and  that  any  new  behavioural  sign  or  symptom  requires  careful  and  immediate evaluation. No  dosage  adjustment  is  required  in  patients  with  mild  to  moderate  renal  insufficiency,  because Sonata pharmacokinetics is not altered in such patients. In 2002, information was added to section 4.2 of the SPC that the safety in patients with severe renal impairment has not been studied. 5. Overall conclusion on the quality, safety, efficacy and benefit risk assessment Quality The quality of this product is considered acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions in the SPC. Physicochemical and biological aspects relevant to the uniform clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Zaleplon has been subjected to an exhaustive series of pre-clinical studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Zaleplon is metabolised by the liver and subject to biliary excretion.  The main metabolites have been studied  and  found  to  be  without  pharmacological  or  toxicological  activity,  they  are  present  in  the animal species used in pivotal studies, although in different proportions to man.

There is no significant target organ toxicity.  Zaleplon is positive in the CHO chromosome aberration assay, but negative in all other in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity tests, including a human lymphocyte chromosome aberration assay, and in carcinogenicity studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy

The applicant has demonstrated through a series of well-conducted clinical trials that zaleplon is a safe and  effective  hypnotic.  It  has  advantages  over  comparable  treatments  in  its  rapid  onset  and  low propensity to cause carryover effects on the following day.

The  10-mg  and  20-mg  doses  of  zaleplon  are  quite  effective  for  sleep  induction  in  non-elderly insomniacs  and  this  effect  is  maintained  for  2-4  weeks.  Similarly  effective  for  sleep  induction  in elderly insomniacs is the 5-mg dose of zaleplon.

It  has  a  disadvantage  in  that  it  is  probably  a  less  effective  agent  than  others  in  terms  of  sleep maintenance.  The 5-mg and 10-mg doses of zaleplon in non-elderly insomniacs do not appear to be effective  for  sleep  maintenance.  However,  the  10-mg  dose  is  efficacious  in  this  respect  for  elderly insomniacs whilst the 20 mg is effective even for the non-elderly. Results from the clinical trial development programme support approval for the use of zaleplon  'for the  treatment  of  patients  with  insomnia  who  have  difficulty  falling  asleep'.  The  attention  of prescribers is drawn to the short half-life of zaleplon, and the need to consider alternative therapy if early morning awakening is experienced. Safety No major CNS or other side effects were associated with the 5 and 10-mg doses studied and there was no evidence for the occurrence of rebound insomnia or other withdrawal effects following their abrupt discontinuation. The 20-mg dose of zaleplon was however associated with a higher incidence of CNS effects amnesia, depersonalisation, hallucinations, hypoaesthesia and paraesthesia during administration as well as rebound insomnia following its abrupt discontinuation. 6. Benefit/risk assessment The CPMP expressed concern regarding the effectiveness of zaleplon in sleep maintenance. Review of the clinical trial data in this regard did not resolve this concern as no clinically significant effects on sleep duration or quality of sleep had been demonstrated.  By contrast zaleplon had been shown to be an effective sleep inducer and had a low propensity to cause carryover effects.  These effects were considered to be an inherent property of the pharmacokinetic behaviour of zaleplon, specifically its very short half-life, rather than a novel mechanism of action as compared with other benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine-like agents. In view of its effect on sleep induction rather than sleep maintenance, the CPMP decided that it was necessary to strictly limit the pack sizes to be made available to support a  maximum  of  two  weeks  administration  reflecting  the  maximum  duration  of  treatment.  The indication was also reinforced with a direction to use the product only when the disorder is severe, disabling  or  subjecting  the  individual  to  extreme  distress  in  line  with  the  indications  for  other benzodiazepines  and  benzodiazepine-like  agents  (CPMP  recommendation  regarding  short  acting hypnotics, III/5519/93). Appropriate wording of the indication and additional information in the SPC was considered to be sufficient to alert the prescriber to its potential reduced effectiveness in sleep maintenance and the need to switch to alternative therapy if early morning awakening is experienced. As for  the  pharmacodynamic  and  safety  data  zaleplon  appeared  to  have  benzodiazepine  properties, suitable warnings concerning the possibility of rebound, withdrawal, amnesia and paradoxical effects similar for all the benzodiazepines were included in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A further concern was expressed by the CPMP regarding the potential misuse of zaleplon by covert administration to others. Zaleplon is quick acting, short-lived, is in a capsule formulation and has little taste.  Thus  is  could  be  easily  administered  to  an  unknowing  victim  in  a  drink.  In  response  to  this concern  the  applicant  reformulated  the  product  to  introduce  two  markers  so  that  if  the  capsule  is dissolved  in  liquid  the  liquid  changes  colour  and  becomes  cloudy.  A  statement  to  this  effect  is included in the patient information leaflet. The CPMP concluded that this was an acceptable approach to address this issue.

The legal status classification for zaleplon was discussed by the CPMP in the light of consideration of its abuse potential relative to other benzodiazepines and benzodiazepine-like compounds. The CPMP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

recommended  that  zaleplon  should  be  classified  as  a  'medicinal  product  subject  to  medicinal prescription' and did not consider that there were grounds for applying a more restrictive legal status such as  'medicinal product subject to special medical prescription' as zaleplon is not listed in the United Nations Psychotropic Convention nor is its abuse potential likely to be any greater than other benzodiazepine  and  benzodiazepeine-like  compounds  currently  registered  in  Europe  with  a  similar classification.

A  divergent  view  was  expressed  by  some  CPMP  members  who  considered  that  the  legal  status classification for zaleplon should be 'medicinal product subject to special medical prescription' as it contains a substance which by reason of its novelty and properties could be considered as belonging to the substances defined in Article 3 (2) of Directive 92/26/EEC as a precautionary measure. Moreover, they considered that if incorrectly used zaleplon is likely to present a risk of medicinal abuse.

<!-- image -->

Based on the available data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by a majority of 24 out of 26 votes that the benefit/risk profile of Sonata for the following indication was considered favourable: 'Zaleplon is indicated for the treatment of patients with insomnia who have difficulty falling asleep. It is  indicated  only  when  the  disorder  is  severe,  disabling  or  subjecting  the  individual  to  extreme distress.' Medicinal product no longer authorised