---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:06:32
document_pages: 30
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/tandemact-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: tandemact-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 8.718475
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 22:22:45.018777
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 1. Introduction

Type  2  diabetes  mellitus  (T2DM)  is  a  progressive  disease  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia,  due  to inadequate control of levels of blood glucose by the pancreatic hormone insulin and/or abnormal resistance to insulin. The principle aim of diabetes treatment is to control blood glucose levels, in order to prevent mortality  and  long-term  complications,  including  retinopathy,  renal  dysfunction,  neuropathy  and  nontraumatic  limb  amputations.    Initial  treatment  includes  modifications  to  diet  and  exercise,  followed  by prescription of an oral antidiabetic agent. However, during the first 3 years of monotherapy with a first-line oral antidiabetic medication, up to 50% of patients treated with a sulphonylurea (SU) exhibit inadequate glycaemic control. Upon failure of monotherapy, combination therapy is initiated, typically with a second (and sometimes third) oral antidiabetic agent, with or without insulin. Combination therapy may enhance tolerability,  simplifies  the  treatment regimen  and  may  prevent  treatment  failures  that  might  result  from missed  doses. With  the  implementation  of  more  stringent  targets  for  A1C  levels  (&lt;6.5%),  the  use  of  a second oral antidiabetic agent is likely to increase, occur earlier in the treatment course, or both. As the importance  of  combination  use  is  increasingly  recognised,  FDCs  have  been  developed  with  the  gold standard,  metformine  (MET).    These  include  a  FDC  with  glyburide  and  MET,  and  a  FDC  with rosiglitazone  (RSG)  and  MET.  However  in  subjects  for  whom  MET  is  inappropriate  because  of contraindication or intolerance, these FDC treatments are not an option. The rationale to develop a new FDC is that in subjects contraindicated to, or intolerant of MET, who are no longer achieving glycaemic control  on  SU  monotherapy,  the  only  oral  combination  option  is  the  concomitant  addition  of  a thiazolidinedione (TZD). Compliance with treatment is an important factor in order to achieve the target glycaemic control. The combination of two different classes of antihyperglycaemic agents in a single tablet can simplify the treatment and may help to ensure compliance although this is largely speculative. When considering  combination  therapy  for  the  treatment  of  T2DM,  it  is  beneficial  to  select  agents  with complementary mechanisms of action in order to provide additive therapeutic benefits without exacerbating treatment-limiting side effects. Various European SPCs include approval for co-prescribing SU, MET and TZD. TZDs, such as pioglitazone (PIOG) or RSG, are oral glucose-lowering drugs specifically designed for T2DM. They reduce insulin resistance in peripheral tissues such as adipose tissue and skeletal muscle, and  the  liver  through  the  activation  of  peroxisome  proliferator-activated  receptor-gamma  (PPAR γ ).  SUs such as glimepiride (GLIM) stimulate insulin production in the pancreas and increase insulin sensitivity at the cellular level. As shown in the Table 1, the available SUs have variable potency and durations of action.

Table. 1 General Characteristics of SUs

| Generic name              | Dose range (mg/d)& (duration of action, h)                   | General characteristics                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| First generation          |                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Tolbutamide               | 500-3000 (6-10)                                              | Shortest acting with fewest side effects; no longer available commercially                                                                                                                                                              |
| Chloropropamide           | 250-500 (24-72)                                              | Rapidly absorbed; may have extra-pancreatic effects; causes most serious side effects, including prolonged hypoglycaemia and severe hyponatraemia; given once daily or in divided dose.                                                 |
| Tolazamide                | 100-750 (16-24)                                              | Effects persist despite a gradual decline in the insulin secretory response, suggesting some extra-pancreatic effects; 5 times more potent than tolbutamide, equally potent to chloropropamide on a milligram basis; once daily dosing. |
| Second generation         |                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Glipizide                 | 2.5-20* [5-20 for XL] (16-24) *upper dose can be 40 mg in US | Binds extensively to plasma proteins; metabolism via CYP system; once daily dosing.                                                                                                                                                     |
| Glibenclamide (glyburide) | 2.5-20 (18-24)                                               | Long-acting, binds to plasma proteins through non-ionic bonds; binds tightly to the 140 kDa protein at the SUR of the pancreatic beta cell membrane; given once daily; given in single or divided doses.                                |
| Gliclazide                | 40-320 (12)                                                  | Intermediate-acting; binds to plasma proteins; stimulates the secretion of insulin in the fasting as well as postprandial states; enhances insulin secretion over time, and continues                                                   |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|             |             | to reduce the production of endogenous glucose after several months of treatment; given once or twice daily.                                                                                                              |
|-------------|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Glimepiride | 0.5-8 (~24) | Long-acting; highly protein bound; given once daily; acts primarily on the membrane receptors on pancreatic beta cells, but also is internalised into pancreatic beta cells, where it acts on insulin secretory granules. |

SUR=SU receptor.

(a) GLIM is referred to as either a second- or third-generation SU.

On a milligram for milligram basis, second- and third-generation SUs are 20 to 50 times more potent and have more prolonged biological action than first-generation agent. Second- and third-generation SUs also penetrate  into  cell  membranes  faster  than  their  older  counterparts  because  they  have  greater  lipid solubility and more selective binding capacity. Second-generation SUs include glibenclamide, gliclazide, and glipizide. GLIM is sometimes described as a third-generation SU. Potency varies among the secondand  third-generation  SUs.  Glibenclamide  is  approximately  2  times  more  potent  than  glipizide  on  a milligram  per  milligram  basis.  GLIM  is  about  2  times  as  potent  as  glibenclamide  in  stimulating glycogenesis  and  lipogenesis  on  a  molar  basis  in  in-vitro  studies.  T2DM  involves  deficient  insulin activity due to a decrease in circulating insulin concentration (insulin deficiency) and a decrease in the response  of  peripheral  tissues  to  insulin  (insulin  resistance).  The  combination  of  the  individual  active substances  from  these  two  classes,  as  proposed,  is  not  inappropriate,  especially  since  both  constituent drugs substances are taken once daily with or without food.  Of the approved antidiabetic combination therapies,  concomitant  use  of  PIOG  with  a  SU  is  among  the  most  frequently  used  in  clinical  practice. Once-daily administration could be seen to offer the benefits of combination treatment in a single tablet, and thereby potentially improve patient compliance and glycaemic management.

This Marketing Authorisation is for a fixed dose combination product (FDC), PIOG/GLIM, containing two previously  authorized  ingredients,  PIOG  hydrochloride  and  GLIM  in  two  strengths:  30mg/4mg  and 45mg/4mg tablets  (initially  for  three  strengths  including  also  30mg/2mg  but  this  strength  was  withdrawn from the application  by  MAH).  Tandemact is  indicated for the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated and who are already treated  with  a  combination  of  pioglitazone  and  glimepiride.  Pioglitazone  hydrochloride,  a  TZD,  was originally  authorized  in  the  European  Union  in  October  2000  and  is  currently  authorized  for  use  as monotherapy or as combination therapy with either MET or SUs in patients with T2DM. PIOG is a potent and selective PPAR γ agonist. Activation of PPAR γ nuclear receptors modulates the transcription of insulinresponsive genes involved in the control of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. As a result of these actions, PIOG reduces insulin resistance in the peripheral tissue and in the liver, thereby increasing insulin-dependent glucose  disposal  and  decreasing  hepatic  glucose  output.  GLIM  is  a  second-generation  SU  originally authorised via the mutual recognition procedure in 1995. It is indicated to treat hyperglycaemia in patients with T2DM either as first-line monotherapy or as an add-on to MET or insulin. GLIM lowers glucose levels primarily  by  stimulating  release  of  insulin  from  pancreatic β cells.  As  with  other  insulin  secretagogues, GLIM  binds  to  and  blocks  the  ATP-dependent  potassium  channels  on  the  surface  of  pancreatic β cells, thereby leading to membrane depolarisation, increased calcium uptake, and insulin release. PIOG/GLIM is indicated in the treatment of patients with T2DM who are already treated with a combination of PIOG and SU or whose diabetes is insufficiently controlled with SU monotherapy.

This application was submitted under Part B of the Annex to Regulation 2309/93 and is a full 'mixed' application in accordance with Article 8(3) and Annex I Part II.7 of Directive 2001/83/EC as amended. The data relating to PIOG was original data that fulfils all of the requirements for pharmacological tests and clinical trials and covers all of the indents in Part I.5 of Annex I Directive 2001/83/EC as amended. The clinical data previously assessed for the Community authorisations for PIOG were not resubmitted in this application. A bibliographic review to describe the clinical profile of GLIM and SU class has been submitted for this application.

## 2. Quality aspects

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Introduction

The  product  is  a  fixed  combination  containing  PIOG  (as  hydrochloride)  and  GLIM  as  active  substances. Three strengths were initially proposed containing 30 mg /2mg, 30 mg/4mg or 45 mg /4 mg of PIOG (as hydrochloride)  /glimeperide  but  the  lowest  strength  was  withdrawn  from  the  application  by  MAH.  They were presented as tablets. Apart from this difference in strength, the formulations are identical, the excipients were povidone, cellulose microcrystalline, croscarmellose sodium, hydroxypropylcellulose, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, and polysorbate 80. The tablets are supplied in HDPE bottles.

## Active Substance

## PIOG hydrochloride

This  active  substance  has  been  authorised  as  a  result  of  an  earlier  centralised  procedure  for  the  same applicant. It is a white crystalline solid that is odourless and slightly bitter. The active substance is produced as a racemate and it is practically insoluble in water. PIOG hydrochloride has a specific crystalline form and has  not  demonstrated  polymorphism.PIOG  HCl  is  manufactured  by  chemical  synthesis,  in  five  steps. Adequate in-process controls are applied during the synthesis. The specifications and control methods for intermediate products, starting materials and reagents, have been presented. The three batch synthesis data for each manufacturing site presented show a reproducible manufacturing process leading to homogeneous batches. PIOG hydrochloride specifications includes tests for description, identification (IR, UV, HPLC and Chloride ion), assay related substances (HPLC), residual solvents (GC), water content, residue on ignition, heavy  metals,  and  particle  size.  The  tests  and  limits  in  the  specifications  are  considered  appropriate  for controlling the quality of this active substance. The re-test period proposed is acceptable according to the stability data submitted.

## GLIM

Information on GLIM has been supplied in the form of Active substance master file (ASMF). GLIM is a crystalline white powder. No asymmetric carbon atom is present and it is practically insoluble in water. Two crystalline  polymorphic  forms  of  GLIM  are  known  and  the  applied  manufacturing  process  yields  the thermodynamically more stable form. The presence of this form is controlled routinely in thebatch analysis. The  manufacturing  and  control  information  on  GLIM  was  provided  in  the  form  of  an  ASMF  and  was evaluated as satisfactory. Adequate In-Process Controls are applied during the synthesis. The specifications and control methods for intermediate products, starting materials and reagents, have been presented. GLIM specifications are in accordance to the latest Ph Eur monograph including tests for appearance, solubility, identification, related substances, water content, sulphated ash, and impurities. , solubility, identification (IR, UV),  polymorph  identification  (IR), heavy  metals, related substances. The  tests and  limits in the specifications are considered appropriates for controlling the quality of this active substance. Batch analysis data  of  six  production  batches  GLIM  are  provided.  The  results  are  reproducible  and  comply  with  the specifications.  Stability  results  of  GLIM  stored  in  double  polyethylene  bags  in  HDPE  containers  at 25ºC/60%RH over 36 months for three batches have been submitted together with 24 months for another three  batches  (25ºC  /  65%RH).  The  parameters  tested  were  description,  solubility,  identification,  loss  on drying, related substances, cis- isomer and assay. No significant changes occurred in the parameters studied. The re-test period proposed was considered acceptable according to the stability data submitted.

## Medicinal Product

## · Pharmaceutical Development

As  the  product  is  a  combination  of  two  existing  oral  antidiabetics,  the  product  was  developed  to  be bioequivalent to commercial products containing the individual active substances. It was found that the most important properties to influence the formulation was the low solubility in water of both PIOG and GLIM. Therefore,  particle  size  of  both  active  substances  played  an  important  factor  in  the  drug  formulation development. Excipients are used at unexceptional concentrations and have been show compatible with the active  substances.  However,  to  optimise  the  stability  of  each  active,  taking  into  account  the  individual (different) stability profiles, the matrix for each active substance was different. This was solved by having the actives and excipients separated in a bi-layered tablet design. The excipients used are povidone, cellulose microcrystalline, croscarmellose sodium, hydroxypropylcellulose, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, and  polysorbate  80.  The  excipients  are  conventional  and  meet  the  requirements  in  Ph.  Eur.  Lactose monohydrate is manufactured from bovine milk. The supplier confirms that the milk used in the manufacture of the lactose is sourced from healthy animals under the same conditions as for human consumption. The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

primary packaging chosen was HDPE bottles. Details and specifications of the packaging components and identity tests for all components together with batch analytical data were provided. The container material has been certified as food grade.

## · Manufacture of the Product

The  active  substances  are  granulated  separately  using  Pharmacopoeial  excipients  and  compressed  into  a bilayer tablet. The manufacturing process has been validated by a number of studies for the major steps of the manufacturing process in one production-scale batch for the 45 mg/4 mg tablet strength and 50% of full scale batch for the 30 mg/ 4mg tablet strengths and is satisfactory. The in process controls are adequate for this  tablet  preparation.  The  batch  analysis  data  show  that  the  tablets  can  be  manufactured  reproducibly according to the agreed finished product specification, which is suitable for control of this oral preparation.

## · Product Specification

The  product  specifications  include  tests  by  validated  methods  for  appearance,  identification  of  the  active substances (HPLC, UV), related substances (HPLC), dissolution, (Ph Eur), uniformity of content (HPLC, Ph Eur),  assay  of  the  active  substances  (HPLC),  and  microbial  limit  (Ph  Eur).  Degradation  products  are controlled and their limits are justified by reference to stability studies and toxicology studies. The tests and limits  of  the  specifications  for  the  finished  product  are  appropriate  to  control  the  quality  of  the  finished product  for  their  intended  purpose.  Batch  analysis  data  confirm  satisfactory  uniformity  of  the  product  at release.

## · Stability of the Product

Three pilot  batches  (1/7.5  full  scale)  of  each  tablet  strength  in  HDPE  containers  were  placed  on  stability under  ICH  conditions.  The  batches  were  tested  for  appearance,  loss  on  drying,  hardness,  assay,  related substances, dissolution and microbial limits. They have were exposed to 25º C/60% RH for 18 months and 40º  C  /  75%  RH  for  6  months.  Based  on  available  stability  data,  the  proposed  shelf  life  and  storage conditions as stated in the SPC are acceptable.

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

Information on development, manufacture and control of the active substances and finished product have been presented in a satisfactory manner. The results of tests carried out indicate satisfactory consistency and uniformity  of  important  product  quality  characteristics,  and  these  in  turn  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the product should have a satisfactory and uniform performance in the clinic. At the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a number of minor unresolved quality issues without impact on the clinical efficacy or safety of the product, therefore the applicant made a commitment to resolve these as post-opinion follow-up measures

## 3. Non-clinical aspects

## Introduction

The Application contained extensive documentation concerning non-clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and toxicology of PIOG and GLIM. The non-clinical data relating to PIOG is derived from bibliographic  references  and  original  data  of  the  Community  authorisations  for  PIOG.  The  non-clinical documentation concerning GLIM is derived from bibliographic references and a justification for the use of the  literature  to  replace  the  results  of  toxicological  and  pharmacological  tests  is  provided.  No  new  nonclinical studies were conducted with the fixed formulation compound. In view of the length and extent of clinical  experience  obtained  with  co-administration  of  commercially  available  PIOG  and  GLIM,  CHMP considered that the omission of animal studies cited under indents 4.2.1 to 4.2.3 (a to f) inclusive of Annex 1 Directive  2001/83/EC  was  justified.  In  the  case  of  carcinogenicity  studies  and  genotoxicity  studies  no supportive  studies  or  bibliographic  references  were  provided.  The  company  provided  a  CPMP  opinion following an Article 10 referral for GLIM as supportive data for the justification of a lack of carcinogenicity and genotoxicity studies (3 rd August 1998 CPMP/1416/98).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacology

## · Primary pharmacodynamics

## PIOG

PIOG is a PPAR gamma agonist with an EC50 of 470 nmol/l. It also has relatively weak PPAR alpha activity. Activation of PPAR gamma is dose dependent. Of the major metabolites, MIV has some contribution to the efficacy  of  PIOG  in  man.  PIOG  enantiomers  occur  spontaneously  in  both  human  and  animal  plasma  and there is no obvious difference in absorption or elimination between them. PIOG, like other PPAR agonists' mechanism of action is not fully elucidated, but the reduction in insulin resistance involves modulation of intracellular signalling mediated via the nuclear PPAR γ .  PIOG reduces TNF-alpha (increased expression is associated  with  diabetes/obesity)  and  improves  metabolic  abnormalities  in  Wistar  fatty  rats.  It  increases insulin  sensitivity  in  isolated  soleus  muscle  and  in  isolated  adipocytes  without  changing  insulin  binding (carried out ex-vivo on tissues from Wistar fatty rats). PIOG improved insulin mediated glucose metabolism in KK mice, and aged insulin resistant dogs also showed reduced fasting and postprandial plasma lipid and glucose  levels.  No  effect  is  anticipated  in  IDDM  and  PIOG  is  unlikely  to  cause  hypoglycaemia.  The combination  of  PIOG  and  either  SUs/  voglibose/MET  was  studied  and  effects  on  reducing  plasma  and urinary glucose were additive (noted in rats).

## GLIM

GLIM is a long acting  SU  that  stimulates  the  rapid  secretion  of  insulin  from  beta-  pancreatic  cells.  This action  is  mediated  by  binding  to  the  SURx  receptor  a  regulatory  subunit  of  the  ATP-sensitive  potassium channel on the beta cell membrane, resulting in membrane depolarisation and subsequent calcium influx and insulin release. Irespective of the route of administration, GLIM has a more rapid onset of activity and longer duration of action than glibenclamide. The longer lasting effects of GLIM are attributed at least in part to the extra-pancreatic  effects  through  the  stimulation  of  increased  insulin  independent  glucose  utilisation  by  a number of  other  tissues  (fat  and  muscle  cells)  via  stimulation  of  glucose  transporter  isoform  4  (GLUT4) translocation  and  increased  activities  of  the  key  metabolic  enzymes  glycerol-3-phosphate  acyltransferase (GPAT) and glycogen synthetase and more recently though the proposed activation of the PPAR γ receptor in adipocytes. Comparison to other SU indicates that GLIM had the greatest degree of extra-pancreatic activity, resulting in reduced potential to induce hypoglycaemic events and improved ability to lower blood glucose levels. Inukai et al. (2005) and Fuken et al., (2005) have both demonstrated the ability of GLIM to directly bind  to  PPARg  receptor  in  a  competitive  manner  to  known  agonists  (RSG)  and  active  gene  promoter containing PPAR-responsive element and alter mRNA levels of PPAR-g targeted genes including aP2, leptin and aiponectin. Furthermore, GLIM has demonstrated the ability to induce differentiation of adipocytes in a PPAR γ dependent manner. The PPARg agonist activites differ between the two published papers and ranges between 16% and 20% of that of PIOG at 1 µ M. Despite interaction with the SUR2A receptor of the KATP channels on cardiac cells, GLIM displayed significantly less cardiovascular activity than other existing SUs and the  least  cardiotoxic  potential.  The  free  combination  of  PIOG  and  glibenclamide  has  been  studied  in Wistar  fatty  rats,  a  model  of  NIDDM,  and  demonstrated  an  improvement  in  glucose  intolerance  and  a suppression  of  over  insulin  secretion.  GLIM  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  superior  to  glibenclamide  with respect to a reduction in plasma glucose and plasma insulin levels with reduced potential for cardiotoxicity. Based on this evidence the combination of GLIM and PIOG would be more beneficial with improved safety in comparison to the combination of PIOG and glibenclamide.

## · Secondary pharmacodynamics

## PIOG

The effects of PIOG on fat mobilisation (distribution) in animal models of NIDDM are explicable in terms of the drug's known pharmacology. The distribution of white and brown adipose tissue is modulated by PIOG. Increases in white fat depots result from increased caloric intake when the animals are fed ad libitum but can be controlled by restricting food intake.  Brown fat is increased by a direct action of the drug and this is thought  to  be  important  in  sustaining  normalisation  of  insulin  sensitivity  in  obese  hyperglycaemic  states. Human adults do not have an equivalent tissue to the brown fat deposits found in rodents thus there can be no clinical impact of the effect of PIOG on brown fat.  Since the animal studies show that dietary restriction can  prevent  weight  gain  as  a  result  of  increased  white  fat  deposition,  dietary  control  should  form  part  of patient treatment. A recent clinical study has shown that there is indeed an increase in body fat associated with  PIOG treatment.  However, this  increase  is  restricted  to  subcutaneous  fat  and  visceral  fat  is  reduced. This  is  important  because  visceral  fat  is  the  main  predictor  of  cardiovascular  risk.  In  addition,  weight increase in clinical studies is still associated with an improvement in metabolic outcome, specifically glucose

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

and  lipids,  leading  to  an  improvement  in  calculated  cardiovascular  risk.  Therefore  the  re-disposition  of adipose tissue seen in animals is of no relevance to clinical outcome.

## GLIM

SU have previously been related with increased mortality due to cardiovascular dysfunction. SU bind to and regulate SUR receptors on KATP channels not only on βpancreatic cell membranes (SUR1) but also those of the KATP channels of myocardial cells (SUR2A). GLIM has a lower affinity for SUR2A and a lower level of activity on KATP channels at therapeutic concentrations in comparison to other SUs. GLIM has no effect on the  electrical  threshold,  conduction  time  or  refractory  period  in  the  isolated  rabbit  heart.  In  both  rat  and guinea  pig  isolated  cardiac  myocytes,  the  IC50  for  inhibition  of  rilmakalim-activated  KATP  channels  was higher for GLIM than glibenclamide. These receptors have a role in ischaemic preconditioning which is a cardioprotective  mechanism.  Glibenclamide  abolished  the  cardioprotective  effect  conferred  by  ischemic preconditioning  and  diazoxide,  in  comparison  to  GLIM,  which  had  no  effect.  Comparison  of  GLIM  and glibenclamide in  vivo demonstrated  that  endotoxin-shocked  rats  administered  glibenclamide  displayed elevated  blood  pressure.  Following  iv  administration  of  GLIM  or  glibenclamide,  glibenclamide  produced signs  of  ischaemia  (change  in  ST-interval  of  the  ECG)  in  all  rats  whilst  GLIM  had  almost  no  effect.  In streptozotocin-diabetic  rats,  glibenclamide  produced  a  lethal  cardiogenic  shock  preceded  by  serious  ECG changes in all animals. In GLIM-treated rats, effects were less pronounced and only 2 of the 11 animals died. In normal open-chest dogs the effects of GLIM on all parameters (reduced coronary blood flow, increased coronary resistance, depressed mechanical activity of the heart, enhanced myocardial O2 extraction, reduced serum potassium levels and an induced moderate endocardial ST-segment elevation) were less than those provoked by glibenclamide. Subsequent studies in normal and alloxan-diabetic dogs further demonstrated that  GLIM effects  were  weaker  than  glibenclamide  on  reductions  in  mean  arterial  blood  flow,  contractile force,  rate  of  myocardial  contraction  and  relaxation,  and  pressure.  Posa et  al., (2002) highlighted  the metabolic  effects  of  SU  in  the  heart  of  diabetic  dogs.  Both  glibenclamide  and  GLIM  reduced  the  rate  of pyruvate  extraction,  however  the  rate  of  lactate  extraction  was  not  consistently  affected  by  glibenclamide whereas GLIM reduced lactate extraction rates with a more moderate reduction in diabetic animals. Overall, action on the metabolic systems was weaker for GLIM than glibenclamide suggesting a lesser disturbance of the cardiovascular system in diabetes. Further positive effects on cardiac function were demonstrated by the ability  of  GLIM  and  glibenclamide  to  increase  the  chance  of  survival  of  life-threatening  arrhythmias  by reducing  the  incidence  of  irreversible  ventricular  fibrillation  during  myocardial  ischemic-reperfusion. Investigation  of  the  effects  of  glibenclamide  and  GLIM  on  myocardial  infarction  in  coronary  ligated  rats revealed  increased  scar  thinning  and  inhibition  of  thickening  of  the  non-infracted  ventricular  septum  by glibenclamide,  in  contrast  GLIM  did  not  precipitate  scar  thinning  and  inhibited  the  dilation  of  the  left ventricular  cavity.  Unlike  GLIM,  glibenclamide  appears  to  contribute  to  the  deterioration  of  the  heart function by promoting the shift from a compensated state to a decompensated state. Based on the in vitro studies GLIM appears to have improved cardiac safety profile over other SU due to a reduced binding of SUR2A regulator and reduced activity at cardiac KATP channel sat therapeutic concentrations. Based on the in vivo action of GLIM in dogs, GLIM appears to be safer with respect to cardiotoxicity than glibenclamide another SU.

## · Safety pharmacology programme

## PIOG

A  series  of  general  pharmacology  studies  were  carried  out  on  PIOG.    For  the in  vivo  experiments  this  was formulated in 0.5% methylcellulose or gum Arabic, in vitro 0.55% DMSO was used.  There appears to be a strong placebo effect where 0.5% methylcellulose is used, this is not the case with gum arabic, the impact of this effect  on  the  interpretation  of  the  results  is  unclear.    The  probability  of  PIOG  exerting  clinically  significant pharmacological action on any of the systems tested is low.

## Central and Somatic Nervous System Effects:

An Irwin screen in mice (4 males/group) showed a decrease in spontaneous motor activity within 15 minutes of an oral dose of 300 mg/kg. The effect lasted 2 hours and there was no change in response to external stimulus. Skeletal  muscle  co-ordination  in  mice  was  unaffected  at  300  mg/kg  po  in  the  inclined  screen,  traction  and Rotarod tests. A dose of 30 mg/kg po did not prevent tonic extensor seizures in mice induced by a supra-maximal electric shock (15 mA, 600 V AC for 0.2 seconds). Doses of 100 or 300 mg/kg po produced a slight reduction in seizure but this was not significant compared to phenytoin 15 mg/kg po. There was no alteration in Phenobarbital induced sleeping time in mice at up to 300 mg/kg po.  Doses of &gt;100 mg/kg po reduced the frequency of writhing episodes following acetic acid (0.6%) 0.1 ml/10g ip, to a similar extent as aminopyrine 50 mg/kg po (i.e. about

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

50%).  The  fact  that  placebo  also  reduced  writhing  by  46%  suggests  that  this  is  not  a  true  'analgesic'  effect. Doses up to 300 mg/kg po had no effect on body temperature in rats. Electrodes were implanted in the dorsal hippocampus and basolateral amygdala of cats (2/sex).  After 2 weeks recovery, recordings were made under conscious, unrestrained conditions before and for 7 hours after a dose of 30 mg/kg po. No effects on spontaneous EEG or behaviour were noted. No effect on the flexor reflex of the anterior tibial muscle in anaesthetised cats was seen at 10 mg/kg intra-duodenally.

## Cardiovascular Effects

Haemodynamic studies were performed in conscious and unconscious male, Beagle dogs and in conscious rats via indwelling arterial catheters. An oral dose of 30 mg/kg had no effect on BP, heart rate or general behaviour during  the  7  hour  observation  period  in  conscious  dogs.  Similarly,  300  mg/kg  po  had  no  affect  on  these parameters in the 5 hours post-dose in conscious rats. There was no alteration, compared to placebo, in BP, heart rate, renal blood flow or superior mesenteric blood flow, in unconscious dogs given 10 mg/kg intra-duodenally.

## Autonomic Nervous System Effects

Intra-duodenal  administration  of  10  mg/kg  to  anaesthetised  cats  had  no  effect  on  the  bradycardic  response  to stimulation of the right cervical vagus nerve, pressor response to bilateral carotid occlusion, contraction of the nictitating membrane caused by pre-ganglionic stimulation of the cervical sympathetic nerve or BP responses to nor-adrenaline,  acetylcholine  or  histamine.  Acetylcholine,  histamine  and  barium  induced  contractions  were unaffected by 10 -5 M PIOG, but the dose-response curves were right shifted at 10 -4 M.

## Renal Effects

The effects of oral PIOG, 30, 100 and 300 mg/kg, were compared to hydrochlorothiazide, 10 mg/kg, in rats. There was a significant reduction in urinary volume and sodium, but not potassium, excretion at the top dose only with PIOG and an increase in urinary volume and sodium excretion with the hydrochlorothiazide. A reduced urinary volume was seen with placebo.

## Gastrointestinal Effects

Oral doses of 0 (placebo), 30, 100 or 300 mg/kg PIOG inhibited gastric emptying in rats by 233, 29, 144, 240 % compared to control. The same doses reduced intestinal transport time from a control of 77.3 % of the intestinal length  in  60  minutes  to  63.0,  73.6,  73.6,  and  51.3  %  respectively.  PIOG  at  10 -5 M  had  no  effect  on  the spontaneous motility of the rabbit ileum in vitro; however10 -4 M decreased the magnitude on the contractions immediately, reaching a maximum of 95% at 20 minutes.

## GLIM

No non-clinical safety pharmacology studies with GLIM have been reported in the literature. In view of the extensive clinical experience with GLIM since authorisation in 1996, the lack of published data in animals is considered justified.

## · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions

## PIOG

No specific studies of potential drug interactions were carried out. The Expert Report contains a discussion of several relevant studies in the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic sections of the dossier. The weight of  evidence  suggests  that  serious  adverse  drug  interactions  with  insulin,  glibenclamide  or  voglibose  are unlikely.

## GLIM

No reports of non-clinical studies have been found. In the opinion of CHMP it is acceptable.

## Pharmacokinetics

PIOG is a high permeability and low solubility drug; GLIM is a low solubility drug. Good absorption was observed in animals and in humans for both drugs with low hepatic first-pass effect for PIOG. Plasma protein binding  of  PIOG  and  GLIM  across  species  was  relatively  high.  Radioactivity  was  widely  distributed  to tissues in rats after [ 14 C]PIOG and [ 14 C]GLIM administration, and was excreted into milk of lactating rats. PIOG  and  GLIM  are  extensively  metabolized  in  all  species  including  humans.  PIOG  did  not  induce cytochrome P450 in rats. All 6 human Phase I metabolites of PIOG were identified in mice, rats, dogs, and monkeys.  PIOG  is  metabolized  primarily  by  CYP2C8  and  CYP3A4  but  the  contribution  of  these  CYP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

isoforms  to  the  metabolism  of  PIOG  was  comparable  with  the  residual  activity  caused  by  other  isoforms including  CYP1A1,  CYP1A2,  CYP2C9,  CYP2C19  and  CYP2D6.  Results  of  extensive in  vitro testing indicate  little  potential  for  PIOG  to  inhibit  the  metabolism  of  other  drugs  via  these  mechanisms. Radioactivity was excreted rapidly in all species following administration of [ 14 C] PIOG, generally by the faecal excretion route and by the urinary excretion route in monkeys. GLIM was excreted rapidly following administration of [ 14 C] labeled material principally via the urine in rabbit and man and the faeces in mouse, rat,  dog,  and  monkey.  In  rats,  both  PIOG-and  GLIM-derived  radioactivity  was  reabsorbed  following excretion into bile. Based on the pre-clinical pharmacokinetic and metabolism data there is no evidence to support  the  possible  interference  on  individual  pharmacokinetic  parameters  if  the  active  substances  are administered  via  FDC.  Therefore  the  summarized  data  herein  supports  the  combination  use  of  PIOG  and GLIM.

## Toxicology

## · Single dose toxicity

In single dose studies, the oral LD50 for PIOG was greater than 2000 mg/kg in both rats and mice. The acute toxicity  of  GLIM after oral or intraperitoneal administration was very low in Wistar rats with all animals surviving the maximal administrable doses of 10,000 mg/kg and 5950 mg/kg, respectively and displayed no signs of toxicity. Based on acute toxicity studies there is a wide safety margin for effects based on oral LD50 values for both PIOG and GLIM.

## · Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics)

In  repeat  dose  toxicity  studies  (between  one  and  twelve  months  duration)  in  4  species  (rats,  mice,  dogs, monkeys),  the  adverse  effects  of  PIOG  appeared  to  be  caused  as  a  result  of  metabolism  (increased  fatty deposits, anaemia, cardiac hypertrophy). As this effect was noted in multiple species, it may be of clinical concern.  The  effects  were  caused  by  exaggerated  pharmacological  activity,  rather  than  a  toxicological consequence.  No  treatment-related  toxicologically  relevant  effects  were  observed  in  either  rats  or  dogs, administered  GLIM,  with  the  exception  of  a  slight  reduction  in  bodyweight  in  2  dogs  dosed  at  320 mg/kg/day. Bilateral subcapsular cataracts were observed in 1 males and 1 female, the relevance of which is unclear.  Consistent  with  the  pharmacological  action  of  the  compound,  decreases  in  serum  glucose  levels were observed which was non-dose related and this was accompanied with degranulation of pancreatic β -cells. These changes were completely reversible.

## · Genotoxicity

Neither PIOG nor MET are considered to have genotoxic potential.

## · Carcinogenicity

Bladder tumours have been noted in male rats after long-term PIOG administration (in 2 year carcinogenicity studies). The carcinogenic potential of PPAR agonists in general is of significant concern to regulators. Both PIOG and GLIM display PPAR γ agonist activity. Due to the high protein binding of both PIOG (&gt;98%) and GLIM (&gt;99% in all species tested and &gt;99.5% in humans) the applicant committed to evaluate the potential of  the  individual  compounds  to  influence  the  individual  free  fractions  and  in  the  presence  of  such  an interaction between PIOG and GLIM on the protein binding profile, to recalculate of the safety margins in relation to carcinogenic potential for both GLIM and PIOG based on plasma concentrations (AUCs) of the free fraction in relation to the proposed dosage regimens. The solution for these concerns was proposed to be handled as part of the follow up measures. GLIM has been shown to cause uterine adenocarcinomas in rats at doses  of  (345  mg/kg).  Safety  factors  based  on  systemic  exposure  of  females  rats  and  humans  were considered high enough to exclude a risk to patients. In mice there was an increased incidence of islet cell hyperplasia and of the islet cell adenomas; these are regarded as resulting from the chronic stimulation of the beta cells.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Reproduction Toxicity

Adverse birth and developmental effects have been noted in the offspring of animals treated with PIOG. This effect was considered as a result of the physiological disturbances that occurred in the mother, rather than as a result of direct toxic effect on the foetus. Administration to the rat revealed no effects on fertility, course of pregnancy or delivery. Malformations (e.g. eye malformations, fissures and bone anomalies) occurred in rats and rabbits, and in rabbits the number of abortions and intrauterine deaths were increased. Sulphonylureaderivatives like GLIM pass into the breast milk.

## Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment

The use of this compound is not considered to represent a significant risk to the environment.

## Discussion on the non-clinical aspects

No new non-clinical studies were conducted with the fixed formulation compound. In view of the length and extent of clinical experience obtained with co-administration of commercially available PIOG and GLIM, the CHMP considered the  omission  of  animal  studies  cited  under  indents  4.2.1  to  4.2.3  (a  to  f)  inclusive  of Annex  1  Directive  2001/83/EC  is  justified.  GLIM  studies  were  presented  in  the  form  of  bibliographic references.  In  the  case  of  carcinogenicity  studies  and  genotoxicity  studies  no  supportive  studies  or bibliographic  references  were  provided.  The  company  provided  a  CPMP  opinion  following  an  Article  10 referral  for  GLIM  as  supportive  data  for  the  justification  of  a  lack  of  carcinogenicity  and  genotoxicity studies. The carcinogenic potential of PPAR agonists in general is of significant concern to regulators. Both PIOG and GLIM display PPAR γ agonist activity. Due to the high protein binding of both PIOG (&gt;98%) and GLIM (&gt;99% in all species tested and &gt;99.5% in humans) the applicant committed to evaluate the potential of  the  individual  compounds  to  influence  the  individual  free  fractions  and  in  the  presence  of  such  an interaction between PIOG and GLIM on the protein binding profile, to recalculate of the safety margins in relation to carcinogenic potential for both GLIM and PIOG based on plasma concentrations (AUCs) of the free fraction in relation to the proposed dosage regimens. The solution for these concerns was proposed to be handled as part of the follow up measures.

## 4. Clinical aspects

## Introduction

This application is for a FDC, containing two authorized ingredients, pioglitazone hydrochloride and GLIM in two strengths: 30mg/4mg and 45mg/4mg tablets (initially for three strengths including also 30mg/2mg but this strength was withdrawn from the application by MAH). PIOG was originally authorized in the European Union in October 2000 and is currently authorised for use as monotherapy or as combination therapy with either MET or a SU in patients with T2DM. GLIM is a second generation SU originally authorised via the mutual recognition procedure in 1995. It is indicated to treat hyperglycaemia in patients with T2DM either as first-line monotherapy or as an add-on to MET or insulin. This application is submitted under Part B of the Annex to regulation 2309/93 and is a full 'mixed' application in accordance with Article 8(3) and Annex I Part II.7 of Directive 2001/83/EC as amended. The data relating to PIOG is original data that fulfils all of the requirements for pharmacological tests and clinical trials and covers all of the indents in Part I.5 of Annex I Directive 2001/83/EC as amended. The clinical data previously assessed for the Community authorisations for PIOG were not resubmitted in this dossier. However, module 2 included an overview and summary of this data. A bibliographic review to describe the clinical profile of GLIM and SU class has been submitted for this application. The accepted indication for the PIOG/GLIM FDC is treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated and who are already treated with a combination of pioglitazone and glimepiride.

Four clinical pharmacology studies are submitted with this application. These bioequivalence studies were completed to demonstrate that 3 initially proposed doses of the FDC are bioequivalent to the concomitantly administered individual tablets. Bioequivalence of the 30 mg/2 mg, 30 mg/4 mg, and 45 mg/4 mg doses were assessed  in  Study  OPISU-001,  Study  OPISU-002  and  Study  OPISU-003,  respectively.  Additionally,  the effect  of  food  on  the  highest  proposed  dose  of the FDC was determined during Study OPISU-004. These studies  served  to  bridge  the  clinical  safety  and  efficacy  data  for  PIOG  and  GLIM  or  other  SU  used concomitantly as presented in this MAA to the FDC tablet. No studies of efficacy have been conducted with

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the FDC. No studies with PIOG as add-on to GLIM therapy have been conducted either. Patients should be switched to a FDC only after the dosage of monotherapy has been optimized. The optimal dosage of GLIM is in the range of 4 mg. No scientific advice has been given in relation to this application. As this is a standalone  application,  summaries  of  all  relevant  PIOG  and  GLIM  data  are  included  and  commented  on,  with emphasis on the pivotal data, which support the FDC.

## GCP

The clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The applicant has provided a statement to the effect that clinical trials conducted outside the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC.

## Pharmacokinetics

- Absorption

PIOG  is  rapidly  absorbed  reaching  maximum  plasma  concentrations  at  0.5-3hrs  after  drug  intake.    The absolute  bioavailability  ranged  between  70%  and  96%  with  a  mean  value  of  83%.    Food  does  not significantly  influence  the  absorption  of  PIOG.    Single  and  multiple  dose  studies  demonstrate linearity of pharmacokinetics in the therapeutic dose range. GLIM  is  completely absorbed (100%)  after oral administration, with a significant degree of absorption occurring within the first post dose hour. Peak plasma concentrations generally occurs within 2 to 3 hours of oral dosing, but is delayed by approximately 12% when GLIM is administered with food.

- -Bioequivalence studies

## Study 01-04-TL-OPISU-001

This was a single-center, open-label, randomized, 2-treatment, 4-period, crossover, replicate-design study. Healthy subjects were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment sequences in which they received a single oral dose  of  each  treatment:  AD-4833SU  (PIOG  30  mg/GLIM  2  mg  FDC  product)  and  the  concomitant administration  of  the  commercially  available  PIOG  30  mg  and  GLIM  2  mg  tablets.  The  sequences  of treatments  were  such  that  upon  completion  of  the  study  each  subject  had  received  both  treatments  twice. During each period, blood samples were collected at specified time points up to 72 hours posttreatment for the  measurement  of  serum  PIOG  and  GLIM  concentrations.  Adverse  events  (AEs)  and  concomitant medications were monitored and recorded throughout the study. Other safety evaluations included clinical laboratory  tests,  vital  signs,  12-lead  electrocardiograms  (ECGs),  and  physical  examinations.  A  total  of  35 healthy  subjects  (mean  age  of  31.3  years),  including  22  male  and  13  female  subjects,  were  randomly assigned to treatment at 1 study site. Thirty-two subjects (91.4 %), including 19 male and 13 female subjects, completed  the  study.  Three  subjects  discontinued  the  study  early:  2  subjects  withdrew  voluntarily  and  1 subject withdrew because of AEs (mild facial lesions and mild dizziness).

## Pharmacokinetic Results

The systemic exposures to PIOG and GLIM after administration of AD-4833SU were not considered to be bioequivalent to exposures observed after concomitant administration of the separate commercial PIOG and GLIM tablets. However, the 90% CIs of the LS mean ratios for AUC(0-inf) and Cmax of PIOG and AUC(0inf), AUC(0-tlqc), and Cmax of GLIM were within the 80% to 125% interval. The 90% CI of the LS mean ratio for AUC(0-tlqc) of PIOG fell slightly below the 80% to 125% interval, as the 90% CI for this parameter was (77.48%, 87.17%). The LS mean and median Tmax values for PIOG were approximately 2 hours for both treatments, and the LS mean λ z values were 0.079 1/hr after treatment with AD-4833SU and 0.068 1/hr after concomitant administration of the commercial tablets. The LS mean and median Tmax values for GLIM were between 2 and 2.6 hours for both treatments. The LS mean λ z values were 0.103 1/hr after treatment with AD-4833SU and 0.128 1/hr after concomitant administration of the commercial tablets. According to CHMP the design of the study and analysis were appropriate and in accordance with regulatory guidance. The  washout  period  of  7  days  allows  adequate  time  for  elimination  of  both  actives  (&gt;5  half-lives)  thus avoiding a carry-over effect. The sampling times were appropriate and with sampling up to 72 hours postdose, there was adequate data to calculate the exposure. There were minor administrative amendments to the protocol, which are not considered to impact on the validity of the study. Three subjects discontinued the study early for various reasons outlined above. One subject was excluded from the PK analysis in accordance with predefined criteria. However, exclusion of subjects for statistical reasons only in the opinion of CHMP was not acceptable. Analysis of all subjects' data should be provided unless there are clinical grounds for excluding a subject. The overall results provided demonstrate that the FDC tablet (PIOG 30mg/GLIM 2mg)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

is bioequivalent with respect to rate and extent of exposure compared to the separate components available commercially.

## Study OPISU-002 (PIOG 30 mg/GLIM 4 mg)

This was a single-center, open-label, randomized, 2-treatment, 4-period, crossover, replicate-design study. Healthy subjects were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment sequences in which they received a single oral dose  of  each  treatment:  AD-4833SU  (PIOG  30  mg/GLIM 4 mg fixed-dose combination product) and the concomitant  administration  of  the  commercially  available  PIOG  30  mg  and  GLIM  4  mg  tablets.  The sequences  of  treatments  were  such  that  upon  completion  of  the  study  each  subject  had  received  both treatments twice. During each period, blood samples were collected at specified time points up to 72 hours posttreatment  for  the  measurement  of  serum  PIOG  and  GLIM  concentrations.  Adverse  events  (AEs)  and concomitant  medications  were  monitored  and  recorded  throughout  the  study.  Other  safety  evaluations included clinical laboratory tests, vital signs, 12-lead electrocardiograms (ECGs), and physical examinations.A  total  of  38  healthy  subjects  (mean  age  of  29  years),  including  18  male  subjects  and  20 female subjects, were randomly assigned to treatment at 1 study site. Thirty-six subjects (94.7%), including 18 male subjects and 18 female subjects, completed the study. Two subjects discontinued the study early: 1 subject withdrew voluntarily for personal reasons, and 1 subject withdrew because of difficulties with the blood draws.

Pharmacokinetic Results

Systemic exposures to PIOG and GLIM after single-dose administration of AD-4833SU were bioequivalent to  exposures  observed  after  concomitant  administration  of  the  commercially  available  PIOG  and  GLIM commercial tablets. For PIOG and GLIM, the 90% CIs of the LS mean ratios for AUC(0-tlqc), AUC(0-inf), and Cmax were within the 80% to 125% interval. The LS mean and median Tmax values for PIOG were between 1.5 and 2.2 hours for both treatments. The LS mean λ z values were 0.081 1/hr after treatment with AD-4833SU and 0.076 1/hr after concomitant administration of the commercial tablets. The LS mean and median Tmax values for GLIM were between 2.5 and 2.7 hours for both treatments. The LS mean λ z values were 0.0755 1/hr after treatment with AD-4833SU and 0.0858 1/hr after concomitant administration of the commercial tablets. In the opinion of CHMP the design of the study and analysis were appropriate and in accordance with regulatory guidance. The washout period of 7 days allows adequate time for elimination of both actives (&gt;5 half-lives) thus avoiding a carry-over effect. The sampling times were appropriate and with sampling up to  72  hours  post-dose,  there  was  adequate  data  to  calculate  the  exposure.  There  were  minor administrative changes and one significant amendment to the protocol, which are not considered to impact on the validity of the study. The amendment involved an increase in the sample size from 36 to 38 subjects. Two subjects discontinued the study early for reasons outlined above. One subject was excluded from the PK analysis in accordance with predefined criteria. However, exclusion of subjects for statistical reasons only in the  opinion  of  CHMP  was  not  acceptable.  Analysis  of  all  subjects'  data  should  be  provided.  The  overall results demonstrate that the FDC (PIOG 30mg/GLIM 4mg) is bioequivalent with respect to rate and extent of exposure compared to the separate components available commercially.

## Study OPISU-003 (PIOG 45 mg/GLIM 4 mg)

This was a single-center, open-label, randomized, 2-treatment, 4-period, crossover, replicate-design study. Healthy subjects were randomly assigned to 1 of 2 treatment sequences in which they received a single oral dose  of  each  treatment:  AD-4833SU  (PIOG  45  mg/GLIM 4 mg fixed-dose combination product) and the concomitant  administration  of  the  commercially  available  PIOG  45  mg  and  GLIM  4  mg  tablets.  The sequences  of  treatments  were  such  that  upon  completion  of  the  study  each  subject  had  received  both treatments twice. During each period, blood samples were collected at specified time points up to 72 hours posttreatment  for  the  measurement  of  serum  PIOG  and  GLIM  concentrations.  Adverse  events  (AEs)  and concomitant  medications  were  monitored  and  recorded  throughout  the  study.  Other  safety  evaluations included clinical laboratory tests, vital signs, 12-lead electrocardiograms (ECGs), and physical examinations.A total  of  36  healthy  subjects  (mean  age  of  31.5  years),  including  15  male  subjects  and  21 female subjects, were randomly assigned to treatment at 1 study site. Thirty subjects (83.3 %), including 11 male  and  19  female  subjects,  completed  the  study.  Six  subjects  discontinued  the  study  early:  3  subjects withdrew voluntarily and 3 subjects were withdrawn because of protocol violations (2 subjects had a positive urine drug screen and 1 subject failed to return for Period 3).

Pharmacokinetic Results

The  systemic  exposures  to  PIOG  and  GLIM  after  administration  of  AD-4833SU  were  bioequivalent  to exposures  observed  after  the  concomitant  administration  of  the  separate  commercial  PIOG  and  GLIM

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

tablets.  The  90%  CIs  of  the  LS  mean  ratios  for  AUC(0-inf),  AUC(0-tlqc),  and  Cmax  of  PIOG  and  the AUC(0-inf) and AUC(0-tlqc) for GLIM were within the 80% to 125% interval. The 90% CI of the LS mean ratio for Cmax of GLIM fell slightly below the 80% to 125% interval, as the 90% CI for this parameter was (76.62%, 87.20%). For PIOG, the LS mean and median Tmax values were approximately 2 hours and the LS mean λ z values were approximately 0.07 1/hr after both treatments. The LS mean and median Tmax values for GLIM were between 2 and 2.5 hours for both treatments. The LS mean λ z values were 0.0848 1/hr after treatment  with  AD-4833SU  and  0.104  1/hr  after  concomitant  administration  of  the  commercial  tablets. Although  the  90%  CI  for  the  Cmax  of  GLIM  was  slightly  below  the  80%  to  125%  interval  at  (76.6%, 87.2%), this  finding  is  not  considered  clinically  relevant.  As  described  in  detail  in  the  Clinical  Overview (Section  2.5),  this  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  following:  (1)  the  establishment  of  dose  proportionality between  the  AD-4833SU  tablets  that  contain  2  mg  and  4  mg  of  GLIM,  (2)  the  establishment  of bioequivalence  for  the  GLIM  component  of  the  30  mg/4  mg  dose  of  AD-4833SU,  and  (3)  the  nature  of GLIM as a chronically administered drug. In the opinion of CHMP the design of the study and analysis were appropriate  and  were  in  accordance  with  regulatory  guidance.  The  washout  period  of  7  days  allowed adequate time for elimination of both actives (&gt;5 half-lives) thus avoiding a carry-over effect. The sampling times were appropriate and with sampling up to 72 hours post-dose, there was adequate data to calculate the exposure. There were minor administrative amendments to the protocol, which are not considered to impact on the validity of the study. Six subjects discontinued the study early for various reasons outlined above. One subject was excluded from the PK analysis as he was inadvertently administered study drug according to the incorrect  treatment  sequence  and  this  is  acceptable.  The  overall  results  demonstrate  that  the  fixed-dose combination  tablet  (PIOG  45mg/GLIM  4mg)  is  bioequivalent  with  respect  to  extent  of  exposure  (AUC) compared to the separate components available commercially. However, the 90% CI for the Cmax of GLIM was slightly below the 80% to 125% interval at (76.6%, 87.2%), the applicant has put forward arguments as to  why  this  finding  is  not  considered  clinically  relevant.  Considering  these  arguments  and  the  fact  that PIOG/GLIM is not intended for use under fasting conditions in clinical practice and that some decrease in Cmax with food is expected in any case, we can accept the arguments summarized above.

In conclusion in three bioequivalence studies, testing each of the combinations against the individual active substances, there were no major issues with the bioequivalence of GLIM.  This shows the AUC s for all 3 strengths:

| AUC 0-t (ng.h/mL)   |   Point estimate | 90% Confidence Interval   |
|---------------------|------------------|---------------------------|
| 30/2mg              |             0.99 | 0.95-1.04                 |
| 30/4 mg             |             1.01 | 0.96-1.06                 |
| 45/4 mg             |             0.96 | 0.93-1.02                 |

However  in  the  case  of  the  PIOG  component,  shown  below,  bioequivalence  was  not  shown  for  the 30mg/2mg combination (AUC0-t  90% confidence intervals between 77.48 - 87.17).

| AUC 0-t (ng.h/mL)   |   Point estimate | 90% Confidence Interval   |
|---------------------|------------------|---------------------------|
| 30/2mg              |             0.82 | 0.77-0.87                 |
| 30/4 mg             |             0.87 | 0.83-0.91                 |
| 45/4 mg             |             0.89 | 0.83-0.95                 |

Such a difference was considered to be particularly significant in the way the FDC is ideally intended for use:  that  is  for  the  individual  dose  of  each  component  to  be  determined  first  before  switching  to  the corresponding strength of the fixed combination product. Flexibility in applying the '80/125 CI guidelines' has been permitted occasionally where such differences are very small and clinical circumstances are such that these differences are irrelevant in practice. In the opinion of the CHMP it was not considered appropriate here.  The  whole  rationale  for  using  a  combination  of  these  two  drugs  is  void  if  having  arrived  at  the individual doses of each component for a patient; the appropriate fixed combination may not be relied upon

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

to have the same clinical effect. Since these two drugs are already available to be co-prescribed, there is no need to approve such licence applications with regulatory and clinical deficiencies. Therefore the Applicant committed to withdrawn the 30/2mg tablet from the Application.

## · Influence of food

## Study OPISU-004 Food-Effect Study

One single-centre, open-label, randomised, 2-period, crossover study was conducted to determine the effect of food on the absorption of PIOG and GLIM from the highest proposed dose of AD-4833SU (45 mg/4 mg). The food-effect study was designed so that 24 subjects would receive AD-4833SU with and without food, according to a randomly assigned sequence. After each dose, blood samples were collected at specified time points  up  to  72  hours  postdose  for  the  measurement  of  serum  PIOG  and  GLIM  concentrations.  Both treatments were separated by a 7-day washout period. Statistical analyses were performed on Tmax, λ z, and natural  logarithms  of  AUC(0-tlqc), AUC(0-inf), and Cmax of PIOG and GLIM. R 2 values  for λ z  and  the ratios of AUC(0-tlqc)/AUC(0-inf) were determined for each subject. If R 2 was less than 0.80 or if the ratio of AUC(0-tlqc) to AUC(0-inf) was less than 80% for an individual subject, then that subject's AUC(0-inf), λ z, and T1/2 values were not included in the statistical analysis. The ANOVA model used in this study included fixed  effects  for  sequence,  period,  and  treatment  and  random  effect  for  subject  nested  within  sequence. Within  the  framework  of  this  model,  the  90%  CIs  for  the  ratio  (test/reference)  of  the  LS  mean  of  AD4833SU  given  under  fed  state  (test)  relative  to  the  LS  mean  of  AD-4833SU  given  under  fasted  state (reference) were calculated for AUC(0-inf), AUC(0-tlqc), and Cmax of PIOG and GLIM. The effect of food was determined by comparing these 90% CIs to the 80% to 125% interval. Data obtained from 23 subjects were  sufficient  to  facilitate  calculation  of  the  pharmacokinetic  parameters  for  both  treatments  and  were included in the statistical analyses of AUC(0-tlqc), Cmax, and Tmax. Twenty-one and 23 subjects for PIOG and GLIM, respectively, had R 2 values for λ z that were greater than or equal to 0.80 and AUC(0-tlqc) values that  comprised  more  than  80%  of  the  AUC(0-inf)  value,  and  therefore,  were  included  in  the  statistical analysis of AUC(0-inf). The results from this study indicate that systemic exposure to PIOG and GLIM were not altered by the presence of food. The 90% CIs of the LS mean ratios for AUC(0-inf) of PIOG and AUC(0inf) and Cmax of GLIM were within the 80% to 125% interval. Dosing with food did result in a significant prolongation in the LS mean Tmax of PIOG from approximately 1.6 to 3.6 hours (median=1.5 to 4 hr). This food-induced delay in Tmax was associated with a 9% decrease in the LS mean value for the Cmax of PIOG. The 90% CI of the LS mean ratio for Cmax of PIOG fell slightly below the 80% to 125% interval, as the 90% CI for this parameter was (79.39%, 105.46%). In the opinion of CHMP the design of the study and analysis were appropriate and were in accordance with regulatory guidance. The washout period of 7 days allows adequate time for elimination of both actives (&gt;5 half-lives) thus avoiding a carry-over effect. The sampling times were appropriate and with sampling up to 72 hours post-dose, there was adequate data to calculate the exposure. The study shows findings consistent with what is known about the effect of food on the individual components. The rate of absorption of PIOG was slowed but overall exposure was unchanged. While a slight food effect has been reported in the literature for GLIM, the extent of this effect in this study was not statistically significant.

In conclusion the 90% CI for the Cmax of GLIM was outside the 80% to 125% interval (76.6%, 87.2%) in the study comparing the 45mg/4mg strength. However, this is unlikely to be clinically relevant. In a food effect study conducted with the highest strength proposed for marketing, a modest food effect was seen for GLIM as would be expected and the rate of absorption of PIOG was slowed which is consistent with the SPC of PIOG.

## · Distribution

The  volume  of  distribution  of  PIOG  is  small  with  a  mean  of  0.253L/kg.    PIOG  is  extensively  bound  to plasma proteins. GLIM is more than 90% bound to serum proteins, mainly to albumin. The degree of protein binding  is  important  because  the  unbound  portion  of  the  drug  determines  the  pharmacokinetic  profile. Conditions that alter the normal protein binding of the drug will alter the pharmacokinetics and affect the occurrence of side effects that are concentration dependent. Second generation SU, of which GLIM is one, are approximately 100 times more potent than first generation SUs. Despite having shorter half lives, which range from 3 to 5 hours compared to 24 to 48 hours with the first generation compounds, second generation SUs  can  typically  be  dosed  once  daily.  The  half-life  of  GLIM  is  5  hours  after  single  oral  dosing  and increases to approximately 9 hours after multiple dosing.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Elimination

PIOG  undergoes  extensive  hepatic  metabolism  by  hydroxylation  of  aliphatic  methylene  groups.    The clearance  is  sensitive  to  changes  in  both  the  intrinsic  capacity  of  the  liver  to  oxidise  drugs  and  the  free fraction in plasma and was found to be independent of dose in the range of 2-60mg. The terminal elimination half-life following intravenous administration was found to vary between 3.5-9.0 hrs with a mean value of 5.8 hrs.  Following oral administration, the terminal half-life observed in most studies is in the same range. Renal elimination of unchanged PIOG is negligible. The profile of metabolites of PIOG in diabetic patients is similar to that seen in healthy volunteers.

Unlike  the  earlier  developed  SUs,  GLIM  is  extensively  metabolised  rather  than  excreted.  The  principal hepatic isoforms involved in the metabolism of GLIM is CYP2C9. The metabolites are excreted in urine, with M1 accounting for approximately 60% of the administered dose; the remainder is found in faeces in the form of the M2 metabolite. M1 has approximately 30% of the pharmacologic activity relative to the parent compound, the clinical significance of which has not been established. GLIM does not accumulate in serum, and its pharmacokinetic behaviour does not differ between healthy subjects and patients with T2DM or with hepatic  dysfunction,  age,  or  gender.  However,  decreased  renal  function  is  associated  with  increased  drug distribution  and  clearance.  Potential  interactions  may  occur  between  GLIM  and  other  drugs  that  are metabolised by CYPC9, such as phenytoin, diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, and mefenamic acid.

## · Dose proportionality and time dependency

Dose proportionality of PIOG and the main metabolites (Total Active Compounds) was demonstrated over the dose range of 2 to 60 mg in both single- and repeated-dose studies conducted in Japan and the United States.  Prescribing  information  for  GLIM  [6]  summarised  the  pharmacokinetic  parameters  observed  in  a single-dose crossover study of the drug when given to 48 healthy subjects in 4 different doses. Mean ( ± SD) peak plasma concentrations were 103 ( ± 34)  ng/mL,  177  ( ± 44)  ng/mL, 308 ( ± 69)  ng/mL, and 551 ( ± 152) ng/mL at doses of 1, 2, 4, and 8 mg, respectively. Data indicate dose-proportional PK within the therapeutic range of doses for PIOG and GLIM.

## · Special populations

## -Impaired renal function

Cmax and AUC of PIOG and metabolites M-III and M-IV were decreased in subjects with impaired renal function.  T1/2  was  generally  unaffected.  PIOG  and  metabolites  M-III  and  M-IV  did  not  appear  to accumulate in subjects with renal impairment after repeated doses. The urinary excretion of the metabolites was not quantified, but the urinary excretion profile of the metabolites appeared to be the same as in subjects with  normal  renal  function.  The  apparent  lower  Cmax  and  AUC  values  in  subjects  with  impaired  renal function may be due to reduced plasma protein levels, which are often observed in individuals with renal impairment.  As  the  drug  is  eliminated  primarily  by  oxidation  in  the  liver,  the  intrinsic  clearance  is presumably unaffected. Pharmacokinetic theory predicts that in this situation, despite the difference in total concentration,  the  free  (ie,  therapeutically  relevant)  drug  concentrations  will  be  similar  in  patients  with normal versus impaired renal function. There is therefore no need for dose adjustment in patients with renal failure. Rosenkranz et al analysed the pharmacokinetics and safety of GLIM in patients with type 2 diabetes who had renal impairment and a creatinine clearance level above 10 mL/min at Baseline. Fifteen patients who received a single dose of 3 mg GLIM underwent serial blood and urine sample testing over 24 hours. Sixteen patients who received a dose of 1 to 8 mg GLIM to achieve glucose control over a 3-month period underwent serum and urine pharmacokinetic testing on the first and last days of the study. The patients in this  study  were  placed  into  1  of  3  groups  according  to  their  creatinine  clearance  levels.  Five  patients  had creatinine clearance levels of 77.7 mL/min; 3 patients had levels of 27.7 mL/min; and 7 patients had levels of 9.4 mL/min. Results of the single-dose, open-label study indicated that serum levels of GLIM decreased with a decline in renal function. Nevertheless, mean AUC levels of the M1 and M2 metabolites rose 2.3 and 8.6 times in the 2 groups of patients with higher creatinine clearance levels. The apparent terminal half-life for GLIM remained the same regardless of renal function. The half-lives for both metabolites increased as renal function declined. The mean level of urinary excretion of the metabolites as a percent of dose decreased to 44.4% for patients in the first group, 21.9% for patients in the second group, and 9.3% for patients in the third group. Findings from the multiple-dose study were consistent. Tandemact is contraindicated in severe renal function disorders.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Impaired hepatic function

PIOG  and  GLIM  are  contraindicated  in  patients  with  hepatic  impairment  and  the  proposed  SPC  for Tandemact has a contraindication also.

## -Gender

Three single dose studies consistently showed that female subjects have higher Cmax and AUC values and delayed Tmax results for PIOG. With the exception of Cmax, there was a less evident gender effect on the pharmacokinetic  parameters  for  Total  Active  Compounds.    Part  of  the  higher  Cmax  and  AUC  values observed in female subjects may be due to their lower body weight. The data from studies in diabetic patients appeared  less  consistent  as  to  whether  a  gender  difference  existed  and  suggested  that  a  possible  gender difference may  not be relevant in clinical practice. For GLIM,  after adjusting for body  weight, pharmacokinetic patterns are similar for men and women.

## -Race

There  was  no  formal  study  conducted  on  the  influence  of  ethnicity  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  PIOG. However, the open-label, single-dose, 2-way crossover study on the bioequivalence of three 15 mg tablets compared to one 45 mg tablet included 12 Caucasian male subjects and 11 Black male subjects (PNFP-018). Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of Black and Caucasian subjects in this study gave an indication of existing major ethnic differences in the pharmacokinetics of PIOG. For all pharmacokinetic parameters the 90% confidence intervals include 100%, thus suggesting that there are no major differences in the absorption and  disposition  of  PIOG  between  Black  and  Caucasian  subjects.  In  summary,  considering  the  metabolic pathways of PIOG, major ethnic differences in PIOG pharmacokinetics are not expected. In support of this, the  data  presented  here  did  not  suggest  clinically  relevant  differences  in  the  pharmacokinetic  behavior  of PIOG  based  on  ethnicity.  Although  pharmacokinetic  studies  have  not  been  conducted  to  evaluate  the disposition of GLIM  in  racial ethnic groups, placebo-controlled clinical studies  have  documented comparable  glucose-lowering  effects  in  Caucasians  (n=  536),  Blacks  (n=63),  and  Hispanics  (n=63).  The CHMP agree with the position of the company: there are no SPC comment warranted.

## -Weight

In  individual  paper  by  U.  Shukla  et  al  compared  pharmacokinetic  characteristics  in  patients  with  type  2 diabetes who were morbidly obese and those who had normal weight. Serum concentrations of GLIM and its metabolites were measured in 14 patients of normal weight and 14 obese patients who received a single oral dose  of  GLIM  8  mg  after  an  overnight  fast.  Mean  peak  concentration,  time  to  reach  peak  concentration, AUC, terminal half-life, and relative total clearances were equivalent in the 2 groups. Although morbidly obese patients  excreted  significantly  greater  amounts  of  M1  (p=0.0430)  and  M2  (p=0.0051)  than  normalweight patients, these differences were not considered to be clinically relevant because the metabolites do not have meaningful pharmacologic activity. Differences in PIOG PK between men and women have been partly attributed to differences in weight. However, no specific dose adjustment for weight is required for PIOG and none is considered necessary for Tandemact.

## -Elderly

Two studies were performed to assess possible age-related differences in the pharmacokinetics of PIOG. In comparison with the pharmacokinetic parameters of PIOG and 'Total Active Compounds' obtained with the non-elderly healthy adult subjects, C max  and AUC in elderly Japanese subjects on the 30mg/day treatment were slightly lower, but the other pharmacokinetic parameters did not show any marked differences.  The composition  of  metabolites  in  the  serum  at  steady  state  was  almost  the  same  for  elderly  and  non-elderly healthy volunteers. Adjusting apparent lower urinary excretion rates in the elderly at the 30mg dose for the lower AUC levels in the elderly, there was almost no statistically significant difference between the excretion rates in the non-elderly healthy adult subjects and those in elderly subjects.  Steady state results suggest that PIOG does not accumulate in elderly subjects on repeated dosing. In a US elderly population AUC of PIOG was  increased  by  about  20%  compared  to  non-elderly,  with  a  slightly  lower  clearance.  In  summary,  the Japanese study indicates lower Cmax and AUC values of PIOG in elderly subjects, while the metabolism and excretion  of  PIOG  appears  to  be  similar  to  young  adult  subjects.  The  US  study  indicates  increased  AUC levels of PIOG and Total Active Compounds in elderly subjects as compared to middle-aged subjects, and slower elimination of PIOG in elderly subjects. These apparent contradictory results suggest that, depending on  the  study  population,  minor  differences  in  pharmacokinetics  between  elderly  and  non-elderly  subjects may exist, but the differences are not clinically relevant. Age does not appear to affect the pharmacokinetics

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

of  GLIM.  Prescribing  information  for  GLIM  (2003  USA)  reported  the  results  of  a  study  that  compared pharmacokinetics  in  patients  over  and  under  the  age  of  65  who  received  6  mg  GLIM  daily  for  type  2 diabetes. Pharmacokinetic profiles were similar in the 2 age groups.  The mean AUC at steady state was 13% lower  for  elderly  patients  than  for  younger  patients.  Mean  weight-adjusted  clearance  was  11%  higher  in elderly  patients  than  in  younger  patients.  The  European  SPC  also  states  that  PK  of  GLIM  are  similar  in young patients and in the elderly (over 65 years).

## -Children

Pharmacokinetic data in the paediatric population are not available for PIOG and GLIM but in the opinion of the Committee Tandemact is not intended for use in children and therefore this is satisfactory.

## · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies

Drug interaction studies indicate that PIOG does not induce or inhibit the metabolism of drugs cleared by the P450 system. Further drug interaction studies conducted since 1999 do not indicate a potential interaction between  CYP3A4  substrates  or  a  potent  inhibitor,  ketoconazole.    PIOG  did  not  affect  the  steady  state pharmacokinetics  of  SUs.  Potential  interactions  may  also  occur  with  highly-protein  bound  drugs.  This  is adequately reflected in the SPC.

## Pharmacodynamics

PIOG/GLIM  combines  2  antihyperglycaemic  agents  with  different  mechanisms  of  action  to  improve glycaemic control in patients with T2DM.  No new pharmacodynamic studies were submitted for PIOG not for the FDC. The literature on SUs in general and on GLIM specifically has been summarised and appears adequate. A summary of the two actives pharmacodynamic effects is provided.

PIOG is a thiazolidinedione and a potent and highly selective agonist for the nuclear receptor PPAR γ . PPAR receptors are found in tissues important for insulin action such as adipose tissue, skeletal muscle, and liver. Activation of PPAR γ receptors modulate the transcription of a number of insulin-responsive genes involved in the control of glucose and lipid metabolism. These results in an enhancement of insulin sensitivity, which manifests in reduced hepatic glucose production, increased glucose uptake in muscle, and reduced lipolysis in  adipocytes.  Data  in  humans  to  support  this  mechanism  have  been  done  using  the  euglycaemic  clamp technique and intravenous glucose tolerance tests with application of a minimal model. Studies investigating the pharmacodynamics of PIOG in diabetic subjects have shown that once-daily administration of PIOG at doses  of  15,  30  or  60mg  improved  both  FBG  and  postprandial  blood  glucose  levels,  the  hypoglycaemic effect being maintained throughout the day. This effect appeared within 2 weeks of treatment. The fact that both fasting and postprandial blood glucose profiles are improved by PIOG suggests that PIOG may improve glucose  metabolism  in  diabetic  patients.  Significant  reductions  in  postprandial  insulin  were  seen  in  these studies  but  almost  no  reductions  in  fasting  insulin  were  seen.  This  suggests  that  PIOG  has  no  direct stimulatory effect on the beta cells of the pancreas.

Like other SUs, GLIM stimulates or potentiates the release of insulin. In contrast with glibenclamide, which binds to the 140kDa subunit of the SUR, GLIM binds to the 65kDA subunit of the SUR, and it acts on the ATP-sensitive  potassium  channel  that  resides  in  the  pancreatic  beta-cell  plasma  membrane.  GLIM  also stimulates  extrapancreatic  effects,  as  shown  by  an  increased  sensitivity  of  peripheral  tissues  to  insulin  in animal and clinical studies. In addition, elevated postprandial insulin and C-peptide responses and enhanced glycaemic  control  have  occurred  in  the  absence  of  clinically  relevant  increases  in  fasting  insulin  and  Cpeptide  levels  in  long-term  randomised  and  placebo-controlled  clinical  trials.  Decreases  in  blood  glucose levels are dose dependent, with no difference in response whether administered as a single dose or in divided doses. Pharmacodynamic  effect  is  not  affected  by  age,  ethnicity,  weight,  or  gender.  The  risk  for hypoglycaemia  has  been  lower  for  GLIM  than  for  other  SU.    A  review  of  21  clinical  trials  reported treatment-emergent signs and symptoms for more than 4200 patients who had been treated with GLIM. This review  determined  the  cumulative  incidence  of  signs  and  symptoms  of  hypoglycaemia  for  clinical  trials conducted in the United States and Europe. The cumulative incidence of hypoglycaemia was 13.9% among patients  who  had  been  treated  with  GLIM  and  2.0%  in  patients  who  had  received  a  placebo  in  placebocontrolled United States (US) clinical studies. The incidence was 10.0% for patients who had received GLIM in  comparison  with  16.3%  for  patients  who  had  received  glibenclamide  in  glibenclamide-controlled  US clinical studies.  Pooled data from European clinical studies indicated that the cumulative incidence of signs

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

and symptoms of hypoglycaemia was 3.0% in patients who were treated with GLIM, 2.2% in those who received glibenclamide, and 6.1% in those who were treated with gliclazide. The review paper concluded that the differences in results for the US and European studies may be due to variations in the design and reporting of the findings.

## Clinical efficacy

- Dose response studies

A number of placebo-controlled studies with PIOG as monotherapy have been performed and submitted as part  of  the  1999  MAA.  Figure  1  shows  the  reductions  from  baseline  (placebo  adjusted)  of  glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) in the major dose-ranging study performed (PNFP-001) and throughout the worldwide program of all studies that were 12 weeks or more in duration.

Figure 1. Summary of Glucemic Control Results from the pivotal Placebo-Controlled PIOG Monotherapy Study (PNFP-001, Submitted with 1999 ISE).

<!-- image -->

- A: Change in HbA1c (%) from Baseline to Week 26.
- B:  Placebo adjusted reduction in HbA1c in worldwide phase 2 and 3 programme using PIOG 7.5, 15, 30, and 45 mg.

From these data, a dose-response relationship was found from 15 to 45 mg, the magnitude of the glycaemic response in the range of 0.5% to 2.0% for HbA1c and 1 to 4 mmol/L (20-70 mg/dL) for blood glucose. These improvements in glycaemic control with PIOG in placebo-controlled studies were generally achieved with reductions  in  insulin  and  C-peptide.  Furthermore,  during  dynamic  testing  (oral  glucose  tolerance  tests; OGTT), PIOG was found to reduce  glucose  excursion  following  a  glucose  load  with  minimal  effects  on insulin  levels.  Review  papers  by  R.  Campbell,  M.  Korytkowski,  and  A.  McCall  reviewed  a  placebocontrolled study of 304 patients with type 2 diabetes who received randomised treatment of 1 mg, 4 mg, or 8 mg GLIM. The median change in FPG in comparison with placebo was 43 mg/dL in patients who received 1 mg glimperide, 70 mg/dL in patients who received 4 mg of the drug, and 74 mg/dL in patients who received 8  mg.  Changes  in  HbA1c  were  1.2%,  1.8%,  and  1.9%  for  the  1  mg,  4  mg,  and  8  mg  doses,  respectively. Results of this study indicated a dose response up to 4 mg, and it concluded that the 4 mg dose appears to be nearly  maximally  effective.  The  authors  of  the  study  concluded  that  the  8  mg  dose  might  be  suitable  for patients  who  have  HbA1c  levels  greater  than  8%  (Campbell  1998;  McCall  2001).  A  review  paper  by  R. Perfetti  et  al  reported  that  dose-ranging  clinical  studies  show  that  the  8  mg  dose  of  GLIM  produces  the maximum biologic effect, and the optimal response tends to occur within 3 weeks of the start of treatment. One clinical trial summarised by Perfetti concluded that 69% of patients who had failed nonpharmacologic treatment  for  type  2  diabetes  were  able  to  achieve  an  HbA1c  level  below  7%  when  treated  with  GLIM (Perfetti  2000).  The  dose  response-patterns  shown  by  GLIM  are  similar  to  those  exhibited  by  other  SU drugs. These patterns show that lower doses of sulphonyureas produce the most effect on hyperglycaemia, and that half of the maximum dose of the drugs provides all of the long-term effect on glycaemic control (McCall 2001). There is adequate evidence of dose-response effects for PIOG within the range 15-45mg per

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

day and for GLIM at doses of 1-4mg per day. The maximally effective dose of GLIM is 8mg per day but most of the effect is seen at half the maximal dose. The SPC for GLIM suggests 6mg as the maximum dose but only in exceptional cases.

## · Main studies

No studies of efficacy have been conducted with the FDC. No specific studies of PIOG as add-on to GLIM therapy have been conducted either. The efficacy of the combined use of PIOG with a SU (several agents were in use, among them GLIM) was demonstrated in 3 previously submitted controlled clinical trials: Study PNFP-010, Study PNFP-341 and Study EC409. This led to the expansion of PIOG indications to include an add-on indication to SU when glycaemic control was inadequate with maximal tolerated SU monotherapy and when MET was contraindicated or not tolerated.

Overview of PIOG plus SU combination therapy studies.

| Study    | Duration   | Treatments (a)                               | Patients (ITT)   | Critical Design Features                                          |
|----------|------------|----------------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| EC409    | 104 weeks  | PIOG 15-45 mg + SU MET 850-2550 mg + SU      | 315 313          | Dose-titration (tolerability based) Change from Baseline analysis |
| PNFP-341 | 24 weeks   | PIOG 30 mg + SU PIOG 45 mg + SU              | 351 351          | Fixed dose                                                        |
| PNFP-010 | 16 weeks   | Placebo + SU PIOG 15 mg + SU PIOG 30 mg + SU | 187 184 189      | Fixed dose                                                        |

Source: EC409, Appendix 16.1.9.1, Table 2; PNFP-341, Appendix 15, Table 3.1.R; PNFP-010, Appendix 15, Table

3.1.

(a) In EC410 the comparator drugs were titrated to maximal tolerated dose.

## Study PNFP-010

The objective of this study was to compare administration of placebo, 15 mg and 30 mg of PIOG in patients with T2DM who did not have adequate glycaemic control despite being on a stable SU dosing regimen. The length of the maintenance phase of the study was 16 weeks as suggested in the CHMP Clinical Investigation of Diabetes NfG document. The NfG document also suggests that patients who are included do ' not need any change and/or adjustment in previous medication during the 8 to 12 weeks preceding the study to ensure the maximal effect of the previous medication has been observed' .  Some patients had a one week placebo run-in period in addition to the 30 days on stable SU monotherapy as an inclusion criteria. Of 560 patients randomised,  187  were  in  the  placebo  group,  184  in  the  15  mg  PIOG  group  and  189  in  the  30  mg  PIOG group.  30(16%) patients withdrew in the placebo group, 29 (16%) in the 15 mg PIOG group and 23 (12.2%) in the 30 mg PIOG group.

## Results

There were significant reductions from baseline in HbA1C for both groups where PIOG was given with a SU (-0.82  and  -1.22),  whilst  there  was  a  small  increase  of  0.065  with  placebo.  Treatment  with  either  dose  of PIOG (15 or 30 mg) plus a SU resulted in statistically significant (P ≤ 0.05) mean decreases from Baseline in HbA1c and FPG at each time point throughout the study. The differences in mean HbA1c and FPG between the placebo plus SU and PIOG plus SU groups in mean change from Baseline were statistically significant (P ≤ 0.05) at all time points. The proportion of subject who responded to treatment was substantially higher in both  PIOG  dose  groups  (56.8%  and  74.2%)  than  in  the  placebo  group  (23.8%)  for  HbA1c.  At  Endpoint (Week 16), the difference in LS mean change from Baseline in HbA1c between each dose of PIOG plus SU and placebo plus SU was -0.88% (95% CI; -1.17, -0.58) for the PIOG 15 mg plus SU group and -1.28% (95% CI; -1.57, -0.99) for the PIOG 30 mg plus SU group. For FPG, the difference in LS mean change from Baseline was -2.19 mmol/L (95% CI; -2.86, -1.57) for the PIOG 15 mg plus SU group and -3.21 mmol/L (95% CI; -3.32, -2.55) for the PIOG 30 mg plus SU group.

## Study PNFP-341

The design of this study was similar to study PNFP-010 except for patients on a stable SU treatment regimen being randomised to 30 mg or 45 mg of PIOG, and there being no placebo comparator. In this study, 702

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients  were  randomised,  351  to  each  treatment  group.    84  (23.9%)  patients  in  the  30  mg  PIOG  group withdrew compared to 97 (27.6%) in the 45 mg PIOG group.

## Results

In this study the patients receiving a SU and 30mg PIOG showed a significant reduction from baseline in HbA1C  of  1.55%  compared  with  1.64%  for  patients  receiving  a  SU  and  45mg  PIOG.  At  Week  24,  an incrementally  larger  decrease  in  HbA1c was  seen  with  45mg,  although  the  difference  was  not  statistically significant (LS mean difference: -0.12 [-0.36, 0.12]). The effects observed with PIOG on glycaemic control were supported by the findings on fasting plasma glucose with significant reductions from Baseline to Week 24 observed with both 30 and 45 mg. HbA1c responder rates ( ≥ 0.6% reduction from Baseline or ≤ 6.1% at Endpoint)  fasting  plasma  glucose  responder  rates  (responder: ≥ 30mg/dL  reduction  from  Baseline)  were higher with 45 mg compared with 30 mg PIOG. Lipid profile was improved by both 30 and 45 mg PIOG with reductions observed in triglycerides, VLDL-cholesterol, and FFAs and increases in HDL-cholesterol. Small increases from Baseline of less than 5% in LDL-cholesterol and TC were observed with both the 30 and 45 mg PIOG groups.

## Study EC409

The third study evaluated the benefit of adding either PIOG or MET to treat patients with T2DM who were currently being treated with a SU at 50% maximum or greater of the recommended dose for at least three months.  Eligible patients were randomised to receive PIOG or MET for 104 weeks in addition to their SU therapy.    Patients  were  initially  seen  every  four  weeks  during  a  forced  titration  period  where  the  dose  of study drug was increased at each visit from 15-30mg and then 30-45 mg of PIOG or 850mg od (once a day) to 850mg bd (twice a day) and then from 850mg bd to 850mg three times a day of MET.  A total of 315 and 313 patients were analysed in the PIOG and MET treatment groups, respectively.

## Results

The analysis after 104 weeks of treatment showed a 1.03% reduction in HbA1c levels with PIOG compared to 1.16% on MET which gives a between treatment difference of 0.13% with corresponding 95% confidence interval of -0.06 to 0.31%.  This is very similar to the week 52 results where a 1.2% reduction in HbA1c levels with PIOG compared to 1.36% on MET which gives a between treatment difference of 0.15% with corresponding 95% confidence interval of -0.01 to 0.32%. In the PIOG group, 72% of patients completed 2 years of treatment compared with 78% in the MET group. Adverse events and lack of efficacy accounted for approximately  half  of  the  withdrawals.  After  2  years  treatment  on  top  of  SU,  both  PIOG  and  MET  had achieved a 1% decrease in HbA1c without the addition of any further agents; 1.03% with PIOG and 1.16% with MET. This represents a difference of 0.13% (-0.06, 0.31) between the groups.

These  three  studies  provide  evidence  of  clinically  significant  improvement  in  glycaemic  control  with  the addition of PIOG 15-45mg to SU treatment in a typical T2D population.

- Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis)

A comparison of the three studies which are considered pivotal to support the combination use of PIOG and GLIM is provided in section 2.7.3.3.3 of module 2 and is summarised here.

All studies included both men and women. A summary of the entry criteria for the 4 studies is presented in table below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                             | EC409                                              | PNFP-341                                              | PNFP-010                                          |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Age (yr)                                    | ≥ 35 to ≤ 75                                       | ≥ 18 years                                            | 30 to 75                                          |
| Period on existing antidiabetic medication  | 3 months (maximum tolerated or ≥ 50% maximum dose) | Fixed dose of SU for ≥ 30 days prior to Visit 1       | Fixed dose of SU for ≥ 30 days prior to enrolment |
| Previous antidiabetic medication prohibited | TZD, MET, or insulin (short-term use was allowed)  | TZD or insulin (chronic use within 4 months of study) | Insulin (chronic use within 4 months of study)    |
| BMI (kg/m 2 )                               | ≥ 25 to ≤ 45                                       | ≥ 25 to ≤ 45                                          | 25 to 45                                          |
| HbA 1c (%)                                  | ≥ 7.5% to ≤ 11.0%                                  | ≥ 8.0%                                                | ≥ 8.0%                                            |
| Fasting C-peptide (ng/mL)                   | ≥ 1.5 ng/mL                                        | Not specified                                         | ≥ 1 ng/mL                                         |

Source: EC409 CTR, Sections 9.3.1 and 9.3.2; PNFP-341 CTR, Sections 9.3.1 and 9.3.2; PNFP-010 CTR, Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2.

TZD = thiazolidinedione, SU = SU.

In  general,  demographics  and  baseline  characteristics  were  well  matched  across  the  studies.  Whilst  most patients  (98%)  in  study  EC409  were  Caucasian,  more  non-Caucasian  patients  appeared  in  studies  PNFP341/PNFP-010 (67% and 79%, respectively). Patients in the US studies PNFP-341/PNFP-010 had higher HbA1c  and  FPG  compared  to  EC409.  No  formal  meta-analysis  of  the  data  from  the  3  studies  has  been performed  since  the  data  have  all  been  submitted  previously  and  the  studies  are  different  in  design  with respect  to  objectives  and  duration  of  treatment  such  that  'grouping'  of  data  is  not  appropriate.  For  all  3 studies the primary efficacy measure was the change in HbA1c from Baseline to last value. These data  show that  doses  of  30  and  45 mg  PIOG are effective in improving glycaemia when concomitantly administered with SU. The data also suggest that peak effect may not be seen until 6 months treatment as in PNFP-341 and that these effects are maintained to 2 years as observed in EC409. In all studies, glycaemic control was further improved following addition of PIOG to SU therapy, at doses up to 45 mg daily. PNFP-010 was a short placebo-controlled study, which showed the benefit of adding 30 mg PIOG with an absolute decrease from Baseline in HbA1c at 16 weeks of 1.22% compared with an absolute increase in placebo of 0.06%. In study  PNFP-341,  both  30  and  45  mg  showed  significant  absolute  decreases  from  Baseline  in  HbA1c  of 1.55% and 1.64%, respectively, after 24 weeks treatment. This level of improvement was similarly found in study EC409, which compared the addition of PIOG with that of MET to an established SU regimen. PIOG plus SU and MET plus SU treatments resulted in absolute mean adjusted decreases from Baseline in HbA1c of  1.22%  and  1.39%,  respectively  (treatment-group  difference  is  not  statistically  significant  [95%  CI  on mean difference:  -0.06,0.31]).  Decreases  in  fasting  plasma  glucose  ranged  from  approximately  1.9  to  2.9 mmol/L in PIOG groups and were found to be statistically significantly greater than those observed with placebo after 16 weeks (2.88 mmol/L) and MET after 2 years (2.0 mmol/L). Glycaemic responder rates are summarised in table below. The responders were defined different in study EC409 and different in studies PNFP-341 &amp; PNFP-010 (EC409: reduction in HbA1c of greater than 0.6%; PNFP-341 &amp; PNFP-010: HbA1c responder was any patient whose HbA1c reduced to less than or equal to 6.1% or decreased from Baseline by greater than or equal to 0.6%).

HbA1c and FPG Responder Rates to PIOG as Combination Therapy with Existing SU Treatment

|                           | EC409 (a)   | EC409 (a)   | PNFP-341 (b)   | PNFP-341 (b)   | PNFP-010 (b)   | PNFP-010 (b)   |
|---------------------------|-------------|-------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
|                           | Pio+SU      | Met+SU      | 30mg+SU        | 45mg+SU        | Pbo+SU         | 30mg+SU        |
| HbA 1c responder rate (%) | 64.1        | 70.3        | 77.4           | 79.5           | 23.8           | 74.2           |

Pio=PIOG, SU=SU, Met=MET, 30 mg=30 mg PIOG, 45 mg=45 mg PIOG, Pbo=placebo. (a) HbA1c responders were classified as patients with a decrease from Baseline of &gt;0.6%. (b) HbA 1c ≤ 6.1% or HbA1c decreased from Baseline by ≥ 0.6%.

Responder rates demonstrate that PIOG, as combination therapy with SU, effectively improved glycaemic control  in  at  least  64%  of  patients  treated  and  that  the  proportion  of  patients  that  respond  to  therapy  is comparable to that seen with the commonly used combination of MET and SU. In order to qualify for entry to these studies, patients had to be on a stable dose of a SU agent and in the case of study EC409, the dose had to be at least  50% of the maximum dose for that agent or at the maximum tolerated dose. Improved glycaemic  control  was  evident  with  doses  of  PIOG  from  15  to  45mg  added  to  a  SU  and  efficacy  was

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

maintained for 2 years as shown in study EC409. The PIOG indications were varied in 2004 on the basis of these studies. As no new studies have been conducted with PIOG and GLIM or other SU, there does not seem to be any basis to support further widening of the population for whom PIOG could be prescribed.

## · Clinical studies in special populations

A pediatric development program for this medicinal product is not proposed and this is acceptable, given the proposed indication, which is primarily a condition of adults.

## · Supportive studies

Studies of PIOG as monotherapy are considered as supportive in the context of this application. In 1-year studies,  PIOG  improved  glycaemic  control  similarly  to  MET  and  gliclazide.  Furthermore,  PIOG  showed additional benefits on a number of secondary endpoints in these studies such as reductions in plasma insulin, improvements  in  insulin  sensitivity  and  response  to  a  glucose  load,  improvements  in  lipid  profile,  and established cardiovascular risk markers. In general, these improvements were found to be at least as good or better than those observed with MET or gliclazide. PIOG showed good maintenance of effect up to 1 year reaching a maximum HbA1c reduction by Week 32 and increasing from the nadir by less than 0.2% in studies EC404  and  EC405.  This  was  also  the  case  with  MET;  however,  gliclazide  reached  maximum  HbA1c reduction by Week 24 and by Week 52, HbA1c had increased from the nadir by 0.41% indicating a loss of glycaemic control. FPG was also well maintained with PIOG and MET where maximum response was seen by  Week  24  and  increased  very  little  thereafter;  0.3  mmol/L  for  PIOG  and  0.4  mmol/L  for  MET.  With gliclazide,  maximum  reduction  in  FPG  was  seen  at  Week  16  and  increased  thereafter  by  1.0  mmol/L  to Week 52. The results of the supportive PIOG studies are concordant with the pivotal studies and support the use of PIOG at doses of 15-45 mg daily, titrated according to response, in the treatment of type 2 diabetes.

An individual paper by G. Scholz et al summarised the results of a study with 22,045 patients with type 2 diabetes  for  whom  GLIM  would  be  administered  as  first-line  therapy  (either  no  previous  treatment  or treatment with diet alone) or second-line therapy (previous treatment with another antihyperglycaemic drug, oral or insulin) with GLIM added to or replacing the current antihyperglycaemia therapy. The study involved 22,045 patients with type 2 diabetes and had an 8-week treatment period. Patients received an initial dose of 1.6 mg GLIM. The dose was increased to a mean of 2.2 mg over the period of the study. In patients who were treated initially with GLIM, HbA1c levels declined by a mean of 1.8%. The absolute mean reduction in HbA1c levels was 1.3% in patients whose therapy was changed to GLIM. The reduction in HbA1c levels was greater  in  patients  who  were  treated  with  GLIM  exclusively.  The  decline  was  1.5%  in  these  patients compared with 1.3% in patients who  had received GLIM  as add-on therapy to a pre-existing antihyperglycaemic regimen (Scholz 2001).

## · Discussion on clinical efficacy

This  application  was  for  a  FDC,  containing  two  authorized  ingredients,  pioglitazone  hydrochloride  and GLIM  in  two  strengths:  30mg/4mg  and  45mg/4mg  tablets  (initially  for  three  strengths  including  also 30mg/2mg  but  this  strength  was  withdrawn  from  the  application  by  MAH).  Four  clinical  pharmacology studies were submitted with this application. These bioequivalence studies were completed to demonstrate that  3  initially  proposed  doses  of  the  FDC  are  bioequivalent  to  the  concomitantly  administered  individual tablets. Bioequivalence of the 30 mg/4 mg and 45 mg/4 mg doses were proven however the applicant failed to  demonstrate  the  bioequivalence  of  the  30mg/2mg  tablet  and  withdrawn  it  from  the  application.  The bioequivalence studies served to bridge the clinical safety and efficacy data for PIOG and GLIM to the FDC tablet. No studies of efficacy have been conducted with the FDC. No studies with PIOG as add-on to GLIM therapy  have  been  conducted  either.  Patients  should  be  switched  to  a  FDC  only  after  the  dosage  of monotherapy has been optimized.  The  indications  for  Tandemact  were  modified  as  to  reflect  the  need  to titrate  patients  with  optimal doses of individual components of the combination before switching to FDC. Tandemact is indicated for the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who show intolerance to metformin  or  for  whom  metformin  is  contraindicated  and  who  are  already  treated  with  a  combination  of pioglitazone and glimepiride. No scientific advice has been given in relation to this application.

## Clinical safety

The  safety  data  from  the  healthy  subjects  in  the  phase  I  studies  referred  to  above  were  not  designed  to characterise the adverse event profile for the combination product.  The applicant utilises the data from the 3 previously  submitted  controlled  clinical  trials  (Studies  PNFP-010,  PNFP-341,  and  EC409),  even  though

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

these  are  based  on  the  co-administration  of  the  individual  constituents.    The  applicant  has  also  submitted safety  data  for  PIOG  and  GLIM  when  used  as  monotherapy,  safety  data  based  on  literature  review  and postmarketing safety information for PIOG.

## · Patient exposure

## PIOG

A total of 3211 patients were randomly assigned to treatment and received at least 1 dose of study drug in 6 PIOG  monotherapy  studies  (EC404,  EC405,  GLAB,  GLAE,  ATS-K001,  EC415).  Of  this  total,  1653 received PIOG. In studies EC404, EC405, GLAB, and GLAE a high percentage of patients receiving either treatment completed the studies (between 84% and 97% of patients who received PIOG and between 84% and 92% of patients receiving the comparator agent). Fewer patients in either treatment group completed the ATS-K001 and EC415 studies. In study ATS-K001, 76% of patients receiving PIOG compared to 58% of patients receiving acarbose and in EC415, 54% of patients receiving PIOG and 43% of patients receiving gliclazide completed the protocols. The demographics within each study were typical for a type 2 diabetic population. The PIOG monotherapy study populations reported a high proportion of concomitant cardiac and vascular disease and taking anti-hypertensive and cardiac medication. High incidences of vascular disorders (mainly hypertension), other metabolic and nutritional disorders, cardiac disorders, and eye disorders were reported  in  each  of  the  PIOG  monotherapy  studies.  As  is  usual  in  a  relatively  elderly  population, musculoskeletal disorders (mainly arthritis) were also commonly noted as concomitant diseases.

## PIOG Plus SU Combination Therapy

A total  of  1,901  patients  were  enrolled  in  the  studies.  Of  this  total,  1,394  received  PIOG  as  combination therapy  with  SU.  The  remaining  patients  received  SU  plus  a  comparator  agent  (either MET  or  placebo). More  than  70%  of  PIOG  patients  included  in  EC409  completed  2  years  of  treatment.  The  duration  of treatment ranged from 16 to 104 weeks in the combination therapy studies. Dosing regimen for PIOG was 30 or 45 mg once daily (od), with the exception of the first portion of EC409, which had a forced dose-titration period during which subjects could initiate treatment at 15 mg.

## GLIM

A review paper by McCall has reviewed clinical trial data in over 5000 patients in the United States and Europe, 3500 of whom received GLIM in doses ranging from 1 to 32 mg per day over 2 weeks to more than 2 years.

## · Adverse events/Serious adverse events

## PIOG

Over  2  years  of  treatment,  PIOG  treatment  is  associated  with  a  similar  incidence  of  AEs  to  other  oral hypoglycaemic agents. Withdrawals due to AEs, SAEs and fatal SAEs also showed similar incidences with PIOG  treatment  and  treatment  with  other  oral  hypoglycaemic  agents.  Analysis  of  the  most  commonly reported  AEs  showed  some  variation  between  different  trials  as  would  be  expected.  Across  all  the  trials, however, the only AEs which were consistently reported at higher rates with PIOG compared to non-PIOG treatment were oedema and weight increase. These are known effects of PPAR γ agonists and are detailed in the SPC. The absolute incidence of reports of oedema varies a little between trials but overall incidence of oedema is about two to three times greater than that reported for other oral hypoglycaemic agents. In active comparator groups, gastrointestinal AEs were reported more often with MET than PIOG. The reporting rates of  SAEs  were  similar  for  PIOG  treated  patients  and  non-PIOG  treated  patients.  Overall,  there  were  no particular  groupings  of  SAEs  suggesting  any  risk  of  PIOG  treatment.  Deaths  reported  during  the  PIOG studies  were  slightly  lower  in  PIOG  groups  than  other  treatment  groups.  As  attention  has  focused  on cardiovascular  safety  of  PIOG  in  assessment  of  Actos  over  the  past  few  years,  a  summary  of  this  issue, oedema and weight gain is provided here.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Cardiovascular

Results from short-term placebo-controlled clinical trials showed no evidence of any negative effects on the cardiovascular system with PIOG treatment. Echocardiographic studies show no changes on cardiac structure or  function  during  long-term  PIOG  therapy.  In  active  and  placebo  comparator  trials  with  treatment  for  1 year,  reporting  rates  of  cardiac  AEs  were  similar  between  PIOG-treated  patients  and  non-PIOG-treated patients.  After  2  years  of  PIOG  treatment,  more  patients  receiving  PIOG  reported  cardiac-related  AEs compared  to  patients  receiving  active  comparator  (6.3%  versus  2.7%).  While  this  data  may  suggest  an increased  risk  for  cardiac-related  AEs  with  long-term  PIOG,  it  is  worth  noting  that  more  PIOG-treated patients were receiving medications for cardiac therapy at study entry than were gliclazide-treated patients (13.0% versus 9.4%; CTR, page 39 of 68) and that serious cardiac disorders were reported in three patients (approximately  1%)  in  each  treatment  group  (CTR,  Section  12.3.3,  page  58  of  68).  Furthermore, cardiovascular mortality (as the most objective outcome) was less in PIOG than non-PIOG-treated patients, irrespective  of  treatment  duration.  Reporting  rates  for  episodes  of  heart  failure  in  the  placebo  and  active comparator  controlled  trials  showed  no  excess  in  PIOG  groups  compared  to  non-PIOG  groups.  PIOG treatment  showed  a  tendency  to  reduce  blood  pressure  although  changes  were  only  minor.  Importantly, however, there was no evidence of any effect of PIOG to increase blood pressure. If some fluid retention does occur with PIOG treatment, it certainly does not result in a secondary effect on blood pressure. In the absence  of  this,  the  company  considers  any  negative  effects  of  possible  fluid  retention  on  cardiovascular physiology very unlikely.

## -Oedema

Oedema occurs with PIOG treatment in 6% to 8% of patients treated over 1 year, with slightly higher rates reported over 2 years of treatment (11%). In by far the majority of AE reports, such oedema was reported as mild or moderate and only very rarely caused withdrawal of treatment with PIOG. In the long-term EC415 study, 1 patient (0.4%, peripheral oedema) receiving PIOG and 1 patient receiving gliclazide (0.3%, oedema NOS) discontinued study drug dosing because of an oedema event. Although reporting of oedema occurred more frequently during the first few months of treatment, it was also reported later during treatment. With continued treatment in some cases oedema resolved. Oedema was not associated with development of heart failure.

## -Weight Gain

After 2 years of treatment in EC415, weight gain was reported as an AE at a slightly higher incidence rate than observed in the short-term monotherapy (7.8% with PIOG and 3.0% with gliclazide in the long-term EC415 study). Consistent with the short-term studies was the relatively low rate of study discontinuation because of weight gain (2.2% with PIOG and 0.3% with gliclazide). Absolute mean weight change increased throughout the  PIOG dosing period, reaching a maximum mean (SD) of 4.34 kg (6.11 kg) at Week 104. Among patients receiving gliclazide,  mean  (SD) weight change peaked at 2.13 kg (5.30 kg) at Week 52; thereafter mean weight change decreased at Week 65 before slowly increasing, reaching a final mean value of 2.06 kg (5.47 kg) at Week 104.

## PIO + SU

The combination of PIOG and SU was well tolerated both in short-term studies up to 6 months and in the longer-term study where the incidences of AEs, SAEs, withdrawals due to AEs, and deaths were similar to the  combination  of  SU  and  MET.  Analysis  of  the  most  commonly  reported  AEs  showed  some  variation between  different  trials,  as  would  be  expected.  Across  all  the  trials,  however,  the  only  AEs  which  were consistently reported at higher rates with PIOG compared to nonPIOG treatment were oedema and weight increase. These are known effects of PPAR γ agonists and are detailed in the SPC.

## -Cardiovascular

Reporting rates for episodes of heart failure in the placebo and active comparator controlled trials showed no excess  in  PIOG  groups  compared  to  non-PIOG  groups.  However,  in  study  PNFP-341  there  was  a  small difference in cardiac AE incidence between the two doses of PIOG. This is likely attributed to the higher incidence of congestive heart failure 1.7% vs 0.3%, angina pectoris 0.6% vs 0%, unstable angina 0.3% vs 0%,  and  palpitations  0.9%  vs  0.3%,  in  the  45  mg  PIOG  group  compared  to  the  30  mg  PIOG  group, respectively.

- -Oedema

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The absolute incidence of reports of oedema varies a little between trials. In the 2-year EC409 study, the incidence of oedema for PIOG-treated patients was 10.7% vs. 2.8% for MET-treated patients. Furthermore, there appeared to be a dose-dependent increase in the incidence of oedema in the PNFP-341 study (9.1% in the 30mg dose group vs 13.4% in the 45mg dose group).

## -Weight Gain

Weight increase was reported as an AE for PIOG when added to SU in 4.4% of patients compared to 0.6% with MET in EC409. After 2 years, in EC409, weight had further increased in PIOG groups, but the rate of weight  gain  was  slower  during  a  second  year  of  treatment.  At  the  end  of  2 years,  PIOG-treated  patients gained on average 3.7 kg in comparison to a mean decrease of 1.7 kg with MET. The incidence of weight gain was slightly higher when PIOG 30 mg was added to SU in study PNFP-010 compared to EC409; this may be a result of the shorter treatment duration in study PNFP-010. Weight gain was noted more often in the PIOG plus SU groups in PNFP-341 compared to either PIOG 30 mg plus SU groups in studies EC409 and PNFP-010, with the highest rates for the PIOG 45 mg plus SU group in PNFP-341. Overall, 5 PIOGtreated patients discontinued study drug dosing because of weight gain recorded as an AE: 4 patients in each treatment group in PNFP-341 and 1 patient in the PIOG plus SU group in EC409.

## -Hypoglycaemia

Hypoglycaemia was reported at approximately similar rates between treatment groups, suggesting that the addition of PIOG to SU does not pose any greater risk of hypoglycaemia than the addition of MET to SU. Data from the 24-week PNFP-341 suggests that there may be a PIOG dose-dependent effect associated with hypoglycaemia. However, few patients in any PIOG treatment group discontinued from any of the PIOG plus  SU  combination  therapy  studies  because  of  hypoglycaemia  and  the  rates  for  discontinuation  for hypoglycaemia were generally similar between treatment groups within studies. For example, in the longterm  EC409  study,  1  patient  in  each  treatment  group  discontinued  study  drug  dosing  because  of hypoglycaemia over the 2-year treatment period.

In conclusion dose related increases in weight and in peripheral oedema have been seen in the PIOG and SU combination studies. The average weight gain on PIOG plus SU for 2 years was 3.1±4.70kg while patients on  MET  plus  SU  lost  on  average  1.6±4.56kg  during  the  same  study.  Hypoglycaemia  occurred  more frequently  in  the  MET/SU  group  than  in  the  PIOG/SU  group  in  study  EC409,  15.6  vs  11.3  %.  The PROactive study has been recently published by Dormandy et al and provides further safety data on the use of PIOG as add-on therapy to SU or other hypoglycaemic agents. This was a randomised controlled trial in 5238 patients with T2D and evidence of macrovascular disease where PIO was added to baseline therapy and gradually titrated from 15 to 45 mg daily. The average time of observation was 34.5months. While overall PIOG was associated with a reduction in the composite endpoint of all-cause mortality, non-fatal MI and stroke, there was a significant increased risk of heart failure versus placebo. There was no increased risk of fatal heart failure.

## GLIM

In an analysis of pooled data from these trials, the incidence of AEs was similar or lower for GLIM than for the other drugs. In controlled trials in the United States, the most common AEs were dizziness, asthaenia, headache, and nausea, which occurred at the rates of 1.7%, 1.6%, 1.5%, and 1.1%, respectively. A paper by Schneider  reviewed  treatment-emergent  signs  and  symptoms  in  21  placebo-  and  active-controlled  clinical trials of GLIM given for more than 2 weeks in the United States, Europe, and Japan. A total of 6500 patients participated  in  the  trials;  more  than  4200  received  GLIM;  and  1500  were  treated  for  more  than  1  year. Controlled clinical trials in the United States included 2013 patients who received GLIM; studies in Europe included 1489 patients, and trials in Japan included 718 patients who took GLIM. The most common AEs were  upper  respiratory  infection,  headache,  accidental  injury,  flulike  syndrome,  and  sinusitis.  Treatmentrelated signs and symptoms occurred in less than 2% of patients. Dizziness, headache, asthaenia, and nausea occurred in more than 1% of patients. Although hypoglycaemia is more common in patients receiving GLIM than placebo, the incidence of this AE is lower with this second-generation SU than with first-generation drugs in this class. The cumulative incidence of hypoglycaemia summarised in a review paper by McCall was 13.9% in patients receiving GLIM and 2.0% in those taking a placebo. The incidence of hypoglycaemia was 10.0% among patients taking GLIM and 16.3% in those receiving glibenclamide in 1 comparative trial. The cumulative incidence of hypoglycaemia for GLIM was similar to that of glipizide, 21.2% and 20.6%, respectively. Hypoglycaemia indicated by serum glucose levels below 60 mg/dL occurred in 0.9% to 1.7% of patients in two 1-year clinical trials. There is a substantial body of literature on GLIM and the applicant has provided critical review papers on this. It is well-tolerated and hypoglycaemia occurs with a similar or

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

perhaps  lower  incidence  than  with  other  SUs.  The  incidence  of  laboratory-confirmed  hypoglycaemia  is consistently &lt;1.7% in clinical trial. The risk of cardiovascular events during GLIM treatment was similar to that seen with other SUs. In addition, there is no weight gain and possibly some weight loss associated with its use unlike with some other drugs in this class. Therefore, the choice of GLIM as a SU to combine with PIOG seems justified from a safety perspective.

## · Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events

Deaths  reported  with  PIOG  in  combination  with  SU  are  comparable  in  number  and  aetiology  with  those observed  with  MET  in  combination  with  SU.  A  slightly  higher  rate  of  SAEs  was  reported  for  45  mg compared to  30  mg  PIOG  when  added  to  SU,  and  it  appears  that  events  related  to  cardiac  function  may account for the higher rate seen in the 45 mg group. However, this higher rate may be an artifact of the study design, which stipulated a fixed-dose regimen rather than titration to tolerability. Over treatment periods of up to 2 years, overall discontinuation rates due to AEs with PIOG and SU combination were low and similar to that for MET  and  SU  combination.  Gastrointestinal AEs  were  the most common  causes  for discontinuation irrespective of treatment group.

## · Laboratory findings

Small  dose-related  decreases  in  mean  haemoglobin  and  haematocrit  levels  were  observed  in  short-term studies with PIOG and SU. They were still evident after 2 years of treatment but had not increased. With MET plus SU, mean levels of these variables also decreased but the decreases were slightly less.When added to  SU,  mean  levels  of  liver  enzymes  showed  a  consistent  decrease  with  PIOG  treatment,  whereas  the decreases  noted  with  MET  were  not  consistent  and/or  smaller  than  that  noted  with  PIOG.  Analyses  of changes  in  individual  patients  showed  no  excess  of  PIOG  patients  with  changes  to  &gt;3x  ULN  of  liver enzymes  compared  with  MET.  LDH  and  CPK  showed  increases  in  mean  levels  from  baseline  to  end  of treatment with PIOG plus SU. Analyses of individual patient changes to &gt;3x ULN and &gt;10x ULN in LDH or CPK in EC409 showed no difference in numbers between PIOG- and MET-treated patients. No negative effects  of  PIOG  on  variables  reflecting  renal  function  were  found.  Dose-related  decreases  in  mean haemoglobin and haematocrit levels are known to occur and this is reflected in section 4.4 of the SPC.

## · Safety in special populations

There  were  only  small  numbers  of  non-Caucasian  patients  recruited  into  the  PIOG  studies,  and  no differences in the AE profiles between Caucasian and non-Caucasian subjects were apparent. Considering results from PIOG and nonPIOG treatment groups in the combination therapy studies PNFP-010, PNFP-341, and EC409, no important differences in safety profiles dependent on gender, age, or race were identified. Rates of report of weight increase as an AE appeared to increase with increasing BMI, but other AEs showed no dependency on this variable. No extrinsic factors were found to affect the safety profile of PIOG other than the continent in which trials were performed. In US trials, weight increase was consistently greater than weight changes seen in European trials. This is probably a result of differences in diet, social class of the subjects  in  the  trial,  and  also  dietary  advice.  In  US  trials,  patients  received  less  dietary  advice  than  in European trials, and as is usual in US studies, a large proportion of the participants were patients without medical insurance. In the opinion of CHMP no SPC comments are needed.

## · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions

A large number of formal pharmacokinetic interaction studies have been undertaken with PIOG, including a SU interaction study, which is described in detail in Section 2.7.2. Although some influence of some drugs on PIOG pharmacokinetic variables were occasionally reported, none was considered clinically relevant, and no  warnings  concerning  dosage  adjustments  are  considered  necessary.  No  relevant  pharmacodynamic interactions  between  PIOG  and  other  drugs  were  noted  in  these  studies.  A  large  number  of  concomitant medications were given to patients taking part in the clinical trials. No individual drugs or classes of drugs were identified to have any influence on the reported safety profile, and no interactions were reported.

## · Post marketing experience

It  is  estimated  that  since  the  first  launch  in  the  US  in  July  1999  until  31  January  2005,  PIOG  has  been cumulatively prescribed to a total of 5,442,000 patients in the U.S. since launch of the product in July 1999, 724,000  patients  in  Japan  since  introduction  of  the  product  in  December  1999  and  470,000  patients  in Europe since introduction of the product in November 2000. This represents an estimated total of 2,929,000 patient years of treatment in the U.S., 962,000 patient years in Japan and 580,000 patient years in Europe. In other areas (Canada, South America, African continent, etc.), where patient exposure is estimated, PIOG has been prescribed to a total of 261,000 patients (487,000 patient years). For the United States, the estimate of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  number  of  patients  being  treated  with  PIOG  was  obtained  from  sales  data  and  use  of  a  patient prescription database. In Japan, the estimate of the number of patients being treated with PIOG was obtained using a patient prescription database and patient years were calculated with the quantity of tablets shipped. In Europe, patient exposure was estimated from data on the number of prescriptions written and/or packs sold and  distributed  as  samples  (different  methods  being  used  in  different  countries).  The  use  of  PIOG  as monotherapy and with different combinations was estimated based on data from a prescription database in the  United  States  and  the  postmarketing  investigation  database  in  Japan.  In  the  United  States,  the  most frequent use appeared to be as monotherapy. In Japan, PIOG was most often prescribed in combination with SUs. PIOG is not indicated in Japan for use with MET or insulin. The following sections firstly summarise the post-marketing data as presented in the ISS in 2002 and then the cumulatively reported events up to 31 January  2005  as  presented  in  the  6th  to  11th  Periodic  Safety  Update  Report  (PSUR).  The  full  extensive reports  are  included  in  Module  5  of  this  submission.  Case  narratives  of  all  deaths  are  appended  to  this section,  other  non-fatal  case  narratives  are  located  in  the  individual  PSURs  and  the  ISS.  In  addition  to routine safety surveillance performed within the company, a pharmacovigilance plan including a number of special studies and investigations to confirm the safety of PIOG regarding malignancy has been compiled and submitted to Regulatory Agencies for approval. The company has also agreed with regulators a series of preclinical  studies  to  further  investigate  mechanisms  of  bladder  cancer  seen  in  male  rats  in  long-term carcinogenicity  studies.  In  addition,  a  pharmacovigilance  plan  consisting  of  both  clinical  studies  and epidemiological studies to assess effects of PIOG on incidence of bladder cancer in humans has also been initiated. There is an accumulating literature (mainly from animal studies) to suggest that PPAR agonists as a class have effects on development of neoplasia in a number of tissues, however an exact role has not yet been defined.  Although  it  is  the  position  of  the  company  that  the  weight  of  evidence  currently  suggests  a protective role, at the request of regulators the pharmacovigilance plan has been revised now also to include a  series  of  studies  designed  to  identify  and  then  to  clarify  any  signals  of  effects  of PIOG on incidence of malignancies other than bladder cancer.

## PIOG and SU Combination Therapy

As outlined above, on the market, about 31% and up to 66% of PIOG therapy is in free combination with a SU  in  the  US  and  Japan,  respectively,  and  only  about  30%  are  as  monotherapy.  From  the  spontaneous reports from the market and as observed in the clinical trials with combination therapy as outlined in detail in this ISS, there appears to be no major difference in the ADR profile. From the adverse event profiles of SUs, it  could  be  expected  to  see  a  higher  incidence  of  hypoglycaemia  when  PIOG  is  added  to  the  therapy; however, in the clinical trials as described in this ISS and from the spontaneous reports from the market, the combination  therapy  appears  not  to  yield  a  shift  of  the  ADR  profile.  There  is  currently  no  marketing authorisation for the fixed combination product and thus no postmarketing experience available yet.

Review of postmarketing data from the use of PIOG, as monotherapy or in free combination with SU, has not resulted in any new safety concern other than those listed or under ongoing review for PIOG. Specific data on use of PIOG with GLIM has not been provided and this is considered acceptable.

## · Discussion on clinical safety

The assessment of the safety of PIOG/GLIM relies on the more recent clinical studies conducted to support the authorisation of PIOG and to amend the product information since 1999, literature review of the clinical safety of GLIM and post-marketing safety data from use of PIOG. Limited safety data is also available from the four phase 1 studies conducted with the FDC.  In the phase 1 program, 133 healthy adults each received at least one dose of one of the three combination products.  There were no clinically surprising events across these 4 studies - most events being mild in intensity, resolving without the need for treatment - dizziness and headache  being  the  most  frequent  and  of  similar  incidence  between  the  combination  products  and  the commercially available individual tablets. For what its worth there were no deaths, SAEs or other unusual occurrences  amongst  these  volunteers  and  similarly  there  were  no  clinically  meaningful  treatment-related effects on temperature, blood pressure, pulse, laboratory tests or ECGs, nor were there any abnormal findings on physical examination. There is a substantial body of literature on GLIM and the applicant has provided critical review papers on this. It is well-tolerated and hypoglycaemia occurs with a similar or perhaps lower incidence than with other SUs. The incidence of laboratory-confirmed hypoglycaemia is consistently &lt;1.7% in clinical trial. The risk of cardiovascular events during GLIM treatment was similar to that seen with other SUs. In addition, there is no weight gain and possibly some weight loss associated with its use unlike with some other drugs in this class. Therefore, the choice of GLIM as a SU to combine with PIOG seems justified from a safety perspective.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The combination of PIOG and SU was well-tolerated both in short-term studies up to 6 months and in the long-term  study  of  104  weeks'  duration,  where  the  incidence  of  AEs,  SAE,  withdrawals  due  to  AEs  and deaths was similar to the combination of SU and MET. Weight gain and oedema occurred with a similar frequency to that seen with PIOG monotherapy. Hypoglycaemia was seen more frequently with the MET and  SU  combination  that  with  PIOG  and  SU.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  potential  for  increased  risk  of hypoglycaemia with the FDC as the minimum dose of PIOG is 30mg. In order to minimise this risk, it should be clearly stated in the SPC that patients should be titrated with the individual components before switching to the FDC.

Postmarketing data do not indicate any new safety concerns for PIOG in free combination with SU. While there is no safety data with the FDC in diabetic subjects, this is justified on the basis that the safety of PIOG  and  SU  in  combination  is  established.    Further  reassurance  on  the  safety  of  PIOG  and  GLIM  at maximum dose was requested with specific data to be presented from the three PIOG/SU studies. This has been provided and no new concerns arise.

## 5. Pharmacovigilance

## Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system

The  CHMP  considered  that  the  detailed  description  of  the  PhV  system  should  be  supplemented  with additional required information in particular on the organisational aspects, procedures and database as per the Draft Guideline on monitoring of compliance with pharmacovigilance regulatory obligations on pharmacoviginance inspections. The applicant committed to provide the supplementary information as part of follow-up measures.

## Risk Management Plan

## The MAA submitted a risk management plan

The MAA submitted a risk management plan in accordance with Guideline EMEA/CHMP/96268/2005. This addressed the known safety profile of PIOG and GLIM and the safety aspects of the combined use of PIOG and SUs. There is very limited data on the use of the 2 components concomitantly or the FDC. The issues in relation to PIOG have previously been assessed. The following is a summary of the RMP.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Summary of the Risk Management Plan

| Safety concern                  | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Proposed / established risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Hepatic dysfunction             | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs 2. Annual review and report on Hepato-biliary events. 3. Results from completed hepatic safety study (01- 00-TL-OPI-506) in PIOG 4. Trend analysis on frequency of reporting.                   | Contraindication for use in hepatic impairment in section 4.3 of the SPC. Precautions and recommendations for assessing ALT levels in section 4.4 of the SPC. Elevated hepatic function tests and hepatocellular dysfunction in section 4.8 |
| Heart failure                   | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs 2. Analysis from ongoing clinical trials 3. Final analysis of PROactive long-term trial.                                                                                                        | Contraindication in section 4.3 of the SPC Precautions and recommendations in section 4.4 of the SPC. .                                                                                                                                     |
| Weight gain / peripheral oedema | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs 2. Resultsfrom PROactive study 3. Analysis from ongoing clinical trials 4. PIOG clinical trial to investigate mechanisms 5. Review of ADR reports to assess compliance with SPC recommendations | Precautions and recommendations in section 4.4 of the SPC                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Neoplasia                       | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs 2. Analysis from ongoing clinical trials 3. Final study report from PROactive study and long term follow up. 4. Analyses from KPNC cohort study 5. Non-clinical study in male rats              | Statement of finding of bladder hyperplasia / neoplasia in rats in section 5.3 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                  |
| Macular oedema                  | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs. 2. PIOG clinical trial to investigate mechanisms                                                                                                                                               | Section 4.4 and 4.8 of the SmPC and the Package Leaflet to be updated to reflect finding (pending review in progress).                                                                                                                      |
| Hypersensitisation,             | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Contraindication in section 4.3 of the SPC for hypersensitivity to GLIM or other SU Hypersensitivity reactions described in section 4.8                                                                                                     |
| Blood dyscrasias,               | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Precautions and recommendations for regular haematological monitoring in section 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                    |
| Hypoglycaemia                   | 1. Routine pharmacovigilance including review in PSURs                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Precautions and recommendations for monitoring in section 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                           |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the application, is of the opinion that no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information.

## 6. Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation

## Quality

The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. At the time of the CHMP opinion, there were a number of minor unresolved quality issues without impact on the clinical efficacy or safety of the product, therefore the applicant made a commitment to resolve these as post-opinion follow-up measures.

## Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology

No new non-clinical  studies  were  conducted  with  the  fixed  formulation  compound.  In  view  of  the length  and  extent  of  clinical  experience  obtained  with  co-administration  of  commercially  available PIOG and GLIM, the CHMP considered the absence of animal studies cited under indents 4.2.1 to 4.2.3 (a to f) inclusive of Annex I to Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended, justified. The carcinogenic potential of PPAR agonists in general is of significant concern to regulators. Both PIOG and GLIM display  PPAR γ agonist  activity.  Due  to  the  high  protein  binding  of  both  PIOG  (&gt;98%)  and  GLIM (&gt;99% in all species tested and &gt;99.5% in humans) the applicant committed to evaluate the potential of the individual compounds to influence the individual free fractions and in the presence of such an interaction  between  PIOG  and  GLIM  on  the  protein  binding  profile,  to  recalculate  of  the  safety margins in relation to carcinogenic potential for both GLIM and PIOG based on plasma concentrations (AUCs) of the  free  fraction  in  relation  to  the  proposed  dosage  regimens.  The  data  related  to  these concerns will be provided as part of the follow up measures.

## Efficacy

This application was for a fixed dose combination, containing two authorized ingredients, pioglitazone hydrochloride and glimepiride in two strengths: 30mg/4mg and 45mg/4mg tablets (initially for three strengths including also 30mg/2mg but this strength was withdrawn from the application by MAH). Four clinical pharmacology studies were submitted with this application. These bioequivalence studies were completed to demonstrate that 3 initially  proposed  doses  of the FDC are bioequivalent to the concomitantly administered individual tablets.  Bioequivalence  of  the  30  mg/4  mg  and  45  mg/4  mg doses were proven. However the applicant failed to demonstrate the bioequivalence of the 30mg/2mg tablet and withdrawn it from the application. The bioequivalence studies served to bridge the clinical safety  and  efficacy  data  for  PIOG  and  GLIM  to  the  FDC  tablet.  No  efficacy  studies  have  been conducted with the FDC. The indications for Tandemact were modified to reflect the need to titrate patients with optimal doses of individual components of the combination before switching to FDC. No scientific advice has been given in relation to this application.

## Safety

The  concomitant  usage  of  PIOG  and  SU  agents,  both  in  the  submitted  phase  III  programme  and subsequently to granting of the marketing authorisation appears to be well tolerated and has not led to any unexpected adverse events. The safety profile for GLIM is generally similar to the other SUs, so it is  argued that this specific PIOG / GLIM combination should not prove significantly different from that observed when co-prescribed with other SUs. It is stated that PIOG is taken concomitantly with a SU in 31% of appropriately treated diabetic patients in the USA and 66% in Japan. The SPC for the fixed  combination  accommodates  the  advice  and  warnings  required  from  both  PIOG  and  GLIM licenses.

## · User consultation

The applicant committed to perform user testing and to provide the results not later then two months after the granting of the Marketing Authorisation, as addressed in the follow-up measures.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Risk-benefit assessment

The CHMP, having considered the data submitted on quality, safety and efficacy was of the opinion that the risk-benefit balance is positive for two of the three strengths of Tandemact initially submitted. The applicant failed to demonstrate the bioequivalence of the 30mg/2mg tablet and withdrawn it from the application. Also the indications for Tandemact were modified to reflect the need to titrate patients with optimal strengths of individual components of the combination before switching to FDC.

A  risk  management  plan  was  submitted  and  was  considered  appropriate.  The  CHMP,  having considered the data submitted was of the opinion that routine the pharmacovigilance was adequate to monitor the safety of the product and no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information.

## Recommendation

Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered by majority that the risk-benefit balance of Tandemact in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who show intolerance to metformin or for whom metformin is contraindicated and who are already treated with a combination of pioglitazone and glimepiride was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.