---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:39:33
document_pages: 9
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/teslascan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: teslascan-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.0405803
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-15 06:02:48.056445
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Teslascan and has been updated until 1 July 2002. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1. Introduction Detection and characterisation of focal liver lesions are essential in order to plan effective treatment in patients with known extrahepatic or primary hepatic tumours. The number and size of lesions are for certain tumour types (in particular hepatocellular carcinoma and metastases of colonic cancer) a major factor  in  decisions  on  surgical  treatment,  including  transplantation.  The  lack  of  a  possibility  for accurate quantification and size estimation of liver metastases often hinders the assessment of response to  medical  treatment.  A  special  problem  is  the  presence  of  liver  tumours  in  abnormal  liver  tissue, particularly  in  patients  with  cirrhosis  of  the  liver  who  have  an  increased  risk  of  developing hepatocellular carcinoma. Several imaging techniques can be used to visualise liver lesions such as ultrasonography, Computer Tomography (CT)-scanning, contrast-enhanced CT-scanning, angiography, radioisotope scanning and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Paramagnetic magnetic resonance contrast media can be used for  contrast  enhancement,  by  changing  the  signal  intensity  of  either  normal  or  abnormal  tissue, depending on the agent used. In general, these agents predominantly shorten the T1 relaxation time of surrounding water protons. This results in an increase in signal intensity (SI) on T1-weighted magnetic resonance images. A problem with all imaging techniques, with or without contrast, is that they cannot give certainty with regard to a specific diagnosis of the nature of the tumour. Teslascan is an intravenous paramagnetic contrast medium for MRI. The active substance of Teslascan is  mangafodipir  trisodium,  a  manganese  (Mn 2+ ) chelate with the ligand fodipir (dipyridoxyl diphosphate  or  DPDP).  Mangafodipir  trisodium  is  metabolised  (dephosphorylated)  and  partially transmetallated (manganese exchanged for zinc) after intravenous administration. Manganese that is released from mangafodipir is taken up by hepatocytes thereby increasing the SI of normal liver tissue. This  may  result  in  an  improvement  of  the  detection  of  liver  metastases,  which  usually  have  no hepatocytes. The metabolites of fodipir are renally excreted, whilst the biliary route mainly excretes manganese. Manganese is a trace element with a normal daily dietary requirement of 3-8 µmol and a normal serum level  of  0.001  µmol/l.  Manganese  toxicity  is  rare  and  has  only  been  seen  after  long-term  exposure resulting in neurological symptoms. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition Mangafodipir  is  supplied  as  a  sterile  aqueous  solution  containing  0.01  mmol/ml  mangafodipir trisodium (anhydrous) 7.57 mg/ml corresponding to mangafodipir (anhydrous) 6.91 mg/ml. Excipients include  ascorbic  acid,  sodium  chloride,  sodium  hydroxide  or  hydrochloric  acid  and  water  for injections.  The  solution  is  filled  into  50  ml  injection  vials  with  a  20  mm  neck  and  a  nitrogen headspace. The vials are made of sulphur treated uncoloured Type I glass, closed with rubber stoppers and sealed with aluminium caps. Method of preparation Formulation :  The solution contains ascorbic acid to prevent oxidation, sodium chloride to obtain an isotonic  formulation  and  water  for  injections  as  the  solvent.  Sodium  hydroxide  and/or  hydrochloric acid are used to adjust the pH to 7.5-7.8. Nitrogen is present in the headspace gas to prevent oxidation. The glass vials are pre-treated with sulphur to prevent transmetallation. Development studies focused on critical aspects of the formulation and justified the choice of the final formulation.

Manufacturing : The manufacturing process is described satisfactorily.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Control of starting materials

Drug substance :  The  synthetic  route is described satisfactorily. An overview of potential impurities from  synthesis  and  degradation  is  presented.  All  detected  synthetic  impurities  are  controlled  in  the drug substance specifications. The limits proposed have been satisfactorily justified according to the batches  used  in  the  toxicological  studies.  Analytical  results  from  batches  used  in  the  toxicological, clinical and production batches have been presented. Production batch results justified an adjustment for assay of mangafodipir and water, which has been implemented by the applicant.

A  linear  dose-dependent  relationship  between  signal  and  manganese  tissue  levels  was  observed following intravenous administration. A dose of 5 µmol/kg appeared to be sufficiently effective in rat

Medicinal product no longer authorise Mangafodipir trisodium is not described in a pharmacopoeia. Specifications for drug substance include physical  characteristics,  identity  and  assay  of  mangafodipir,  total  maganese  and  sodium,  purity  and microbiological  tests.  The  specification  limits  for  unspecified  peaks  and  total  unknowns  have  been adjusted  in  line  with  the  ICH  guideline  'Impurities  in  new  drug  substances'. The  tests  and specifications  proposed  were  considered  appropriate  to  control  the  drug  substance  in  view  of  the synthetic route applied. Stability : Drug substance stability studies, conducted according to ICH guidelines, identified the main degradative pathways. The proposed retest period and storage conditions are supported satisfactorily by the data presented. Excipients and packaging materials : All excipients used complied with Ph.Eur.. Specifications for the packaging  materials presented were  satisfactory and  complied  with  the appropriate Ph. Eur. specifications. Control tests on the finished product Satisfactory finished product specifications are proposed for release. The proposed limits for related substances and the lower limit for assay of ascorbic acid were adjusted in line with the presented batch analysis results. Extractable volume testing was amended in line with the Ph.Eur.. All methods have been adequately validated and the results justify the proposed specifications. Stability test on the finished product The formal stability programme included three production batches from the proposed manufacturing site packed in sulphur treated glass vials. A range of temperature/relative humidity storage conditions was examined in addition to the effects  of  light  and  freeze-thaw  cycling.  The  results  of  the  formal stability studies showed no significant changes at any condition. End-of-shelf-life specifications were presented.  The  lower  limits  for  assay  of  mangafodipir  and  ascorbic  acid  were  adjusted  in  line  with stability data. The claimed shelf life for the finished product (24 months when stored protected from light)  was  considered  acceptable  following  review  of  the  12-month  results  of  the  formal  ongoing stability studies. Inspection Status The  Norwegian  Board  of  Health  and  Belgian  Inspectorates  inspected  sites  for  the  finished  product manufacture  of  Teslascan.  The  facilities  were  considered  satisfactory  for  the  finished  product manufacture of Teslascan. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics On the basis of literature references it was demonstrated that mangafodipir enhances the MRI signal in rabbits,  rats  (including  rats  with  chemically  induced  liver  tumours)  and  pigs.  Results  from  in  vivo studies demonstrated that manganese ions are exchanged with zinc ions and that the MRI enhancing properties of mangafodipir are probably partly due to the release of manganese. In vivo uptake into rabbit  hepatocytes  was  also  demonstrated.  Unlike  manganese  chloride,  mangafodipir  possesses sufficient stability to reduce the exposure to manganese in most tissues.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

imaging studies. The duration of contrast enhancement in rats was increased by biliary obstruction as a result of impaired excretion of manganese.

Safety pharmacology studies mainly focused on the expected toxicity effects of manganese i.e. effects on the central nervous system (CNS) and cardiovascular system. Acute IV doses up to 70 times the expected clinical dose had no significant effects on the CNS in mice. In view of the potentially serious adverse  effects  of  manganese  itself  mangafodipir  has  been  extensively  studied  both  in  vivo  and  in vitro (anaesthetised dogs, conscious dogs and Langedorff perfused rat heart model). The dog studies produced no evidence of significant haemodynamic effects at doses up to 60 times the clinical dose although  transient  effects  on  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  observed.  In  the  rat  heart  model, mangafodipir,  manganese  dichloride  and  fodipir  caused  a  dose  dependent  reduction  of  contractile function.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Pharmacokinetics Single dose kinetic studies were conducted in rats, pregnant rats, bile obstructed dogs and monkeys as well as human volunteers. At similar dose levels the AUC of manganese was greater in man than in rats or dogs reflecting a more rapid elimination from plasma in these species. No repeat dose kinetic studies were performed. Distribution: Radiolabelled fodipir was distributed rapidly throughout the body with the highest levels observed  in  the  kidneys,  lung,  blood  and  liver  with  a  low  affinity  in  the  myocardium  and  brain. Manganese was mainly distributed to the kidney initially and to the liver, spleen and pancreas at later time  points.  In  vitro  protein  binding  studies  showed  no  significant  binding  with  fodipir  and approximately 26% binding with manganese at a concentration of 86 uM. Biotransformation: Mangafodipir is subject to two processes of transformation dephosphorylation and transmetallation (exchange of manganese with zinc). No inter-species differences were observed with respect to the extent to which these processes take place. Excretion: Excretion was studied mainly in rats and dogs. In both dogs and man fodipir was almost exclusively excreted through the urine whereas in rats up to 25 % was excreted in the faeces. In rats, dogs and humans 10-25% of the manganese dose is excreted in the urine within the first few hours, thereafter the remaining dose is excreted in the faeces. Toxicology Acute toxicity studies in mice, rats and dogs using IV administration showed mangafodipir to have low to moderate toxicity. Repeat dose toxicity studies were conducted in rats, cynomologous monkeys and dogs.  The  liver  and  to  a  lesser  extent  the  kidney  were  target  organs  of  toxicity.  No-ObservedEffect-Level's (NOEL) were determined in rats (116 µmol/kg) and monkeys (29 µmol/kg), which on a dose for dose basis represent safety margins of approximately 23 and 6 respectively. In dogs severe toxicity was observed at a dose level of 100 µmol/kg with evidence of liver cell necrosis, cholestasis and  important  histopathological  changes  e.g.  cholangiohepatitis.  A  further  risk  assessment  was requested to address these toxic effects. In their response the applicants referred to a study examining single  doses  of  mangafodipir  (10-50  µmol/kg)  administered  to  dogs  with  total  common  bile  duct obstruction. No significant toxicity findings were reported and these data were considered adequate to address this issue. Segment I/II reproductive toxicity studies were conducted in rats and rabbits. Skeletal malformations were  observed  in  rats  at  the  lowest  doses  tested  together  with  embryotoxicity  and  foetotoxicity  in rabbits. Teslascan administration is therefore contraindicated in pregnant women. Information on the excretion of mangafodipir into breast milk is lacking and it is recommended in the SPC to discontinue breast feeding for at least 14 days after administration. Genotoxicity  was  studied  in  a  standard  battery  of  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  tests  as  well  as  in  cell transformation assays. Mangafodipir was devoid of any genotoxic potential in the standard tests. Some positive results were seen in the cell transformation assays, which were adequately addressed by the applicant in their response to questions. Mangafodipir is considered to be non-genotoxic. In view of it's single use administration there is no need to perform carcinogenicity studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Miscellaneous

Local tolerance was extensively studied in rabbits and dogs with no evidence of irritant effect.

The environmental risk assessment has been performed satisfactorily in compliance with Guideline III 5504/94 Draft 6 version 1. Even in the worst-case scenario the predicted environmental concentration in water (PECwater) of mangafodipir is a factor of 15 below that requiring further action?

<!-- image -->

|                  | Study/ Report No.   | Description                                                                                                                 | Conc. µmol/ml    | Dose, µmol/kg b.w.        | longer Administration rate               | longer Administration rate         |
|------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|---------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                  |                     |                                                                                                                             |                  |                           | as given in report                       | in µmol/min*                       |
| Phase I Studies  | Phase I Studies     | Phase I Studies                                                                                                             | Phase I Studies  | Phase I Studies           | Phase I Studies                          | Phase I Studies                    |
|                  | 727                 | Safety, tolerance, pharmacokinetics. 54 subjects                                                                            | 145              | no 0**, 3, 10, 15, 20, 25 | 0.016, 0.08, 0.12, 0.16, 0.20, 0.25 ml/s | 139.2, 696, 1044, 1392, 1740, 2175 |
|                  | MNV01 5             | Safety, pharmacokinetics, imaging. 13 subjects                                                                              | 10               | 5, 10                     | Admin. time: 1 min, 20 min               |                                    |
|                  | 1587 (suppl. study) | product Plasma profile, bio- transfor-mation, excretion of radiola-belled drug ( 14 C-ligand). 6 subjects                   | 50               | 5                         | 0.25 ml/s                                | 750                                |
|                  | 1774 (suppl. study) | Safety, iron metabolism, zinc metabolism. 30 subjects                                                                       | 50               | 0**, 5                    | 0.25ml/s                                 | 750                                |
| Phase II Studies | Phase II Studies    | Phase II Studies                                                                                                            | Phase II Studies | Phase II Studies          | Phase II Studies                         | Phase II Studies                   |
|                  | 2514                | Pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers and in patients with impaired liver function (cirrhosis), men and women. 41 subjects | 50               | 5                         | 0.1 ml/s                                 | 300                                |
|                  | BY017/ MR310        | Dose ranging, safety and efficacy. 161 patients                                                                             | 10, 50           | 5, 10                     | 2 - 3 ml/min                             | 20-30, 100-150                     |
|                  | 293                 | Dose ranging, safety and efficacy, 96 patients                                                                              | 145              | 3, 5, 8, 10               | 0.25 ml/s, 1 ml/min                      | 2175, 145                          |

Medicinal product no longer authorise Good Laboratory Practice (GLP): All pivotal preclinical studies have been performed in compliance with GLP. 4. Clinical aspects The clinical programme was carried out from May 1989 to December 1995. It consisted of 18 clinical trials including four Phase I studies, three Phase II studies and eleven Phase III studies set up as two multiple independent trials (MIT1 &amp; MIT2). An overview of these trials is presented in Table 1. Table 1: Overview of clinical documentation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Phase III Studies   | Phase III Studies   | Phase III Studies                         |   Phase III Studies |   Phase III Studies | Phase III Studies    | Phase III Studies   |
|---------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|---------------------|
|                     | MIT1 (n=5)          | Safety and efficacy. 322 patients         |                  10 |                   5 | 2 - 3 ml/min         | 20-30               |
|                     | MIT2 (n=6)          | Safety and efficacy. 295 patients         |                  10 |                   5 | 2 - 3 ml/min         | 20-30               |
|                     | Four US studies     | Safety and efficacy. 546 patients (total) |                  50 |                   5 | 1 min slow injection | -                   |

Medicinal product no longer authorise * Obtained by multiplying rate in ml/min by concentration in µmol/ml ** placebo (received saline) NA: not attached Pharmacodynamics Two Phase I studies in healthy male volunteers were conducted to study the safety and efficacy of mangafodipir in increasing doses and different concentrations. In Study 727 SI increases of 27-63% at 3 µmol/kg and 82%-140% at 10-15 µmol/kg were found. The increase occurred within 1-3 min of administration and remained high during the 30 min scanning period. In Study MNVO15 peak SI was reached in the liver 15-20 min after administration, enhancement lasted for 4 hr and returned to baseline after 48 hrs. Mean maximum SI enhancement for the liver was 77% and 110% at 5 and 10 µmol/kg respectively. Enhancement of SI was also seen in the pancreas, spleen, renal medulla, renal cortex and choroid plexus. No enhancement of T2 imaging was seen. In both studies adverse events reported in some patients included warmth, flushing and dose associated discomfort. Pharmacokinetics Five trials were performed for elucidating the pharmacokinetics of mangafodipir in man. Two phase I studies ( Study 727 dose ranging finding study &amp; Study MNVO15 effect of infusion time), one phase II  study  ( Study  2514 pharmacokinetics  in  males  and  females  and  patients  with  impaired  liver function) and two supporting phase I studies performed in the US ( Study 1587 plasma concentration time profiles biotransformation and excretion of C 13 labelled ligand &amp; Study 1774 interactions with iron and zinc metabolism). These studies indicated that the protein binding of manganese is approx. 27% with negligible binding of  fodipir  being  observed  in  in  vitro  studies.  Mangafodipir  trisodium  is  rapidly  metabolised (dephosphorylated) and partially transmetallated following intravenous administration. Manganese is predominantly released from mangafodipir by exchange with plasma zinc. Free manganese is taken up by  different  organs  e.g.  liver,  pancreas,  and  spleen  by  an  undefined  mechanism.  The  mean  initial plasma half-life of manganese is 20 min or less with significant uptake into the liver, pancreas, kidney and spleen. The initial plasma half-life of fodipir is 50 min. Manganese and the ligand fodipir have different elimination routes. Initial renal elimination of manganese occurs in the form of manganese pyridoxylethylenediamine (MnPLED 15-20% over 24 hr) and further elimination occurs in the faeces via biliary excretion (over 4 days). The majority of the ligand fodipir (DPDP) is excreted as ZnPLED. Fodipir is metabolised by means of dephosphorylation to PLED. In patients with impaired liver function due to liver cirrhosis the mean terminal elimination half-life was  about  three  times  longer  than  in  healthy  volunteers.  In  patients  with  impaired  liver  function obstruction of the hepatobiliary flow is of more importance than impairment of the metabolic capacity of the liver. Use of Teslascan in obstructive biliary disease is therefore contraindicated (as well as use in  severely  reduced  liver  function).  No  specific  studies  were  performed  in  the  elderly,  children  or patients with renal insufficiency. The lack of specific data in the elderly, which was not considered clinically relevant, and the lack of experience in children are suitably addressed in the SPC. The use of Teslascan  is  contraindicated  in  patients  with  severe  renal  insufficiency.  Gender  did  not  affect  the metabolism of mangafodipir. The administration of Teslascan caused a statistically significant increase

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in  zinc  excretion.  This  increase  amounted  to  less  than  1.3%  of  the  total  body  zinc  and  was  not considered clinically relevant.

## Clinical Studies / Experience

Medicinal product no longer authorise Phase II  studies: Studies BY017/MR310 and 293 were  designed  as  open  non-controlled  ascending dose  studies  examining  safety  and  tolerability  in  patients  with  focal  liver  disease  and  evaluating efficacy. Safety evaluation included vital signs, ECG and laboratory parameters. Efficacy parameters were  SI,  technical  quality,  and  diagnostic  utility  and  lesion  delineation.  Only  SI  is  considered  an objective  determination.  In Study  BY017/MR310 SI  increased  more  in  normal  tissue  than  in 'tumour' tissue. In Study 293 SI increased more in normal tissue with a significant dose response up to  8  µmol/kg.  There  was  no  difference  between  groups  with  respect  to  rate  of  administration  or concentration.  In Study BY017/MR310 30% of  patients  reported  adverse  events  with  an  increased incidence  with  concentration  and  administration  rate.  In Study  293 64%  patients  reported  adverse events, primarily warmth and flushing. Definition of Optimal dose: Results from the Phase I/II clinical programme indicated that 5  µmol/kg  was  considered  an  adequate  dose  for  efficacy  as  it  produced  a  &gt;50%  increase  in  SI  of normal liver tissue. Higher doses did not increase SI significantly and were associated with a higher incidence of side effects. Concentration or flow rate did not have an effect on efficacy but fewer side effects were seen with the lowest concentration and lowest administration rate. Based on these results a concentration of 10 µmol/ml and a flow rate of 2-3 ml/min were chosen for the phase III studies. Phase III studies Two  'multiple  independent'  trials, MIT1 &amp; MIT2 each  consisting  of  5  or  6  separate  open  noncontrolled studies respectively, were performed in Europe. Formally these were not multi-centre trials but  similar  protocols  and  the  same  primary  efficacy  parameter  were  used  throughout.  However  in separate studies different secondary parameters were examined. Patients included were aged 18 or over and were referred for MRI of the liver with 1-5 liver lesions demonstrated in an examination (CT, MRI or ultrasound) within the last 4 weeks. All patients received 5  µmol/kg  mangafodipir  using  a  10  µmol/ml  solution,  infused  in  10-20  minutes  (max.  50  ml  per patient). MR machines with 0.5 to 2.0 Tesla field strengths were used according to standard protocols. The following sequences were performed: pre-contrast T1, SE, -T1GE, -T2SE and post contrast T1SE and -T1 GE sequence (no post contrast T2). Primary  efficacy  parameters  were  similar  for  all  studies  i.e.  the  difference  in  the  number  of  liver lesions detected per patient with post versus pre contrast MRI. Secondary efficacy parameters were investigated  in  separate  studies  e.g.  diagnostic  utility  in  detection  and  characterisation  of  lesions, optimal sequence for lesion characterisation, level of confidence in the final diagnosis etc. For all studies separate 'on site evaluations' were performed and these were integrated for each MIT. For each MIT as a whole an 'independent evaluation' was performed. In all studies the main safety parameters collected up to 24 hr post dose were occurrence of adverse events and infusion associated discomfort. Secondary safety parameters included vital signs and blood chemistry. Results: The number of lesions detected was compared for the different types of pre and post contrast images separately and for all pre and post contrast images taken together. Table 2 provides a summary of the change in the total number of lesions seen with post vs. pre contrast MRI for all images. In the on-site analysis 17% more lesions were found after contrast but in 75% of patients the number was unchanged and in 8% less lesions were found. In patients with more lesions, 1-2 more lesions were detected in most cases. In the independent analysis 33% of patients had more lesions after contrast but 20% of patients  had  fewer  lesions?  If  diagnosis  were  taken  into  account  the  overall  analysis  of  all images showed that both for metastases and hepatocellular carcinoma contrast resulted in more lesions being detected. However fewer lesions were detected in haemangioma.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2: Change in total number of lesions post vs. pre-contrast, all images

|                                | MIT1                    | MIT2                    | Total                   |
|--------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                                | On-site evaluation      | On-site evaluation      | On-site evaluation      |
| All diagnosis                  | 322                     | 298                     | 620                     |
| post>pre                       | 62 (20%)                | 43 (14%)                | 108 (17%)               |
| post<pre                       | 30 (9%)                 | 19 (6%)                 | 49 (8%)                 |
| p value                        | =0.005                  | =0.05                   | =0.005                  |
| Metastases                     | 101                     | 88                      | 189                     |
| post>pre                       | 26 (26%)                | 15 (17%)                | 41 (22%)                |
| post<pre                       | 8 (8%)                  | 3 (3%)                  | 11 (6%)                 |
| p value                        | =0.05                   | =0.05                   | =0.005                  |
| Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) | 65                      | 92                      | longer 157              |
| post>pre                       | 11 (17%)                | 13 (14%)                | 24 (15%)                |
| post<pre                       | 5 (8%)                  | 3 (3%)                  | 8 (5%)                  |
| p value                        | ns                      | =0.05                   | =0.005                  |
| Haemangioma                    | 34                      | 26                      | 60                      |
| post>pre                       | 0                       | 2 (8%)                  | 2 (3%)                  |
| post<pre                       | 8 (24%)                 | 3 (12%)                 | 11 (18%)                |
| p value                        | =0.05                   | ns                      | =0.05                   |
|                                | no Independent analysis | no Independent analysis | no Independent analysis |
| All diagnoses                  | 294                     | 293                     | 587                     |
| post>pre                       | 100 (34%)               | 94 (32%)                | 194 (33%)               |
| post<pre                       | 59 (20%)                | 58 (20%)                | 117 (20%)               |
| p value                        | 0.0014                  | 0.0044                  | 0.0001                  |

Medicinal product no longer authorise Analyses of secondary end-points indicated that hepatic lesions = 5 mm in diameter were detected on post  contrast  MR  images  in  an  increased  number  of  patients  (66  vs.  47).  The  investigators  judged diagnostic  utility  subjectively.  Pre-  and  post-  mangafodipir  images  were  compared  to  those  of previous examinations. Since the T2 sequence was not repeated post contrast, there was a bias toward pre-examination. Diagnostic utility in detection of lesions was greater post contrast in 120 (20%) of cases and better pre-contrast in 81(14%) of cases. This was statistically significant in MIT1 but not in MIT2. Diagnostic utility in characterisation of lesions was better post-contrast in 132 (22%) of cases and better pre-contrast in 166 (28%) of cases. Investigators considered that the enhanced images contained additional diagnostic information in 279 (45%) of the 621 patients examined and in 76 patients (12%) the additional diagnostic information was considered to have affected patient management. When considering all sequences, a post contrast sequence was most frequently considered best for lesion characterisation. In the delayed images (up to 24 hours post injection) in 129 patients, more lesions were detected than on the pre contrast images in 28 patients (22%). More lesions were seen in 8 cases (6%) when comparing delayed and immediate post contrast and in MIT2 this difference was considered to be statistically significant.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  comparing  mangafodipir  enhanced  MRI  scans  with  contrast  enhanced  computerised  tomography (CECT) scans in 137 patients, more lesions were seen in the MR images in 40 patients, while more were seen in the CT images in 23 patients.

Pre-contrast images were used to determine diagnoses in 75% of the 621 patients and post-contrast images  in  81%  of  patients.  Diagnoses  were  described  as  extremely  confident  in  56%  of  the  729 diagnoses and as very confident in 26% of cases.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Two-phase III studies were submitted in support of a new indication 'as an adjunct to MRI in the investigation  of  focal  pancreatic  lesions'.  These  studies  demonstrated  that  results  with  contrast enhanced MRI are comparable to those with spiral enhanced CT.  There is however no clinically or statistically  significant  difference  between  the  two  methods  and  the  results  do  not  suggest  a  clear benefit with one method rather than another in the diagnosis of a particular pathology.  The results of the studies are considered to support the indication as an adjunct to MRI in the investigation of focal pancreatic lesions. Safety in Phase III trials In  the  combined  MIT  trials  624  patients  were  evaluable  for  adverse  events.  Infusion  associated discomfort  was  reported  in  4%  of  patients  (n=24)  a  feeling  of  warmth  of  mild  (n=22)  to  moderate (n=2) intensity. Six serious adverse events occurred in 5 patients. Two were considered possibly/likely to be drug related and occurred in one patient. These were reported as exanthema of the left arm in the presence of pre-existing lymphedema followed by a septicaemia after a superficial cut of the left hand. Vital signs were monitored in 321 patients and clinically important changes in blood pressure were recorded in two patients, one with an increased systolic blood pressure of 70 mmHg the other with increased  systolic/diastolic  pressures  of  50/40  mmHg  respectively.  Monitoring  of  blood  chemistry indicated increases in bilirubin levels and ALAT in one patient and high total serum iron in 5 patients. Special  populations:  No  specific  interaction,  renal  impairment,  high  risk  patient  studies  were submitted. Subjects less than 18 years old were excluded in the trials. In the phase III studies, 216 of the 624 patients were over 65. The rate of adverse events was lower in this sub-group (4% vs. 9.3%). Bilirubin was measured in 257 patients and was abnormal in 30 of them although severe obstructive hepatobiliary disease was an exclusion criterium. 138 patients were recorded as having cirrhosis. No increased adverse event rate was found in either sub-group. 86 out of the 624 patients had unspecified cardiovascular disease. No difference in adverse event rate was observed with this sub-group. 5. Conclusions Risk Benefit Assessment The  quality  of  the  product  applied  for  has  been  well  documented  and  is  generally  considered acceptable with satisfactory answers being provided to questions raised regarding the manufacturing process, drug substance specifications for related substances and finished product specifications. Preclinical  pharmacodynamics  indicated  that  mangafodipir  enhances  the  MRI  signal  in  the  species tested, which included rats with chemically induced tumours of the liver. Results of in vivo studies demonstrated that manganese ions are exchanged with zinc ions, and that the MRI enhancing properties of mangafodipir are probably partly due to the release of manganese. Acute toxicity was low to moderate. Target organs in repeated dose toxicity studies were the liver and to a lesser extent the kidney. Teratogenicity in rats and embryo- and foetotoxicity in rabbits have been observed. Mangafodipir is considered non-genotoxic. Local tolerance was good. Mangafodipir is subject to two processes of transformation, dephosphorylation and transmetallation. No  significant  interspecies  differences  were  observed  with  respect  to  the  extent  to  which  these processes take place. The metabolites of fodipir are renally excreted, whilst the biliary route mainly excretes manganese.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Dose,  concentration  and  infusion  rate  have  been  appropriately  selected  as  those  associated  with optimum efficacy and safety of this preparation.

The open uncontrolled Phase III studies in over 600 patients showed that mangafodipir enhanced MRI (at  a  dose  of  0.5  ml/kg equivalent to 5 µmol/kg administered at 2-3 ml /min) revealed an increased number  of  lesions  compared  to  unenhanced  MRI.  This  applied  particularly  to  metastases  and hepatocellular lesions but not to haemangiomas. Overall on-site evaluation showed an increase in the total  number  of  lesions  in  17%  of  patients  while  this  figure  increased  to  33%  in  the  independent evaluation. In most of these cases 1 or 2 extra lesions were detected.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorise Assessment  of  secondary  parameters  was  for  the  most  part  subjective  e.g.  diagnostic  confidence, confidence  in  the  presence  of  lesions,  conspicuity  of  lesions.  Diagnostic  utility  (the  investigator's overall assessment) in detection of lesions was greater post contrast in MIT1 and the total analysis. On comparing mangafodipir enhanced MRI with CECT scans, more lesions were seen in MR images in 31% of patients and more lesions in CT scan in 13% of patients. The studies showed that there was a low rate of adverse events in general and in particular infusion related discomfort was noted in less than 5% of cases. No anaphylaxis was reported but the occurrence of an urticarial reaction in one patient indicates a possibility of allergic reactions to mangafodipir. No specific interaction studies were performed. Overall Conclusion Mangafodipir has been shown to be an effective contrast medium for diagnostic MRI for the detection of liver lesions due to metastatic disease or to hepatocellular carcinoma. The data presented have not clearly demonstrated a clear benefit in the characterisation of liver lesions. When administered at the proposed rate and concentration (2-3 ml/min &amp; 0.01 mmol/ml) it was associated with a low incidence of infusion related discomfort or other adverse effects. The CPMP on the basis of this benefit risk ratio adopted a positive opinion on the granting of a marketing authorisation for Teslascan for the following indication: 'Contrast medium for diagnostic Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) for the detection of lesions of the liver suspected to be due to metastatic disease or hepatocellular carcinomas.' The indication was extended in March 2001 to include the use of Teslascan as an adjunct to MRI to aid in the investigation of focal pancreatic lesions.