---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:17:40
document_pages: 37
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/thelin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: thelin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 13.8352262
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-30 13:14:16.787448
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1. Introduction

Pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  (PAH)  is  a  disease  of  the small pulmonary  arteries  that is characterised  by  vascular  proliferation  and  remodelling.  It  results  in  a  progressive  increase  in pulmonary  arterial  resistance  and,  ultimately,  right  ventricular  failure  and  death.  A  diagnosis  for primary (or idiopathic) pulmonary hypertension is made when no known risk factor is identified. The functional classification of PAH 1 is as follows:

· Class  I:  PAH  without  a  resulting  limitation  of  physical  activity.  Ordinary  physical  activity does not cause undue dyspnoea or fatigue, chest pain, or near-syncope. · Class II: PAH resulting in a slight limitation of physical activity. The patient is comfortable at rest,  but  ordinary  physical  activity  causes  undue  dyspnoea  or  fatigue,  chest  pain,  or  nearsyncope. · Class III: PAH resulting a marked limitation of physical activity. The patient is comfortable at rest,  but  less  than  ordinary  activity  causes  undue  dyspnoea  or  fatigue,  chest  pain,  or  nearsyncope. · Class IV: PAH resulting in an inability to carry out any physical activity without symptoms. The patient has signs of right heart failure. Dyspnoea, fatigue, or both may be present even at rest, and discomfort is increased by any physical activity. No current treatment cures this rare, devastating condition. However, during the past years treatment options  for  patients  with  the  disease  have  evolved  to  help  prolong  their  survival  and  improve  their quality  of  life.  At  present,  conventional  treatment  for  patients  with  primary  and  secondary  PAH includes calcium-channel  blockers, anticoagulants, diuretics and  oxygen.  In addition, an oral endothelin-1  receptor  antagonist  (bosentan),  an  intravenous  prostacyclin  (epoprostenol),  an  inhaled prostacyclin (iloprost), a subcutaneous prostacyclin (treprostinil) and a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor (sildenafil) have also been licensed for the treatment of PAH in various European countries. Of these, bosentan (Tracleer ® ), iloprost (Ventavis ® ) and sildenafil (Revatio ® ) have been authorised through the centralised  procedure for orphan medicinal products, the latter of which received a positive CHMP opinion  recently  (July  2005).  Bosentan  is  indicated  for  patients  with  primary  and  sclerodermaassociated PAH, iloprost only for patients with primary PAH, and sildenafil for patients with primary and  CTD-associated  PAH.  All  these  three  medicinal  products  are  only  licensed  for  patients  with NYHA/WHO class III disease severity. As a last resort, a lung or heart/lung transplant may be offered to the patient. The  present  application  for  marketing  authorisation  of  Thelin  is  made  under  Article  8.3  (i)  and concerns a new active substance, sitaxentan sodium, for which a complete dossier has been submitted. Sitaxentan sodium is an endothelin receptor antagonist (ETRA), with higher selectively for the ETA receptor than the ETB receptor subtype. The  approved  indication  at  the  recommended  dose  of  100  mg  once  daily  is  for  the  'Treatment  of patients  with  pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  classified  as  WHO  functional  class  III,  to  improve exercise  capacity.  Efficacy  has  been  shown  in  primary  pulmonary  hypertension  and  in  pulmonary hypertension associated with connective tissue disease.' Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 2. Quality aspects

## Introduction

1 This classification was modified from the New York Heart Association classification of patients with cardiac disease. It is adapted from the executive summary of the World Symposium on Primary Pulmonary Hypertension in Evian, France, in 1998.

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Thelin is presented as film-coated tablets containing 100 mg sitaxentan sodium INN per tablet. The tablets  are  packed  in  PVC-Aclar/Alu  blisters  or  white  HDPE  bottles  with  white  PP  child  resistant closure.

## Drug Substance (to be changed in the EPAR to 'Active Substance')

Sitaxentan sodium is a yellow powder, which is non-hygroscopic. The aqueous solubility is pH dependent, being more soluble in alkaline solution. (0.4 mg/ml at pH 1, rising to 77.8 mg/ml at pH 10). Log P is in the region of 2.

<!-- image -->

The specification includes tests for assay (HPLC), identification (HPLC, FT-IR), total and specified impurities  (HPLC),  particle  size  (Lased  diffraction),  residual  solvents  etc.  The  limits  as  set  for  the individual  impurities  are  in  line  with  the  ICH  requirements  and  in  line  with  recent  batch  analysis results. Batch used during pre-clinical studies have similar impurity profiles but with slightly higher levels,  thus  the  potential  toxicity  of  the  impurities  has  been  appropriately  studied  in  view  of  the proposed specification and the proposed dose.

· Manufacture A four-stage synthetic process has been well described and the critical parameters and accompanying in process controls have been defined. Specifications and control methods of the three main starting materials are satisfactory. Evidence of the molecular structure of the active substance routinely produced by the defined method of synthesis has been provided in the form of a number of techniques including sodium identity, ICPOES,  ROI,  elemental  combustion  analysis,  melting  point,  IR,  UV, 1 H  and 13 C  NMR,  and  high resolution MS. The  organic  impurities  arising  from  the  defined  synthesis  are  known.  The  impurities  have  been identified when found above 0.10%, and some below that level. No inorganic impurities are known to be present, and residual solvents are present at levels complying with ICH limits. All lots/batches of sitaxentan sodium used for clinical drug supply have shown a consistent impurity profile, qualified with reference to toxicology studies. In recent batches, no impurities are found above 0.15% by the commercial manufacturing process, so qualification was not necessary (early batches used in toxicity and carcinogenicity studies had levels above 0.15%). There are 2 degradation products found, which have also been identified as metabolites. · Specification Medicinal product no longer authorised

Analytical control methods have been validated with regard to relevant guidelines.

## · Stability

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Batches  have  been  studied  at  25ºC/60%  RH,  30ºC/65%  RH,  40ºC/75%  RH,  5ºC.,  for  up  to  2  yrs (25ºC) by validated stability-indicating methods.

The  active  substance  is  photostable.  Standard  stress  studies  have  been  performed,  and  the  HPLC method has been shown to be stability indicating.

Results support the proposed retest period.

## Medicinal Product

## · Pharmaceutical Development

The crystalline, stable, non-hygroscopic form of sitaxentan is used, which has a pH dependent aqueous solubility, and the properties are well defined. The particle size is controlled for uniform dissolution properties and more uniform bioavailability.  It has been demonstrated that sitaxentan sodium tablets of two different particle size distributions give comparable dissolution profiles, and all batches have satisfactory content uniformity. Excipients interactions with the active substance were studied. Excipients that promoted degradation of the active substance were excluded. Also the coatings were tested, and shown to be compatible with sitaxentan sodium. No novel excipients are used. All excipients comply with the PhEur requirements where necessary. Excipients of human or animal origin: The only material of human or animal origin is lactose, and is certified to meet EU requirements on TSE. Magnesium stearate and stearic acid are not of animal origin. · Manufacture of the Product Sitaxentan  sodium  100  mg  coated  tablets  are  made  from  a  common  granulation  procedure.  The intragranular components are granulated in a fluid bed granulator, followed by milling, blending with the  extragranular  components,  and  compression.  The  tablet  cores  are  then  film-coated  for  moisture protection and taste masking. · Product Specification The product specification is standard for tablets, and contains tests with suitable limits for identity of active  substance,  assay,  dissolution,  uniformity  of  dosage  units,  total  and  specified  degradation products, water content, and  microbial bioburden . Batch  analytical  results  (n=25)  indicate  satisfactory  uniformity  and  compliance  with  the  agreed specification. · Stability of the Product Batches have been studied under the following conditions, 25ºC/60% RH, 30ºC/65% RH, 40ºC/75% RH, Photo stability, Freeze thaw thermal cycle, according to ICH guidelines. Validated,  stability-indicating  methods  have  been  used  and  the  results  support  the  shelf  life  and storage conditions as defined in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

Satisfactory  documentation  has  been  provided  to  confirm  the  acceptable  quality  of  this  medicinal product, and no major objections have been raised during evaluation. The drug substance is adequately characterized and the specification is acceptable in view of the route of synthesis and the various ICH guidelines. The solid drug substance is stable with respect to degradation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Concerning the finished product, it has been developed in a sound way and the manufacturing process is well studied and controlled. The in-process controls and release specification guarantee consistent control of product quality. The drug product is shown to be stable and to maintain important quality characteristics within the storage time and conditions as defined in the SPC.

Overall the product should perform well in a uniform manner in the clinic.

At the time of the CHMP opinion, a number of minor quality issues related to stability (mass balance) were unresolved.

The applicant agreed to solve these as Follow Up Measures, within an agreed timeframe.

3 Non-clinical aspects Introduction Sitaxentan  sodium  is  a  highly  selective  endothelin  A  (ETA)  receptor  antagonist  that  has  been developed  for  the  treatment  of  patients  with  pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  classified  as  WHO functional class III, to improve exercise capacity. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent vascular paracrine and autocrine peptide whose actions are mediated through ETA receptors present on smooth muscle cells and endothelin B (ETB) receptors present on endothelial  cells.  Predominant  actions  of  ET-1  binding  to  ETA  receptors  are  vasoconstriction  and vascular remodeling, while binding to ETB receptors results in ET-1 clearance and vasodilatory and antiproliferative effects due in part to nitric oxide and prostacyclin release. ET-1 concentrations are elevated in plasma and lung tissue of patients with PAH. ET-1 and ETA receptors play a key role in regulating  vascular  resistance  in  the  lung  by  directly  stimulating  vasoconstriction  and  pulmonary vascular remodeling and this ultimately leads to progressive right heart failure. The safety and potential local and systemic adverse effects of sitaxentan sodium were evaluated in single-  and  repeat-dose  toxicity  studies  in  mice,  rats,  and  dogs.  Reproductive  and  developmental toxicology  studies  in  rats  assessed  potential  adverse  effects  on  libido,  sexual  activity,  fertility, pregnancy, embryo-fetal development, and post-natal development. The potential carcinogenic risk to humans  associated  with  chronic  sitaxentan  sodium  treatment  was  evaluated  using  Sprague-Dawley rats and p53+/mice, as well as the International Committee of Harmonization (ICH)-recommended test battery of genotoxicity studies, which included in vitro assessments of mutagenic activity in bacteria and mammalian cells, clastogenic activity in mammalian cells, and a bone marrow micronucleus assay in mice.  Animals of all species were observed for clinical signs, laboratory findings and post-mortem evidence of adverse events in toxicity studies. All pivotal toxicity studies on safety pharmacology and toxicology were conducted in compliance with Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) Regulations. In addition, non-GLP studies were also conducted. The non-GLP conditions  of  these  studies  were  not  considered  to  compromise  the  scientific  integrity  or affect the experimental results. Pharmacology Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Primary pharmacodynamics

Sitaxentan sodium is a highly selective ETA receptor antagonist that has been developed for treatment of PAH. It binds to and blocks selectively (ratio ETA/B is ~6,500 fold) and competitively ETA receptors with  high  affinity  (K i 0.43  nM),  and  potently  inhibits  receptor  signalling  (K i  0.43  nM;  0.686  nM). Tested metabolites show much lower affinity. Animal studies (using rats and pigs) have shown that sitaxentan  sodium  (mg/kg  range)  is  effective  for  pulmonary  hypertension  (PAH)  in  response  to

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

hypoxia; sitaxentan sodium was effective given (i.v. or oral) either before or after hypoxia. Systemic haemodynamics were not affected.

## · Secondary pharmacodynamics

Cardiac effects associated with chronic hypoxia-induced hypertension (increases in pulmonary arterial pressure, pulmonary arterial wall, thickness in right heart hypertrophy) were attenuated by sitaxentan. The ability of sitaxentan sodium to prevent changes in left ventricular function and cardiopulmonary haemodynamics was shown in pigs with cardiopulmonary bypass. Also, sitaxentan treatment blunted the rise in pulmonary vascular resistance without significantly affecting systemic perfusion pressures or heart rate. Its preclinical efficacy was demonstrated in models of heart failure (50 mg/kg/day oral or 20  mg/kg  IV:  lowering  resting  mean  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate)  and  myocardial  infarction (attenuation  of  rightward  shift  in  left  ventricular  end-diastolic  and  end-systolic  pressure-volume relationships  relative  to  sham-operated  controls,  reduced  contractile  response  to  norepinephrine  in aortic rings as well as reduced systemic haemodynamics).

· Safety pharmacology programme The potential for sitaxentan sodium to interact with biologically important targets and cause potential adverse side effects was evaluated in vitro and in vivo in multiple pharmacodynamic animal models of PAH and congestive heart failure (CHF) and cardiovascular, respiratory and central nervous system (CNS) safety pharmacology studies using rats, mice and dogs. These  studies  suggest  that  sitaxentan  sodium  does  not  pose  a  risk  of  producing  adverse  effects  on respiration,  heart  rate,  blood  pressure,  action  potential  prolongation  or  QT  interval,  or  arrhythmia activity. Detailed studies on potential effects of sitaxentan on the renal, gastrointestinal and respiratory system in different species showed no major side effects. · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions No non-clinical pharmacodynamic drug interaction studies have been conducted on sitaxentan sodium, this is acceptable as these studies are planned as post-authorisation commitments. Pharmacokinetics Many in vitro studies and in vivo toxicokinetic studies were performed. These data give a good picture of  the  pharmacokinetics  of  sitaxentan  at  high  doses  in  mice  (100-400  mg/kg/day),  rat  (10-120 mg/kg/day)  and  dog  (10-120  mg/kg/day).  However,  no  kinetic  information  is  available  for  lower dosing of sitaxentan, i.e. for human application a dose of 100 mg/day ( ≈ 1.4 mg/kg/day) is indicated. Intestinal  absorption  of  sitaxentan  was  good,  and  sitaxentan  was  not  a  substrate  for  P-glycoprotein. Kinetics  was  generally  less  than  dose-proportional  in  mice  and  rats,  and  dose-proportional  or  more than  dose-proportional  in  dogs.  After  dosing  of  sitaxentan  the  highest  levels  of  radioactivity  were recovered in the liver, and to a lower extent in the kidney and lung. Sitaxentan was highly bound to plasma  proteins,  i.e.  about  99.5%  in  humans  at  the  Cmax  level  (10 µ g/ml).  Sitaxentan  and  its metabolites are weak or potent inhibitors of CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 activity, and possibly of  CYP2C8.  Sitaxentan  may  induce  enzymes  responsible  for  its  own  metabolism.  Sitaxentan  is eliminated via hepatic and renal clearance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  vitro  and  in  vivo  studies  on  the  interaction  of  sitaxentan  with  the  hepatic  transporter  proteins (hNTCP  (SLC10A1),  OATP1B1,  OATP1B3,  ABC  efflux-transporters)  are  planned  and  will  be provided as a Follow Up Measures.

The safety regarding the metabolite in fraction P8 is not known. In the preclinical testing program, animals (mouse, rats, dogs) have been exposed to the metabolite in fraction P8, but with a very low safety margin. This means that if there is any toxicity associated with P8, there is a risk on an effect in human at therapeutic exposure. To shed light on this point, the metabolite in fraction P8 should be

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

identified  and  it  should  be  shown  whether  or  not  this  metabolite  is  pharmacologically  active.  This information will be provided as a Follow Up Measure.

## Toxicology

- Single dose toxicity

The acute toxicity of sitaxentan was determined by the oral, i.v. routes of administration in mice and rats. In mice, the highest non-lethal doses were in the 800 to 1200-mg/kg range by the oral and 200 to 300 mg/kg by the intravenous route. In rats, these values were in the range of 500 to 750 mg/kg and 125 to  375  mg/kg/day,  respectively.  At  the  maximum  tolerated  doses,  tremors,  subdued  behaviour, hunched appearance; laboured breathing and hypothermia were observed.

<!-- image -->

In rats and dogs, lower RBC count, Hb concentration and Hct and/or spleen weights were observed. The NOAEL for these effects was ≤ 20 mg/kg/day in the 13 week- and 30 mg/kg/day in the 26-week rat study, and &lt;10 mg/kg/day in the 39-week dog study.

· Repeat dose toxicity (with toxicokinetics) Repeated dose toxicity of sitaxentan was evaluated orally in mice, and both orally and intravenously in rats and dogs. Three oral toxicity studies of 14-days, 28-days and 26 weeks duration were conducted in mice, four oral toxicity studies with durations of 7 days, 4 weeks, 13 weeks and 26 weeks in rats, and six oral toxicity studies with durations of 3 days to 39 weeks were conducted in dogs. Each study, except  the  7-day  study  in  rats,  the  3-  and  9-day  study  in  dogs  included  satellite  groups  in  which systemic exposure to sitaxentan was evaluated relationship, to dose level, sex, and duration of dosing. In general, exposure increased with increasing dose level using once-a-day (QD) dose regimens. There was little evidence of accumulation at doses below 300 mg/kg in mice and 80 mg/kg in dogs with QD dosing. However, some accumulation was observed in rats at doses greater or equal to 120 mg/k/day and mice at doses ≥ 400 mg/kg/day. In repeat dose oral studies using a two-times-a-day (BID) dosing regimen, substantial accumulation was noted, especially in the trough plasma sitaxentan concentrations  of  rats  at  doses  of  30  mg/kg  BID  and  above  and  in  dogs  at  50  mg/kg  BID.  This continuous and relatively high exposure most likely accounted for the greater toxicity observed with BID dosing. A BID dosing regimen was less well tolerated than QD administration. As assessed in the 39-week dogs study, the local and systemic effects of sitaxentan were reversible within 12 weeks after dosing stopped. In mice, rats and dogs, there were changes in a number of haematology parameters (e.g. decreases in Hb  and  Hct,  and  increases  in  platelet  count,  activated  partial  thromboplastin  times  (APTT)  and/or prothrombin times (PT). In mice, the slightly longer APTT in males (at all dose levels) and in females at ≥ 200 mg/kg/day were not associated with any signs of coagulopathy. Increases in APTT were also seen,  but  coagulopathy  (bleedings)  were  not  observed.  In  rats  and  dogs,  blood-loss  anaemia  and evidence  of  multi-organ  haemorrhage  was  noted  at  higher  dose  levels  in  many  repeat-dose  studies especially  with  BID  dosing.  In  both  rats  and  mice,  there  is  an  association  of  sitaxentan  dose  with increased  coagulation  time  parameters  which  results  in  safety  margins  relative  to  therapeutically effective free plasma concentrations of &gt; 40. In mice rats and dogs, there is no correlation between increases in PT, APTT and platelet count. The dose-dependent increase in PT and APTT observed in vivo,  most  prominently  in  rats,  indicates  that  sitaxentan  can  affect  both  the  intrinsic  (APTT)  and extrinsic (PT) pathways. In vitro, sitaxentan affected platelet aggregation in human and rat plateletrich plasma at &gt; 300 and 1000 µg/ml, respectively. Sitaxentan at up to 1000 µg/ml did not alter PT or APTT. Therefore, sitaxentan had minimal effects on coagulation parameters and platelet aggregation in in vitro studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In mice, rats and dogs, there were changes in a number of clinical chemistry parameters (e.g. decrease in  total  protein,  albumin  and/or  decreases  in  creatinine  and  blood  urea  nitrogen)  and  greater  heart (most  likely  mild  myocardial  hypertrophy).  Urinalysis  revealed  increased  urinary  water  excretion, reflected  in  greater  urine  output  and/or  decreased  urine  concentrations  of  potassium  and  other electrolytes.  These  observations  were  considered  to  be  physiological  response  to  plasma  volume

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

expansion. The NOAEL for these effects were &lt;200 mg/kg in mice (28-day study) and &lt;10 mg/kg/day in rats (26-week study) and dogs (39-week study).

In  mice,  rats  and  dogs,  there  were  dose-related  increases  in  the  weights  of  liver  (centrilobular hypertrophy  and occasionally also necrosis). At high doses, gall bladder hyperplasia and/or inflammation were occasionally seen in mice at ≥ 400 mg/kg/day (28-day study) and in dogs at 80 mg/kg/day (39-week study). In the 99-week rat carcinogenicity study, liver hypertrophy was present at an  increased  incidence  in  males  at  15  mg/kg/day  and  in  females  in  the  40  and  80  mg/kg/day  dose groups. In this study, centrilobular necrosis was present in both sexes at all dose levels. This finding was  dose-related  and  was  considered  the  cause  of  death  in  animals  at  the  higher  dose  levels  ( ≥ 40 mg/kg/day).  The  NOAEL  for  the  liver  effects  were  &lt;200  mg/kg  in  mice  (28-day  study)  and  &lt;10 mg/kg/day (26-week study) or &lt;15 mg/kg/day in rats (99-week study, see chapter on carcinogenicity) and 10 mg/kg/day in dogs (39-week study). From these data, safety margins &lt;41.2 (based on the 13week rat study) and &lt;27 (based on the 99-week rat study) and &lt;3.9 (based on the 39-week dog study) can be calculated. This means that, with respect to early changes in liver weight the safety margin for human is low.

In male rats, an increased number of benign pheochromocytoma was observed in the adrenals. Benign pheochromocytoma  is  common  in  Sprague  Dawley  rats,  however  the  difference  in  incidence  with controls  was  quite  obvious.  The  highest  incidence  of  benign  pheochromocytomas  in  male  Sprague Dawley rats from the historical control data was 24 %, compared to 18, 21 and 22 % for the 15, 30 and 60 mg/kg sitaxentan treated dose groups. Therefore, based on the historical control data, the incidence of  adrenal  benign  pheochtomocytomas  in  male  Sprague-Dawley  rats  did  not  seem  to  be  related  to sitaxentan.

In mice, rats and dogs, decreased serum cholesterol (mice, rat,), triglyceride (rat), bilirubin (rat), and decreased or increased in alkaline phosphatase, aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase.  The  NOAEL for these effects were &lt;100 mg/kg in mice (28-day study) and &lt;10 mg/kg/BID in rats (26-week study) and &lt;10 mg/kg/day in dogs (39-week study). · Genotoxicity The Ames test was negative. The mouse lymphoma test was equivocal associated with cytotoxicity and lacking dose dependence. The chromosome aberration test in CHO cells was positive associated with cytotoxicity. The in vivo mouse micronucleus test and the transgenic bioassay in p53± mice were clearly negative. The conclusion that the effects seen in the in vitro studies in mammalian cells have to be  regarded  as  probably  biologically  irrelevant.  This  conclusion  is  further  supported  by  the  also negative long-term carcinogenicity study in rats. · Carcinogenicity The carcinogenic potential of sitaxentan was seen in a 99-week rat study and in a 26-week study in p53+/- mice. In  the  99-week  oral  rat  study,  no  toxicokinetic  measurements  were  performed  in  control  animals. However,  data  do  not  indicate  towards  contamination  of  control  samples. Most  obvious  effects occurring already at low dose (exposure approximately 14-57x human exposure) were haemorrhages in several organs and liver hypertrophy and centrilobular necrosis. The latter effect could possibly be secondary to haemorrhages, but a primary effect of sitaxentan on the liver cannot be ruled out. Red blood cell decreases were probably caused by the haemorrhages. Nasal cavity epithelial degeneration and regeneration occurred, for which a gavage effect is a likely explanation. In males, also already at the lowest dose, atrophy of the seminiferous epithelium in the testis was observed. These effects were not  considered  relevant  by  the  MAH  but  nevertheless  increased  from  the  low  dose  were  adrenal cortical hyperplasia and degeneration of the lumbar spinal cord nerve fibre in males and cysts in ovary and uterus in females. At the highest dose, body weight and food consumption were decreased and accumulation of macrophages was observed in the lungs. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Tumour incidences that reached statistical significance in the rat carcinogenicity study were squamous cell carcinomas in males, and basal cell adenomas and keratoacanthomas in male rats. The incidence of squamous cell carcinomas in male rats (up to 5 %) was higher than that of the historical control data

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(up to 1.8 %). The incidence of basal cell adenomas in male rats (up to 6.7 %) was higher than that of the historical control data (up to 2.7 %). The incidence of keratoacanthomas in male rats (up to 11.7 %) was below that of the historical control data (up to 13.4 %). The apparent increased skin tumour incidence  seems  not  to  be  associated  with  sitaxentan  treatment  based  on  the  statistical  analysis  of combined skin squamous cell tumours (papillomas, keratoacanthomas and carcinomas) and combined skin  basal  cell  tumours  (adenomas)  and  absence  of  phototoxicity.  It  is  not  possible  to  combine  all types of skin tumours for statistical analysis in order to elucidate a possible relationship to treatment. In the 26-week study in p53+/- mice, administration of sitaxentan sodium up to 200 mg/kg/day did not result  in  increased  mortality  or  clinical  signs  of  toxicity.  Weight  gain  and  food  consumption  were inhibited  in  males  from  50  mg/kg/day  (exposure  approximately  28-43  x  human  exposure)  and  in females from 100 mg/kg/day. Centrilobular hepatocellular hypertrophy in the liver was found in all sitaxentan-treated groups and the incidence was dose-related. Furthermore, in the liver, mononuclear cellular infiltrate, cytoplasmic vacuolization of hepatocytes (males only) and individual cell necrosis (females  only,  not  dose-related)  were  observed  in  the  liver.  The  liver  effects  were  probably  due  to adaptive response to metabolic events in the liver. Degenerative changes of the olfactory epithelium, often associated with the presence of exudates in the nasal cavity, were also observed in sitaxentan sodium treated animals at all dose levels and were considered to be associated with reflux of the test article  from  the  nasopharynx  up  into  the  nasal  cavity.  Furthermore,  mononuclear  cell  infiltrate  was observed  in  the  salivary  glands  of  all  sitaxentan-treated  groups.  The  number  of  tumours  was  not increased in sitaxentan-treated groups. In mice treaded with p-cresidine, the expected transitional cell hyperplasia, metaplasia, papillomas, and/or carcinomas were observed, demonstrating the validity of the model. The combined incidence of papillomas and carcinomas was 66.7% in males and 46.7% in females.

· Reproduction Toxicity Fertility  studies  were  conducted  in  rats  with  sitaxentan  at  doses  up  to  120  mg/kg/day  (orally).  No effect  on  male  fertility  was  observed.  In  the  female  fertility  study,  maternal  no-effect  level  was considered 20 mg/kg/day by the Applicant because of a very slight effect on weight gain between GD 6-13 at dosages ≥ 80 mg/kg. However, this effect was hardly noticeable and therefore we consider the maternal NOEL in this study to be 120 mg/kg. The incidence of foetuses with the minor abnormality of  protrusion  of  the  median  liver  lobe  with  thinning  diaphragm  tended  to  be  increased  at ≥ 80 mg/kg/day.  However,  since  the  animals  were  dosed  only  up  to  GD6,  this  could  not  have  been  a treatment-related effect. It can be concluded that this study showed no effect on female fertility. The effect on embryo-foetal development has been investigated rats only. Sitaxentan has demonstrated to  affect  foetal  development  at  all  dose  levels  with  a  dose  response  relationship.  Considerable teratogenicity was observed, in particular incomplete soft palates and large additional ossified areas in the skull. At the lowest dose of 20 mg/kg BID, decreased pup survival, delayed female sexual maturity and tubular atrophy/aplasia in the testis were observed. At higher dosages, of F1 animals, weight gain during lactation was decreased, an increased liver was observed in males, male sexual maturity was delayed,  auditory  function  was  delayed,  and  in  F1  females  a  decreased  number  of  implants  was observed.  At the lowest dose of 20 mg/kg/BID, the exposure to sitaxentan was about 30 times higher than that in healthy and PAH patients. Since lower doses have not been tested, it is not clear whether there is a safety margin for human. It also not clear whether the teratogenic effects observed represent a class effect of endothelin receptor antagonists. Thus far, Bosentan is the only registered ET receptor antagonist.  Available  preclinical  information  is  insufficient  to  compare  the  reproduction  toxicity findings of sitaxentan with those of bosentan. There are no data on the use of sitaxentan in pregnant women, but there is a need to treat hypertensive women of child bearing potential, also in situations when other treatment alternatives are not suitable. Following with these data the discussion scheme in the Discussion Paper on Contraindications in Pregnancy, it is concluded that sitaxentan should not be contraindicated in pregnancy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Juvenile toxicity:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Sitaxentan  sodium  is  not  recommended  for  use  in  children  under  the  age  of  12  years.  A  study  in juvenile animals is currently performed (results available in 2006), but no clinical studies in children are ongoing at present. The MAH will perform a paediatric clinical programme as a post-authorisation commitment.

## · Local tolerance

The local tolerance of orally and IV administered sitaxentan sodium was evaluated as part of the local and systemic toxicity studies. With orally administered sitaxentan sodium, the only evidence of local adverse  effects  was  the  occurrence  of  nasal  discharge/epithelial  degeneration  (secondary  to  dosing solution reflux) in mice and rats and vomiting in dogs at high doses in a few repeat-dose studies. Since no irritation of GI tract was seen, these findings are not considered to imply that orally administered sitaxentan sodium would produce locally mediated adverse GI effects in humans. For intravenous administration to mice, rats, and dogs, sitaxentan sodium was dissolved in a vehicle composed  of  PVP:PG:water  (5/10/85,  w/v/v)  or  saline.  In  mice,  sitaxentan  sodium  caused  local irritation at injection sites at ≥ 200 mg/kg with single IV doses. In rats, single or repeated daily IV doses produced local irritation at dose levels ≥ 30 mg/kg/day, characterized by dark and swollen tails. In  dogs,  repeated  daily  IV  doses  produced  local  irritation  at ≥ 10  mg/kg/day,  characterized  by injection-site inflammation and pain on injection. These findings suggest that sitaxentan sodium does have the potential to cause local irritation at injection sites when administered parenterally. · Other toxicity studies Immunotoxicity During  the  repeated-dose  toxicity  studies  and  the  carcinogenicity  study  performed  with  sitaxentan, there  were  no  treatment-related  effects  on  haematological  parameters  (except  on  red  blood  cells), serum globulins and immune system organ weights or histopathology. The thymic atrophy observed in mice and dogs was attributed to stress. No cause for concern regarding a possible immunotoxic effect of sitaxentan was revealed. Phototoxicity According to the  \"Note for Guidance on Photosafety testing\", photosafety testing is warranted for those chemicals that absorb light in the wave length of 290-700 nm and are either topically applied or reach the skin following systemic exposure  (CPMP/SWP/398/01).  Sitaxentan is a yellow powder, which indicates that it absorbs light in the visible area. According to the MAH, preliminary in vitro findings using the 3T3 NRU PT phototoxicity test utilizing the permanent mouse fibroblast cell line Balb/c 3T3 do not point to a phototoxic effect. The MAH has agreed to provide a copy of the final study  report  for  the  study  LOG0001  (\"Neutral  Red      Uptake      Phototoxicity  Assay  of  Sitaxentan Sodium in 3T3 Mouse Fibroblasts\") as part of the post authorization commitments. The final study report is awaited for assessment. Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment No ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment (ERA) has been performed as the current Draft 'Note for Guidance on the Environmental Risk Assessment' waives the need for ERA in orphan drugs. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 4 Clinical aspects

## Introduction

The clinical program included 3 placebo-controlled studies (FPH01, FPH02, and FPH04), 2 open-label studies  (TBC11251-211  and  FPH03),  and  3  long-term  extension  studies  (FPH01-X,  FPH01-XC,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

FPH02-X). Long-term data were also provided by FPH03, which included de novo subjects as well as extension  subjects  from  FPH04  and  FPH06.  Additionally,  a  definitive  corrected  QT  interval  (QTc) study (FNL13) and 1 blinded study of 2 doses of sitaxentan in a special population of subjects who were identified as bosentan treatment failures for either efficacy or safety reasons (FPH06) have been conducted.

Three different formulations were used during the development program. The BE-part of study FNL01 (Group A) failed to demonstrate bioequivalence of the two uncoated 50 mg and the coated 100 mg tablets. These results may not be of clinical relevance for the 100 mg coated tablets, which have been found to be clinically effective in the pivotal study and FPH02.

<!-- image -->

The absolute  bioavailability  is  between  the  70  and  100  %.  After  administration  of  25  and  100  mg coated tablets the median Tmax ranges from 0.5 to 4 hours. The single-dose mean Cmax values at the proposed therapeutic dose of 100 mg once daily were in the range of 7-13 µ g/mL. At steady state, the mean ± SD  Cmax,  Ctrough,  and  AUC0-24  values  were  13 ± 5 µ g/mL,  0.06 ± 0.07 µ g/mL,  and  40 ± 26 µ g.h/mL, respectively (fasting state). Based on Cmax data, steady state was reached after 5 days in healthy volunteers.

GCP The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. Pharmacokinetics The  pharmacokinetic  program  of  sitaxentan  sodium  consisted  of  23  studies,  which  included  522 patients with PAH. Additionally population pharmacokinetics analysis was conducted using data from 5 Phase 1 studies (FNL01, FNL02, FNL06, FNL08A, and FNL13) and 2 Phase 3 studies (FPH01 and FPH02). In vitro human biomaterial studies for sitaxentan evaluated its intestinal permeability, protein binding, hepatic metabolism and its potential for metabolism-based drug-drug interactions · Methods Sitaxentan  concentrations  in  human  plasma  were  determined  by  HPLC  coupled  to  a  tandem  mass spectrometry detector ((LC/MS/MS). The method (low and high concentration range) was developed by  Inveresk,  Scotland,  and  then  adapted  by  Analytical  solutions  Inc,  Sunnyvale,  USA.  After acquisition  of  Analytical  Solutions  by  MDS  Pharma  Services,  the  method  was  transferred  and revalidated  at  the  MDS  laboratory  in  Québec,  Canada.  Validation  reports  were  submitted  and  the assays were considered appropriate. The within-run and between-run accuracy and precision values were generally within 10%. The detection of sitaxentan was in the range of 0.2 to 50 µ g/ml and 50 to 12000 µ g/ml for the Inveresk method. The analytical range was 0.5 to 20000 µ g/ml for the Analytical Solutions/MDS method. Sitaxentan is stable in plasma over a period of at least 692 days. Freeze/thaw cycles  did  not  influence  the  accuracy  or  precision.  Even  though  no  cross  reference  between  the methods performed by the different institutes was performed; the pharmacokinetic results between the studies using the same dosages of sitaxentan are comparable · Absorption In vitro studies indicate that sitaxentan is not a substrate of P-gp. Clinical interaction studies indicate that sitaxentan might be a substrate of the OATBP1B1 transport protein. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Food affected the Cmax (43 % decrease with food) and Tmax (2-fold increase with food) of sitaxentan (100 mg coated tablet) but not the AUC. This food interaction has no clinical implication based on

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

efficacy  data  taken  at  through  and  close  to  the  C max.. Therefore,  it  is  agreed  that  sitaxentan  can  be administered with and without food.

## · Distribution

Sitaxentan  binds  extensively  and  dose-independently  to  human  plasma  proteins  (99%),  at  clinical relevant concentrations. Sitaxentan does not penetrate into erythrocytes. In pre-clinical studies it was shown that sitaxentan is excreted in breast milk. Sitaxentan seems to cross the placenta and bloodbrain-barrier.

## · Elimination

The  terminal  half-life  after  single  dose  and  steady  state  administration  of  100  mg  sitaxentan  was approximately 7 hours. The terminal half-life did not differ substantially between the different dosages or  between  oral  or  intravenous  administration.  However,  at  a  dose  of  1000  mg  at  steady  state  the terminal  half-life  increased  to  13  hours.  Sitaxentan  is  metabolised  by  CYP2C9  and  3A4/5.  There appears  to  be  sufficient  redundancy  in  the  CYP  metabolising  pathways  so  that  no  single  CYP  is considered rate limiting. Excretion in the urine and faeces accounted for 55% and 41% of the dose of radioactivity, respectively, for an essentially complete recovery of ~96% after 96 hours. A total of 1 % of the administered drug was excreted unchanged (in urine). The major metabolites of sitaxentan have no clinical relevant activity. No  ADME  data  were  provided  in  relation  to  relevant  polymorphisms  of  the  drug  metabolizing enzymes (e.g. CYP2C9 and CYP2C19). According to the applicant sitaxentan sodium appears to be a substrate for multiple efflux transporters in the canalicular membrane, including MXR and MRP2. The applicant commits to conduct, and provided some preliminary data on preclinical in-vitro studies to investigate  the  interaction  of  sitaxentan  with  several  hepatic  transport  proteins  (OATP,  the  human hepatic ABC efflux transporters MRP2 (ABCC2), MXR (ABCG2/BCRP), and BSEP (ABCB11/sPgp)).  A  statin  interaction  study  using  pravastatin  is  also  planned  to  evaluate  coadministration of statins and accumulation of sitaxentan. · Dose proportionality and time dependencies In general pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers were roughly comparable with patients with PAH. A  population  pharmacokinetic  study  revealed  that  patients  had  an  approximately  30%  lower  Cl/F compared to healthy subjects. Consecutively, AUC's were significantly higher in patients. This may be  due  to  effect  of  PAH  on  hepatic  and  renal  blood  flow.  The  pharmacokinetics  of  sitaxentan  are nonlinear after  oral  administration  to  healthy  volunteers  and  subjects  with  PAH.  The  AUC  and  the Cmax increase more than dose-proportional after increasing oral doses of sitaxentan, while the terminal half  life  does  not  change  significantly  between  the  different  administered  doses.  Between  the  doseinterval  of  50-100  mg  the  disproportional  increase  in  exposure  is  less  pronounced.  The  applicant predicts  an  approximate  3-fold  increase  in  AUCs  between  50  mg  and  100  mg.  According  to  the applicant the nonlinear increase in AUC could be due to a more immediate reduction in clearance by inhibition  of  CYP3A4/5  during  the  first-pass  through  the  liver.  Though  less  pronounced,  dose inproportionality is also found after intravenous administration of sitaxentan. A possible mechanism for this is saturation of the multiple efflux transporters, and as such, the applicant has committed to studying  the  mechanism  of  action  through  use  of  in  vitro  and  animal  models.  No  unexpected accumulation in the plasma was observed after multiple dosing at the recommended dose of 100 mg once daily. Inter- and intra individual variability for the Cmax and AUC ranged between the 10 and 35%. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Special populations

Renal  impairment  has  no  influence  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  sitaxentan.  No  information  was provided regarding changed pattern of metabolites in urine with renal impairment. No

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in patients with impaired hepatic function. As the effect of liver impairment on the pharmacokinetics is not clear, and non-linear pharmacokinetics may result in disproportionately  higher  plasma  concentrations  of  sitaxentan  in  patients  with  liver  impairment, sitaxentan should not be used in patients with impaired liver function (child-Pugh Class A-C). Gender, race,  and  age  do  not  clinically  significantly  affect  the  pharmacokinetics  of  sitaxentan.  Increasing weight resulted in an increase in apparent clearance. No pharmacokinetic studies with sitaxentan were performed in children.

## · Pharmacokinetic interaction studies

In  vitro,  sitaxentan  is  a  moderately  potent  inhibitor  of  CYP2C9  activity  and  a  moderately  weak inhibitor of CYP2C8, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4/5 activities. Sitaxentan is a substrate for CYP3A4/5 and CYP2C9. The AUC0-inf of S-warfarin (25 mg) increased with sitaxentan administration with 95%, for 100 mg once daily doses of sitaxentan (study FNL02). Also the terminal half-life of warfarin increased after sitaxentan co-administration. Sitaxentan treatment did not influence the Cmax of S-warfarin. This effect is  consistent  with  the  in  vitro  finding  of  sitaxentan  as  CYP2C9  inhibitor.  An  enhanced  effect  on prothrombin time and INR also was observed, consistent with the increase in exposure to S-warfarin. Warfarin is not licensed in all EU countries. These results obtained with warfarin can be extrapolated to other anticoagulant drugs used in EU countries for similar indications, as is stated in the SPC. Mean steady state plasma concentrations of ethinyl estradiol and norethindrone (CYP3A4/5 substrate) were higher  with  concomitant  treatment  of  sitaxentan.  The  Cmax,  and  AUC0-24  of  ethinyl  estradiol  were increased  by  approximately  35  %  and  60  %,  respectively.  The  Cmax,  and  AUC0-24  of  norethindrone were increased by approximately 20 % and 45 %, respectively. Measurements on follicle stimulating hormone  (FSH),  luteinizing  hormone  (LH)  indicated  that  there  was  no  effect  on  anti-ovulatory activity. No  clinical  significant  interactions  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  nifedipine  (CYP3A4/5  substrate), sildenafil (CYP3A4/5 substrate), ciclosporin (CYP3A4/5 substrate), digoxin (P-glycoprotein substrate), omeprazole (CYP2C19 substrate), ketoconazole and nelfinavir (CYP2C19 and CYP3A4/5 substrate) were found after concomitant treatment of sitaxentan. The dose of nifedipine used in study FNL04 (3 doses daily of 10 mg) is the minimum advised dose, the maximum advised dose is 6 times 20 mg daily for the immediate release capsules of nifedipine, the maximum advised dose for sustained release  tablets  of  nifedipine  is  also  120  mg  daily.  Therefore,  in  the  SPC  it  is  remarked  that  an interaction with nifedipine with higher doses cannot be excluded. Concomitant  treatment  with  ciclosporin  significantly  increased  sitaxentan  pre-dose  levels  up  to approximately 6-fold. The combination of ciclosporin and sitaxentan is contraindicated in the SPC. The applicant postulates that this interaction may be caused by interaction at the OATB transporter enzyme. The applicant will further investigate this in vitro.  If necessary  preclinical  studies  confirm such  an  interaction  in  vivo  studies  will  be  performed.  No  clinical  significant  interactions  on  the pharmacokinetics of sitaxentan were found after concomitant treatment of ketoconazole (inhibitor of CYP3A4/5)  and  fluconazole  (inhibitor  of  CYP2C19,  CYP2C9,  and  CYP3A4/5).  Regarding  the possible impact of polymorphisms of the main metabolizing enzymes (e.g. CYP2C9) it is of relevance that  fluconazol  (moderate  inhibitor  of  CYP3A4/5,  CYP2C9  and  CYP2C19)  did  not  significantly change the  PK  of  sitaxentan.  Albeit  not  investigated  in  subjects  with  known  geno-  or  phenotype  a clinically relevant change in PK in poor metabolizers is therefore unlikely. Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

To determine the effects of sitaxentan sodium on cardiovascular haemodynamics and function, studies were conducted in both healthy volunteers and subjects with PAH, left ventricular dysfunction, essential hypertension, and congestive heart failure.

Non-selective  blockade  of  the  endothelin  receptors  has  proven  to  be  a  useful  treatment  strategy  in primary and scleroderma-associated PAH. It has been postulated that relatively selective antagonism of  the  ETA  receptor  may  be  further  advantageous  through  blocking  the  deleterious  vasoconstrictive

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

effects  of  endothelin-1  (ET-1) on the pulmonary vasculature, while maintaining the vasodilator and clearance functions of the ETB receptor. To date, the further clinical efficacy anticipated on the basis of  this  hypothesis  remains  to  be  proven.  In  study  TBC11251-220  conducted  in  patients  with hypertension, numerically increased plasma levels of ET-1 were observed after a 2-week oral dosing of sitaxentan 160-480 mg BID, which was statistically significant in the highest dose group (480 mg BID).  This  supports  the endothelin  receptor blocking  action of sitaxentan with  chronic  oral administration.  It  is  of  note  that  no  pharmacodynamic  (PD)  studies  were  conducted  in  the  target population  of  PAH  patients,  and  that  PD  studies  did  not  incorporate  the  6-Minute  Walk  Test  as  a measure of clinical efficacy besides various haemodynamic parameters.

High-dose  PD  studies  were  conducted  in  healthy  volunteers  and  patients  with  left  ventricular dysfunction (LVD). In healthy volunteers, no clinically relevant systemic haemodynamic effects were observed at intravenous (IV) dosages up to 3.0 mg/kg. More relevant PD data came from two studies conducted  in  patients  with  LVD.  The  first  study  (TBC11251-202,  sitaxentan  0.3-10.0  mg/min  or placebo  IV),  showed  a  dose-dependent  reduction  in  systolic,  diastolic  and  mean  pulmonary  artery pressure (PAP). Meanwhile, changes in systemic systolic blood pressure, heart rate, cardiac output and cardiac index were generally minor and showed no clear dose-dependency. Systemic diastolic blood pressure showed a moderate dose-dependent reduction. In agreement with these findings, the second study (TBC11251-03, sitaxentan 1.5-6.0 mg/kg or placebo IV) also showed sitaxentan's efficacy in lowering systolic PAP in patients with LVD. The reduction in diastolic PAP observed with sitaxentan was however not significantly different from placebo. Further, a statistically significant reduction in PVR  was  observed  with  sitaxentan,  indicating  a  pulmonary  vasodilatory  response.  Overall,  these effects,  as  demonstrated  in  patients  with  heart  failure,  may  substantiate  sitaxentan's  potential therapeutic efficacy in patients with PAH on the basis of a clinically useful effect on PAP and PVR without marked systemic haemodynamic consequences. The  potential  clinically  useful  dose  range  was  difficult  to  establish  from  the  abovementioned  PD studies in the absence of data with multiple oral dosing in the target population of patients with PAH. Instead, the dose selection for the first pivotal clinical study (FPH-01) was mainly based on data from phase II clinical study TBC11251-211 in patients with PAH receiving oral sitaxentan 100-500 mg BID for  12  weeks (see section Clinical Efficacy/Safety). Besides showing favourable effects on relevant PD and clinical efficacy parameters, safety concerns emerged in the extension phase of this study due to clinically significant liver enzyme elevations and hepatitis in 2 subjects; one of these patients died from liver failure (see below). In addition, Michaelis-Menten modelling was conducted using PK data from normal human volunteers. Sitaxentan 100 and 300 mg QD were predicted to yield steady-state trough plasma free-drug concentrations of 1.4-fold and 6.1-fold in excess over the inhibition constant (IC50) value, assuming 99.9% protein binding. Therefore, sitaxentan 100 and 300 mg QD were chosen for study FPH01 in an attempt to reduce risk while maintaining efficacy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Sitaxentan  is  an  inhibitor  of  CYP2C9  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  of  CYP2C19  and  CYP3A4/5.  The administration  of  warfarin  (S-warfarin  is  a  CYP2C9  substrate)  resulted  in  a  larger  INR  increase  in patients  pretreated  with  sitaxentan  versus  placebo,  consistent  with  sitaxentan's  potential  to  inhibit CYP2C9 and the consequentially increased S-warfarin exposure (AUC) during co-administration. The mean  values  for  the  maximum  PD  effect  and  area  under  the  PD  effect  curve  were  higher  with sitaxentan versus placebo. These findings underline the necessity of a dose reduction when sitaxentan is  initiated  in  patients  treated  with  Vitamin  K  antagonists  that  are  CYP2C9-dependent  in  their metabolism,  to  avoid  an  initially  increased  bleeding  risk.  This  PD  interaction  has  been  taken  into account in the phase-3 clinical programme (see section Clinical Safety). No data on dose adaptation in relation to polymorphisms of CYP2C9 have been provided. Consistent with PK findings regarding an increased  nifedipine  exposure  during  co-administration  with  sitaxentan  (nifedipine  is  a  CYP3A4/5 substrate), a somewhat increased BP lowering response was observed over time, but the lowest mean SBP and DBP achieved were  rather  comparable  in  the  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  and  placebo  group, indicating that a nifedipine dose reduction is not necessary. However, the nifedipine dosage selected (10 mg TID) was below the usual maintenance dose, which has been reflected in the SPC. Regarding the sildenafil interaction study (sildenafil is a CYP3A4/5 substrate), the mean maximum positive and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

negative  changes  for  both  SBP  and  DBP  were  rather  comparable  for  the  sitaxentan  and  placebo treatments,  indicating  no  dose-reduction  to  be  necessary  in  case  of  co-administration.  The  antiovulatory effect of the oral anticonceptive  Ortho-Novum  1/35 ® was maintained during coadministration. Sitaxentan led to an additional an increase (approximately  2-fold) in  plasma concentrations  of  progesterone  in  this  study.  The  altered  ratio  of  the  oestrogen  and  the  gestagen component  may  have  an  impact  on  the  risk/benefit  ratio  of  the  oral  contraceptive,  especially  in smoking women, who would have an increased risk for thromboembolism due to the relatively higher (59% increase of ethinyl estradiol versus 47% increase of norethindrone) oestrogen component. This has been reflected in the SPC.

## Clinical efficacy

<!-- image -->

· Dose response studies Dose finding was based on small initial studies and on investigation of three different doses in the large trials FPH01, 02, and 04. TBC11251-211 was the initial sitaxentan uncontrolled study to explore efficacy and safety in PAH as a proof of concept study. The study was conducted at doses higher than those used in the subsequent pivotal  studies  (4-6 mg/kg  dosed  BID,  for  total  doses  of  100-500 mg  BID).  The  study  indicated  an increase in 6-minutes walk test and of haemodynamic parameters that did not correlate well, however. In  the  small  population  of  14  patients,  an  unfavorable  safety  profile  was  shown.  Two  patients developed acute hepatitis after a total of 4 - 5 months on study drug. One of the patients discontinued the study due to the adverse event (hepatitis), the other one died from liver failure despite reduction and discontinuation of study drug. Finally,  dose  finding  was  established  by  including  50,  100,  and  300  mg  QD  arms  in  the  large  and pivotal clinical trials. As the 50 mg QD dose did not proof to be efficacious and the 300 mg QD dose had  an  unfavourable  safety  profile,  the  pivotal  trials  revealed  100  mg  QD  as  the  therapeutic  dose. There does not seem to be a close correlation between plasma sitaxentan levels and clinical efficacy as measured by the 6-minutes walk test. For example, PK data from study FPH-01 suggest that plasma levels are very low after 6h or less with 100 mg QD. There is one PK study comparing 1x200 mg BID vs 2x200 mg QD. It was concluded from that study that if pharmacodynamic outcome is related to Cmax,  then  the  QD  regimen  may  be  more  appropriate.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  pharmacodynamic outcome is related to overall drug exposure (e.g. AUC), the BID regimen may be more appropriate, because it allows for less fluctuating plasma concentrations, higher CminSS concentrations, and lower CmaxSS concentrations,  thus  reducing  the  risk  of  toxicity  while  maintaining  the  necessary  plasma concentrations  for  a  pharmacological  effect.  These  mainly  theoretical  concerns  were  based  on  PK data, but were not substantiated by clinical endpoint studies. In study FPH01, the 6-minutes walk test was performed at trough (24h post dosing) at very low plasma levels. Patients with 300 mg had about 48 fold trough plasma-levels compared to those on 100 mg, but efficacy was not different. In study FPH02, the 6-minutes walk test was taken at different time points. Furthermore, it took several weeks to achieve a significant therapeutic effect. Overall, these data indicated that the long-term effects on the  6  minutes  walk  test  were  not  dependent  on  continuous high plasma  levels  and  can  be achieved with a once daily dosing regimen. · Main studies Medicinal product no longer authorised

The main randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled studies in patients with PAH were FPH01, FPH02 and FPH04 .  Study FPH01 (n=178; sitaxentan 100 or 300 mg, or placebo) was 12 weeks in duration,  while  FPH02  (n=240;  sitaxentan  50  or  100  mg,  bosentan,  or  placebo)  and  FPH04  (n=98; sitaxentan 50 or 100 mg, or placebo) were 18 weeks in duration.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Overview for Controlled Studies: FPH01, FPH02, and FPH04

|                               | FPH01                                                                              | FPH02                                                                                       | FPH04                                                                          |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Population                    | Subjects with PAH, 16 to 75 years of age, and NYHA functional Class II, III, or IV | Subjects with PAH, 12- 75 years of age, and WHOfunctional Class II, III, or IV              | Subjects with PAH, 12- 75 years of age, and WHOfunctional Class II, III, or IV |
| Treatment groups              | Placebo once daily, sitaxentan 100 mg once daily, sitaxentan 300 mg once daily     | Placebo once daily, sitaxentan 50 mg once daily, sitaxentan 100 mg once daily, bosentan BID | Placebo once daily, sitaxentan 50 mg once daily, sitaxentan 100 mg once daily  |
| Number of subjects planned    | 60 per group, total 180                                                            | 60 per group, total 240                                                                     | 30 per group, total 90                                                         |
| Treatment duration            | 12 weeks                                                                           | 18 weeks                                                                                    | 18 weeks                                                                       |
| Number of sites and countries | 23 sites in the United States and Canada                                           | 55 sites in North America, Europe, Israel, and Australia                                    | 11 sites in Mexico, Argentina, Brazil, Spain, and Poland                       |

Add-on studies with non-conventional treatments (e.g. sildenafil, iloprost) have not been performed during the clinical development and will be done as part of the post-authorisation commitments (i.e. sitaxentan/sildenafil).

Number of subjects planned Treatment duration Number of sites and countries BID = twice daily; NYHA = New York Heart Association; WHO = World Health Organization The  primary  efficacy  endpoint  in  FPH01  was  the  change  from  baseline  to  Week  12  in  percent  of predicted peak oxygen uptake (VO2), which is an endpoint of uncertain clinical relevance. The study report did not mention a closed hierarchical stepwise testing procedure, thereby limiting any potential claims on the basis of secondary endpoints, which included the 6-Minute Walk Test as well in FPH01. The primary efficacy endpoint in FPH02 and FPH04 was the change from baseline to Week 18 in the 6-Minute  Walk  Test  distance.  Thus,  these  pivotal  studies  were  not  designed  to  evaluate  long-term effects of sitaxentan or to demonstrate improved survival. The inclusion and exclusion criteria only permitted patients with primary, CTD-associated, or CHDassociated  PAH  to  be  enrolled.  Consistent  with  the  accepted  definition  of  PAH,  a  precapillary pulmonary hypertension (mean PAP &gt;25 mmHg at rest) with a PCWP &lt;15 mmHg was required. It is of  note  that  patients  with  pre-existent  hepatic  disease  were  excluded  from  these  studies.  No requirement for a 6-Minute Walk Test distance at baseline was postulated for FPH01, but a baseline distance between 150-450 meters was required for FPH02 and FPH04. Complementary to the upper limit  postulated  for  the  baseline  walking  distance,  patients  with  WHO  functional  class  I  were excluded.  Patients  receiving  non-conventional  PAH  treatments  (e.g.  bosentan,  iloprost,  sildenafil) were excluded. Across  the  pooled  ITT  population  for  these  studies,  a  large  majority  of  patients  had  primary  PAH (299/521;  58%)  or  CTD-associated  PAH  (129/512;  25%).  Most  patients  were  assessed  as  having WHO functional class II (210/512; 41%) or class III (291/512; 57%), while very few patients were in class IV (11/512; 2%). By exclusion, zero patients were in class I disease severity. Study FPH01 and FPH02  recruited  predominantly  class  III  patients,  while  in  FPH04  a  majority  had  a  lesser  disease severity (class II).  As  expected, there was a female-to-male preponderance with 80% being female. Studies FPH01 and FPH02 included mostly Caucasians, while in study FPH04 the majority of patients were non-Caucasians (mainly Hispanics or Latinos). Overall, baseline characteristics regarding age, gender,  race,  PAH  aetiology,  concomitant  medications,  and  WHO  classification  were  reasonably comparable across treatment groups within each study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## METHODS

Study Participants

All  study  subjects  had  documented  PAH  classified  by  one  of  the  following:  Primary  pulmonary hypertension,  Secondary  pulmonary  hypertension  related  to  a  connective  tissue  disease  or  PAH

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

associated  with  congenital  heart  defects.  Additionally  they  had  NYHA/WHO  Class II,  III  or  IV symptoms, despite optimal therapy.

Among the exclusion criteria were having parenchymal lung disease, portal hypertension or chronic liver disease.

## Treatments

Patients were randomized to the following treatments:

FPH01: 1:1:1 ratio: sitaxentan 100 mg once daily, 300 mg once daily, or placebo once daily, for 12 weeks.

FPH02: 1:1:1:1 ratio: double-blind sitaxentan sodium 50 mg, sitaxentan sodium 100 mg, or placebo once daily; or open-label, rater-blinded, bosentan for 18 weeks. Bosentan was given at the standard dose according to the Package Insert (62.5 mg twice daily [ BID ]  for  4 weeks, then increasing to the maintenance dose of 125 mg BID )

FPH04:

-  Minute  ventilation  per  carbon  dioxide  production  at  the  AT  change  from  baseline  to  Week  12  as measured during cycle ergometry.

FPH04: 1:1:1  ratio:  double-blind  sitaxentan  sodium  50 mg  plus  conventional  treatment,  sitaxentan sodium  100 mg  plus  conventional  treatment,  or  placebo  plus  conventional  treatment  for  18  weeks. Study drug was taken once daily. Objectives The  primary  objective  of  the  three  studies  was  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  sitaxentan  as follows: FPH01: sitaxentan sodium compared to placebo in patients with PAH. FPH02: sitaxentan sodium compared to placebo. For descriptive comparison, an open-label bosentan arm was included. sitaxentan sodium compared to placebo. In these studies, the study medicine was added to patients' current conventional therapy, which could have  included  a  combination  of  digoxin,  anticoagulants,  diuretics,  oxygen,  and  vasodilators  (e.g., calcium channel blockers, ACE inhibitors). In all three studies the secondary objective was to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of sitaxentan sodium treatment. Outcomes/endpoints · Primary efficacy endpoints FPH01: maximal aerobic capacity defined by change in percent of predicted peak VO2 from baseline to  Week 12  as  measured  during  cycle  ergometry.  Percent  of  predicted  peak  VO2  was  defined  as observed peak VO2 divided by the predicted peak VO2 (based on weight, height, age, and gender) multiplied by 100. FPH02 and FPH04: change from baseline in 6-minute walk distance at Week 18. · Secondary efficacy endpoints FPH01: - 6-minute walk distance changes from baseline to Weeks 6 and 12. - Shifts from baseline to Week 12 in NYHA functional class. - Cardiopulmonary haemodynamic changes from baseline to Week 12. - Anaerobic threshold change from baseline to Week 12 as measured during cycle ergometry. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- Time to clinical worsening (occurrence of either death, epoprostenol use, atrial septostomy, or need for lung transplantation) between baseline and Week 12.
- Time to NYHA functional class deterioration between baseline and Week 12.
- Cycle ergometry exercise time: change from baseline to Week 12.

Other efficacy endpoints:

Quality of life defined by Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36) questionnaire (Version 2) score change from baseline to Week 12

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## FPH02:

- World Health Organization functional class change from baseline at Week 18.
-  Time  to  clinical  worsening  through  Week 18.  Clinical  worsening  was  defined  as  any  of  the following: Hospitalization for worsening PAH, Death, Need for heart-lung or lung transplant, Atrial septostomy,  Addition  of  any  new  type  of  chronic  treatment  for  worsening  PAH  (calcium  channel blocker, digitalis, prostacyclin or prostacyclin analog, alternative ET receptor antagonist, phosphodiesterase  inhibitor,  oxygen),  Combined  WHO  functional  class  deterioration and ≥ 15% decrease in 6 minute walk distance from baseline.
-  Borg Dyspnea Score change from baseline at Week 18. The Borg Dyspnea Score assessment was administered at the end of the 6-minute walk test to assess the greatest degree of dyspnea that occurred at any time during the 6-minute walk test. If a subject was not able to perform the 6-minute walk test due to clinical worsening or death, the worst Borg Dyspnea score of 10 was assigned for the visit. During a post-baseline visit, if a subject performed the 6 minute walk test with the addition or increase in  the  level  of  oxygen  compared  to  baseline,  the  worst  value  of  Borg  Dyspnea  score  amongst  all values for the individual subject, including the values obtained under oxygen, was assigned.

In FPH02 and FPH04 an Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) was used, assigning a drug kit number, blinding the site personnel and the subject to the actual treatment assignment. The bosentan treatment arm in FPH02 was unblinded both for subject and Investigator.

FPH04: - World Health Organization functional class change from baseline at each follow-up assessment. - Time to clinical worsening through Week 18 (for definition: see FPH02) Other efficacy endpoints: - Borg Dyspnea Score (for definition: see FPH02). Sample size In FPH01, a sample size of approximately 180 subjects (60 subjects/treatment group) was estimated to provide  approximately  80%  power  to  detect  a  4%  absolute  difference  at  Week 12  in  percent  of predicted  peak  VO2,  as  measured  during  cycle  ergometry  in  at  least  1 of  the  sitaxentan  groups compared with placebo. Assuming that (a) the baseline value for sitaxentan-treated subjects for peak VO2  is  37.2%,  and  (b)  no  improvement  is  observed  in  placebo  subjects  through  Week 12,  a  4% absolute difference in peak VO2 was necessary to obtain approximately 10% relative improvement, which is considered clinically meaningful. This sample size was calculated based on a type I error of 0.01, equal variance for placebo-treated and sitaxentan-treated groups (SD of 5.4%), 2-sided test, and adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Dunnett test. Based on results from FPH01, FPH02 had a sample size of approximately 60 subjects per treatment group  to  detect  statistically  significant  differences  between  the  treatment  groups,  with  90%  overall power  at  the  significance  level  of  0.05  using  a  2-sided  Student  t  test.  This  study  was  powered  to identify statistical differences in efficacy between the 100 mg sitaxentan and placebo groups. A total of 240 subjects were required to be randomized and treated. Also  based  on  results  from  FPH01,  FPH04  had  a  sample  size  of  approximately  30 subjects  per treatment  group  to  detect  statistically  significant  difference  between  treatment  group  sitaxentan 100 mg and placebo in the primary efficacy endpoint. This estimation was based on a 2-sided student t-test with type I error of 0.05 and statistical power of 85%. Randomisation In  FPH01,  randomization  was  done  assigning  the  subject  the  next  available  blinded  drug  kit.  The blinded  drug  kit  was  numbered  sequentially  according  to  the  randomization  schedule,  which  was stratified by sites and blocked to ensure balance between treatment groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Blinding (masking)

The  studies  were  adequately  blinded.  Site  personnel  conducting  efficacy  assessments  were  to  be conducted  by  trained  personnel  who  were  blinded  to  the  subject's  treatment  assignment,  including coagulation test results and bosentan where applicable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

Participant flow and Recruitment

The disposition of patients and demographic characteristics is presented in table 2 and 3

Table 2: Subject Disposition in FPH01, FPH02, and FPH04

|                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                       | Sitaxentan                                       | Sitaxentan                          | Sitaxentan                         |                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Subject Disposition                                                                                                                                                                              | Placebo                                               | 50 mg                                            | 100 mg                              | 300 mg                             | Bosentan                                      |
| FPH01                                                                                                                                                                                            | FPH01                                                 | FPH01                                            | FPH01                               | FPH01                              | FPH01                                         |
| Randomized and took study drug Completed study Discontinued                                                                                                                                      | 60 55 (92%) 5 (8%)                                    | NA                                               | 55 55 (100%) 0 (0%)                 | 63 56 (89%) 7 (11%)                | NA                                            |
| Primary reason for discontinuation AE Lost to follow-up Elevation of LFT values                                                                                                                  | 3 (5%) 1 (2%) 1 (2%)                                  |                                                  | 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%)                | 6 (10%) 0 (0%) 1 (2%)              | authorised                                    |
| ITT Population                                                                                                                                                                                   | 60 (100%)                                             | 60 (100%)                                        | 55 (100%) 63 (100%)                 | 55 (100%) 63 (100%)                | 55 (100%) 63 (100%)                           |
| FPH02                                                                                                                                                                                            | FPH02                                                 | FPH02                                            | FPH02                               | FPH02                              | FPH02                                         |
| Randomized                                                                                                                                                                                       | 62                                                    | 61                                               | 62                                  | NA                                 | 62                                            |
| Took study drug Completed study Discontinued                                                                                                                                                     | 62 51 (82%) 11 (18%)                                  | 62 54 (87%) 8 (13%)                              | 61 57 (93%) 4 (7%) longer           |                                    | 61 52 (85%) 9 (15%)                           |
| Primary reason for discontinuation                                                                                                                                                               | Primary reason for discontinuation                    | Primary reason for discontinuation               | Primary reason for discontinuation  | Primary reason for discontinuation | Primary reason for discontinuation            |
| Elevation of LFT values > 3 × ULN WHOfunctional class deterioration + ≥ 15% 6-minute walk distance ↓ Need for additional treatment AE Subject/Investigator/Sponsor decision Other ITT Population | 1 (2%) 2 (3%) 4 (6%) 1 (2%) 3 (5%) 0 61 (98%) product | 0 1 (2%) 3 (5%) 1 (2%) 2 (3%) 1 (2%) 60 (98%) no | 1 (2%) 0 2 (3%) 0 1 (2%) 0 60 (97%) |                                    | 1 (2%) 1 (2%) 4 (7%) 2 (3%) 0 1 (2%) 59 (97%) |
| FPH04                                                                                                                                                                                            | FPH04                                                 | FPH04                                            | FPH04                               | FPH04                              | FPH04                                         |
| Randomized and took study drug Completed study Discontinued study early                                                                                                                          | 34 30 (88%) 4 (12%)                                   | 32 28 (88%) 4 (12%)                              | 32 29 (91%) 3 (9%)                  | NA                                 | NA                                            |
| Primary reason for discontinuation                                                                                                                                                               | Primary reason for discontinuation                    | Primary reason for discontinuation               | Primary reason for discontinuation  | Primary reason for discontinuation | Primary reason for discontinuation            |
| WHOfunctional class deterioration + ≥ 15% 6-minute walk distance ↓ Investigator/Subject decision Elevation of LFT values > 5 × ULN Pregnancy Medicinal                                           | 2 (6%) 2 (6%) 0 0                                     | 1 (3%) 2 (6%) 1 (3%) 0                           | 0 1 (3%) 1 (3%) 1 (3%)              |                                    |                                               |
| ITT Population                                                                                                                                                                                   | 34 (100%)                                             | 32 (100%)                                        | 32 (100%)                           |                                    |                                               |

LFT = liver function test; NA = not applicable; ULN = upper limit of the normal range

A  large  majority  of  patients  completed  the  pivotal  studies  in  the  placebo  and  sitaxentan  treatment groups  in  FPH01  and  FPH04.  This  was  also  observed  in  the  sitaxentan,  placebo  and  bosentan treatment groups in FPH02. At least 97% of patients were included in the primary ITT analyses, which is acceptable. Discontinuations will be further discussed in the section on Clinical Safety.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## CONDUCT OF THE STUDY

Baseline data

Baseline characteristics can be found in the table below:

Table 3: Demographic Characteristics in FPH01, FPH02, and FPH04

|                             |              | Sitaxentan   | Sitaxentan   | Sitaxentan   |              |
|-----------------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Demographic Characteristics | Placebo      | 50 mg        | 100 mg       | 300 mg       | Bosentan     |
| FPH01                       | (N=60)       | (N=0)        | (N=55)       | (N=63)       | (N=0)        |
| Mean (SD) age (years)       | 48 (14.0)    |              | 45 (14.1)    | 44 (11.5)    | authorised   |
| Gender                      |              |              |              |              |              |
| Male                        | 13 (22%)     |              | 8 (15%)      | 16 (25%)     |              |
| Female                      | 47 (78%)     |              | 47 (85%)     | 47 (75%)     |              |
| Race or ethnicity           |              |              |              |              |              |
| Caucasian                   | 42 (70%)     |              | 39 (71%)     | 44 (70%)     |              |
| Non-Caucasian               | 18 (30%)     |              | 16 (29%)     | 19 (30%)     |              |
| PAH classification          |              |              |              |              |              |
| PPH                         | 37 (62%)     |              | 23 (42%)     | 34 (54%)     |              |
| SPH                         | 23 (38%)     |              | 32 (58%)     | 29 (46%)     |              |
| CTD                         | 9 (15%)      |              | 16 (29%)     | 17 (27%)     |              |
| CHD                         | 14 (23%)     |              | 16 (29%)     | 12 (19%)     |              |
| WHOfunctional class         |              |              | longer       |              |              |
| Class II                    | 22 (37%)     |              | 16 (29%)     | 21 (33%)     |              |
| Class III                   | 36 (60%)     |              | 39 (71%)     | 42 (67%)     |              |
| IV                          | 2 ( 3%)      |              | 0            | 0            |              |
| Class                       |              |              |              |              |              |
| FPH02                       | (N=61)       | (N=60)       | (N=60)       | (N=0)        | (N=59)       |
| Mean (SD) age (years)       | 53.0 (15.15) | 56.8 (13.14) | 54.7 (13.75) |              | 48.8 (15.89) |
| Gender                      |              |              |              |              |              |
| Male                        | 15 (25%)     | 9 (15%) no   | 16 (27%)     |              | 13 (22%)     |
| Female                      | 46 (75%)     | 51 (85%)     | 44 (73%)     |              | 46 (78%)     |
| Race or ethnicity           | product      |              |              |              |              |
| Caucasian                   | 45 (74%)     | 46 (77%)     | 51 (85%)     |              | 47 (80%)     |
| Non-Caucasian               | 16 (26%)     | 14 (23%)     | 9 (15%)      |              | 12 (20%)     |
| PAH classification          |              |              |              |              |              |
| PPH                         | 37 (61%)     | 33 (55%)     | 38 (63%)     |              | 34 (58%)     |
| SPH                         | 24 (39%) a   | 27 (45%)     | 22 (37%)     |              | 25 (42%)     |
| CTD                         | 16 (26%)     | 19 (32%)     | 18 (30%)     |              | 19 (32%)     |
| CHD                         | 7 (11%)      | 8 (13%)      | 4 ( 7%)      |              | 6 (10%)      |
| WHOfunctional class         |              |              |              |              |              |
| Class II                    | 23 (38%)     | 20 (33%)     | 26 (43%)     |              | 22 (37%)     |
| Class III                   | 34 (56%)     | 37 (62%)     | 33 (55%)     |              | 36 (61%)     |
| Class IV                    | 4 (7%)       | 3 ( 5%)      | 1 ( 2%)      |              | 1 (2%)       |

<!-- image -->

In  these  studies,  a  large  majority  of  patients  had  primary  or  CTD-associated  PAH.  Only  FPH01 recruited a substantial proportion of patients with CHD-associated PAH, but any claims solely on the basis of this study proved difficult on the basis of the adjudication of endpoints and statistical analysis plan.

Outcomes and estimation

Results on the 6-Minute Walk Test distance (primary endpoint in FPH02 and FPH04)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4. Change from baseline in 6-Minute Walk Test distance (FPH01, FPH02 and FPH04)

* Statistically significant difference (p ≤ 0.05) compared to placebo. Wk: Week, SD: standard deviation. a Simultaneous (Dunnett-Hsu) two-sided CIs (for active versus placebo differences). b Pairwise (versus placebo) p-value was from an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) including baseline response in the model and adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Dunnett-Hsu method. c P-value was obtained from a nonparametric ANCOVA with the factor of treatment and baseline value as the covariate based on last observation carried forward (LOCF) imputed data. d P-value was calculated for the comparison with placebo from a 2-sample t-test. Missing values were imputed: LOCF. Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                                              |                       | Sitaxentan                            | Sitaxentan                               | Sitaxentan                       |                                              |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| 6-Minute Walk Distance                       | Placebo               | 50 mg                                 | 100 mg                                   | 300 mg                           | Bosentan                                     |
| FPH01                                        | (N=60)                | (N=0)                                 | (N=55)                                   | (N=63)                           | (N=0)                                        |
| Baseline                                     | 412.9                 | NA                                    | 394.2                                    | 387.1                            | NA                                           |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 6 95% CI a P-value b  | -0.17 (52.74)         | NA                                    | 12.71 (55.05) -11.4, 33.70 0.440         | 14.97 (56.64) -9.12, 34.58 0.327 | NA                                           |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 12 95% CI a P-value b | -13.44 (62.76)        | NA                                    | 21.63 (47.57) 8.53, 58.60 0.006*         | 19.81 (67.82) 6.92, 55.43 0.009* | NA                                           |
| FPH02                                        | (N=61)                | (N=60)                                | (N=60)                                   | (N=0)                            | (N=59)                                       |
| Baseline                                     | 322.0                 | 327.4                                 | 361.7                                    |                                  | 335.6                                        |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 6 95% CI P-value c    | 12.55 (52.14)         | 9.10 (46.92) -21.32, 14.41 0.7698     | 18.03 (40.83) -11.40, 22.36 0.6984       | NA                               | 22.48 (61.21) -10.60, 30.46 0.3337           |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 12 95% CI P-value c   | 0.47 (79.14)          | 5.69 (58.35) -19.84, 30.28 0.6089     | 22.89 (59.44) -2.80, 47.65 0.0201*       | NA                               | 28.47 (70.78) 0.83, 55.17 0.0183* authorised |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 18 95% CI P-value c   | -6.49 (84.37)         | 17.76 (58.27) -1.90, 50.39 0.0703     | 24.91 (57.50) 5.37, 57.44 0.0316* longer | NA                               | 23.02 (76.41) 0.38, 58.64 0.0526             |
| FPH04                                        | (N=34)                | (N=32)                                | (N=32)                                   | (N=0)                            | (N=0)                                        |
| Baseline                                     | 341.6                 | 355.3                                 | 342.8                                    |                                  |                                              |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 6 95% CI P-value d    | 32.46 (66.91)         | 27.89 (46.86) -33.14, 24.01 0.7506 no | 40.71 (53.50) -21.66, 38.16 0.5834       | NA                               | NA                                           |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 12 95% CI P-value d   | 35.12 (71.79) product | 31.25 (54.85) -35.43, 27.69 0.8074    | 51.63 (61.62) -16.49, 49.50 0.3214       | NA                               | NA                                           |
| Mean (SD) change to Wk 18 95% CI P-value d   | 33.76 (88.51)         | 22.18 (48.64) -47.00, 23.86 0.5163    | 58.04 (63.65) -13.84, 62.40 0.2078       | NA                               | NA                                           |

Results  on  study FPH02 are  considered  of  main  importance,  since  this  study  included  a  sufficient amount  of  patients  per  treatment  group  (n=60),  adjucated  the  6-Minute  Walk  Test  as  a  primary endpoint, and incorporated a bosentan active-control arm as well. The improvement in 6-Minute Walk Test  distance  showed  some  dose  dependency  in  this  study,  and  a  statistically  significant  moderate improvement from baseline in 6-Minute Walk Test distance was noted with sitaxentan 100 mg QD of 24.9  meters  versus  -6.5  meters  with  placebo  (difference  vs.  placebo:  31.4  m).  Importantly,  the bosentan group that was included for descriptive purpose (i.e., without the power to test a hypothesis of  non-inferiority),  showed  a  comparable  improvement  of  23.0  meters  after  18  weeks  of  treatment (difference vs. placebo: 29.5 m).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The results were generally confirmed in study FPH01 also conducted in a predominantly Caucasian WHO  functional  class  III  primary  and  CTD-associated  PAH  population,  showing  a  comparable placebo-corrected  improvement with sitaxentan 100 mg QD at 12 weeks (35.1 m). The efficacy of sitaxentan 300 mg QD did not improve compared to 100 mg QD in FPH01. Sitaxentan 50 mg QD, that produced statistically insignificant improvements versus placebo at all time points in FPH02, was less efficacious. The results on the change from baseline to Week 12 in percent of predicted peak oxygen uptake  were  not  consistent  with  the  relative  improvements  in  6-Minute  Walk  Test  distance  on sitaxentan,  underlining  the  questionable  validity  of  this  alternative  primary  endpoint  in  FPH01 reflecting maximal aerobic capacity.

The third pivotal study, FPH04 ,  was  conducted in a different population of non-Caucasian patients with a lesser disease severity and half as much patients per treatment group (n=32). Large, positive placebo and sitaxentan 100 mg QD treatment effects were noted (33.8 and 58.0 m, resp) compared to the other studies. This may seem remarkable, given the lesser disease severity in FPH04 (i.e., WHO class II instead of class III patients), in which a smaller treatment effect might be expected a-priori in PAH patients. These findings may however relate to sample size and the fact that randomised clinical studies are generally appropriate for comparing treatment effects across randomised treatment groups, while being less suitable for determining the true treatment effect within a given treatment arm. In this respect, it is noted that a smaller relative improvement versus placebo was noted with sitaxentan 100 mg  QD  in  FPH04  (24.2  m)  compared  to  FPH01  and  FPH02,  consistent  with  the  abovementioned assumption  of  disease  severity-related  efficacy.  Further,  study  FPH01  and  FPH02  conducted  in patients  with  similar  disease  severity  (class  III)  showed  a  good  consistency  in  their  relative improvements on sitaxentan 100 mg QD vs. placebo (31.4 and 35.1 m, resp). In  order  to  allow  for  an  assessment  of  a  potential  influence  of  differences  in  the  concomitant medications between treatment groups, the Applicant presented an overview of classes of medications used by treatment group for pivotal studies FPH01, FPH02 and FPH04, with emphasis on PAH-related and vasodilatory medicinal products. The percentage usages of drugs approved for the treatment of PAH  and  other  vasodilatory  medicinal  products  across  the  3 treatment  groups  in  the  placebocontrolled trials were not considered sufficiently different in each case to account for differences in efficacy responses between placebo and active drugs (sitaxentan sodium and bosentan). Overall, the relative improvement in exercise capacity (6-Minute Walk Test distance) with sitaxentan 100 mg QD versus placebo (~33 m) appears to be clinically relevant, in view of a numerically comparable relative improvement observed with the previously licensed medicinal product bosentan (30 m). As expected in  a  rare  disease,  non-inferiority  has  not  been  formally  demonstrated.  The  placebo-corrected improvement in the subgroup of patients dominated by WHO class III patients was 46 m. The  results  on  the  predicted  peak  oxygen  uptake  (primary  endpoint  FPH01)  showed  statistically insignificant  absolute  decrease  in  mean  percent  of  predicted  peak  VO2  (i.e.,  peak  exercise  oxygen consumption; maximal aerobic capacity) of 0.4% with sitaxentan 100 mg QD compared with a mean decrease  of  0.1%  in  the  placebo  group.  In  contrast,  sitaxentan  300  mg  QD  showed  a  statistically significant  absolute  increase  in  mean  percent  of  predicted  peak  VO2  of  3.0-4.1%.  These  results  on cardiopulmonary  exercise  testing  are  not  consistent  with  the  relative  improvements  with  sitaxentan 100  and  300  mg  QD  regarding  the  established  clinically  relevant  endpoint  of  6-Minute  Walk  Test distance,  which  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  both  tests  measure  different  abilities.  Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is symptom-limited and measures maximal exercise performance, while the 6-Minute Walk Test is time-limited and measures exercise capacity performed at the patient's own pace. In any case,  the  disparity  in  outcomes  underlines  the  questionable  validity  of  this  alternative  primary endpoint in FPH01. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Results on secondary endpoints

In  the  absence  of  a  pre-specified  statistical  procedure  accounting  for  multiplicity,  the  secondary endpoint results for change from baseline in WHO/NYCA Functional Class, Clinical Worsening and Borg Dyspnea Score are considered supportive, and thus not compelling enough to substantiate any specific  claims.  Sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  treatment  was  generally  associated  with  better  WHO classification  outcome  versus  placebo  at  the  end  of  the  studies.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  results regarding the incidence of clinical worsening, showing a lower incidence with sitaxentan 100 mg QD

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

versus  placebo  in  all  three  studies.  Sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  however  failed  to  produce  statistically significantly lower Borg Dyspnoea Scores compared to placebo at the end of the study in FPH02 and FPH04, which also applied for bosentan in FPH02.

## Ancillary analyses

Compared  to  placebo,  both  sitaxentan  100  and  300  mg  QD  resulted  in  statistically  significant reductions in PVR and SVR, while a significant increase in cardiac index was noted. For the majority of  haemodynamic  measurements,  only  the  changes  observed  with  sitaxentan  300  mg  QD  achieved statistical significance versus placebo (in particular MPAP and MRAP), although a favourable trend towards a decreased MPAP was noted with sitaxentan 100 mg QD.

The  maximal  exercise  performance  test  revealed  no  significant  differences  between  sitaxentan treatment groups and placebo in change from baseline to Week 12 in percent of predicted VO2 at the AT, VE/VCO2 at the AT, or cycle ergometry exercise time. This latter statistically insignificant result on  cycle  ergometry  time  versus  a  statistically  significant  improvement  on  the  6-Minute  Walk  Test distance  required  further  discussion.  Although  in  a  different  setting  (symptom  limited  maximal exercise performance vs. time limited exercise capacity at the patient's own pace), both tests intend to measure exercise capacity. This issue was studied and the conclusion was that the exact reason for failure  of  the  cycle  ergometry  in  FPH01  still  remained  unclear.  However,  it  was  agreed  that  the  6 Minutes Walk Test measuring exercise capacity at the patient's own pace represents the best-validated endpoint in PAH, which was appropriately performed at trough. The change from baseline to Week 12 in heart rate, mixed venous oxygen saturation and systemic arterial oxygen saturation did not differ significantly for either sitaxentan dose group compared to placebo. Overall,  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  may  be  considered  as  having  a  moderately  favourable  effect  on pulmonary vascular haemodynamics in patients with PAH on the basis of its PAP and PVR lowering potency,  without  affecting  oxygenation  status.  These  findings  are  in  line  with  previous  findings  in pharmacodynamic studies in patients with LV dysfunction (see section on Clinical Pharmacology). · Supportive studies Supportive efficacy: studies FPH01-X, FPH02-X and FPH03 These  long-term  studies  were  primarily  safety  studies.  Efficacy  results  on  these  studies  should  be cautiously  interpreted  due  to  the  lack  of  a  placebo  or  active  control  arm  (except  for  FPH02-X  that included a bosentan treatment arm) and their open-label nature (except for FPH01-X that was blinded to treatment). The large open-label study FPH03 (sitaxentan 100 mg QD) that produced interim data on a substantial amount of patients up to Week 28 (n=229), suggested moderate improvements in exercise capacity and WHO functional classification, but no effect on Borg Dyspnoea Score with sitaxentan 100 mg QD up to this time point. These results are in line with previous findings from the pivotal trials up to 18 weeks' duration. Study FPH02-X (sitaxentan 100 mg QD or bosentan) produced interim data on a substantial amount of patients up to Week 18 (n=98) and suggested some further improvement of exercise capacity from preceding study FPH02 in both the sitaxentan and bosentan group. This was likely related to the fact that placebo- and sitaxentan 50 mg QD-treated patients were switched to either sitaxentan 100 mg QD or bosentan in the extension phase. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  study FPH01-X (n=170),  5%  of  patients  receiving  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  experienced  a deterioration  of  NYHA  functional  class  over  a  mean  exposure  of  29  weeks  compared  to  0%  on sitaxentan 100 mg QD and 7% on placebo within the 12 weeks of the preceding pivotal FPH01 study, which is acceptable. Overall, within the limitations posed by the absence of a placebo or active control arm and the open-label nature, these studies suggested maintenance of sitaxentan's efficacy up to 28 weeks of treatment.

## Patients failing on bosentan treatment: study FPH06

FPH06 (n=48)  was  a  randomized,  double-blind,  12-week  study  with  50  or  100  mg  QD  sitaxentan given  orally  to  patients  with  PAH  who  had  failed  bosentan  therapy  either  due  to  lack  of  clinical response or due to safety concerns/dose-limiting toxicity. In principle, the administration of sitaxentan

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in patients who have failed on bosentan (a drug with a similar mechanism of action) has a questionable clinical rationale. The interpretation of the results of this small-sized study was not straightforward in the absence of a placebo or active control arm, although ethical (placebo) and practical (unavailability of commercial bosentan to allow blinding) difficulties were acknowledged. The subset of patients who entered  the  study  on  the  basis  of  safety  reasons  (n=13)  was  too  small  to  allow  for  any  meaningful conclusion in this context. In the 'lack-of-efficacy' subset (n=35), 7 (20%) and 6 (17%) sitaxentantreated patients respectively showed an in- and decreased 6-Minute Walk Test distance of at least 15% at  Week  12.  In  this  same  subset,  2  (6%)  and  6  (17%)  respectively  showed  an  improvement  and progression (i.e., deterioration) in WHO functional classification. In the context of the aforementioned methodological  limitations,  these  results  were  not  considered  compelling  enough  to  support  any specific recommendation in patients experiencing a lack of efficacy on bosentan.

Clinical safety Sample size allowed only common AEs to be analysed in subgroups; no subgroup data on SAE and discontinuations were provided. · Patient exposure Across all phase 2 and 3 studies in patients with PAH, 899 patients have been treated with sitaxentan with  a  mean  exposure  of  29  weeks,  while  155  and  83  patients  have  been  exposed  to  placebo  or bosentan for mean duration of 15 and 27 weeks, resp. Of the 526 sitaxentan patients exposed for at least 6 months, 378 (72%) have been treated ≤ 12 months, 136 (26%) have been treated for at least 1 year but &lt; 1.5 years, but very few patients received sitaxentan past 1.5 years (12 patients). Of the 48 patients in the bosentan group exposed for at least 6 months, 41 (85%) have been treated ≤ 12 months, while only 7 patients (15%) have been treated for at least 1 year. · Adverse events In  the  medium-term  phase  3  placebo-controlled  studies  in  patients  with  PAH,  at  least  1  treatment emergent AE was experienced by comparably high proportions among treatment groups (all sitaxentan 91%, sitaxentan 100 mg QD 92%, placebo 92%, bosentan 89%). AEs that occurred in more than 10% of sitaxentan 100 mg QD patients included headache (28%), oedema peripheral (21%), nausea (15%), upper  respiratory  tract  infection  (15%),  dizziness  (13%),  nasopharyngitis  (13%),  nasal  congestion (13%) and insomnia (13%). The incidences of specific AEs were comparable between sitaxentan and placebo treated patients, except for marked higher incidences (difference ≥ 5%) on peripheral oedema (21% vs. 16%), insomnia (13% vs. 6%), nasopharyngitis (13% vs. 7%), nasal congestion (13% vs. 6%), upper respiratory tract infection (15% vs. 8%) and epistaxis (8% vs. 3%) with sitaxentan 100 mg QD  versus  placebo.  However,  when  the  preferred  terms  of  oedema  and  peripheral  oedema  were combined, the overall incidence was comparable between the sitaxentan 100 mg QD (22%), placebo (21%) and bosentan (25%) group. When nasopharyngitis, nasal congestion, sinus congestion, sinusitis, upper respiratory  tract  infection  and  pharyngolaryngeal  pain  were  combined,  the  overall  incidences were higher in the sitaxentan 100 mg QD and bosentan groups (45% and 48%, resp) compared to the placebo group (32%). Marked incidence differences (difference ≥ 5%) in the sitaxentan 100 mg QD versus bosentan group concerned vomiting (5% vs. 0%, resp), muscle cramp (7% vs. 0%), headache (28% vs. 20%), insomnia (13% vs. 0%), cough (5% vs. 13%), dyspnoea (7% vs. 15%) and pulmonary hypertension (1% vs. 7%). The increased incidence of epistaxis with sitaxentan may be related to a higher incidence on INR increased (sitaxentan 100 mg QD 6%, placebo 4%, bosentan 3%), for which a sitaxentan dose-dependency was demonstrated (50-300mg; 4%-14%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Regarding common AEs judged to be drug-related, sitaxentan treatment was associated with higher rates  on  coagulation/bleeding-associated  (INR  increased,  PT  prolonged,  epistaxis)  and  vasodilationassociated  (peripheral  oedema,  flushing)  AEs  compared  to  placebo.  The  presence  of  a  dosedependency further supports the association with study drug for these AEs. Overall, sitaxentan and bosentan  were  generally  associated  with  higher  rates  on  upper  respiratory  tract  disorders  and vasodilation-associated  events  (mainly  peripheral  oedema)  compared  to  placebo,  while  sitaxentan further elicited an increased rate on bleeding events (mainly epistaxis).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Adverse  events  were  also  analysed  by  subgroup.  Females  treated  with  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD experienced  peripheral  oedema  more  frequently  compared  to  males,  while  no  such  difference  was observed in placebo-treated female and male patients. However, no consistent difference was noted in AE  frequencies  between  female  and  male  sitaxentan-treated  patients.  Sitaxentan's  safety  profile appeared  to  be  more  favourable  in  Caucasians  on  the  basis  of  lower  frequencies  for  most  AEs  in Caucasian versus non-Caucasian patients (i.e., Latinos and Hispanics). Within the limitations posed by the low number of elderly patients ( ≥ 65 years) treated with either sitaxentan or placebo (n=27 and 24, resp),  no  consistent  difference  was  noted  in  AE  frequencies  between  patient's  aged  18-65  and  the elderly.  Sitaxentan's  AE  profile  appeared  to  be  comparable  in  patients  with  primary  and  CTDassociated PAH, as well as in patients in WHO functional class II versus III.

· Serious adverse event/deaths/other significant events In the phase 2 and 3 oral studies conducted in patients with PAH, at least 1 SAE was experienced by comparable proportions of patients across treatment groups; sitaxentan 23%, placebo 20%, bosentan 25%. A lower proportion of PAH patients experienced serious cardiac disorders (predominantly right ventricular failure, chest pain and cardiac failure) in the all doses sitaxentan compared to the placebo group (5.3% vs. 7.1%, resp), but this rate was lowest in the bosentan group (3.6%). On the other hand, serious respiratory disorders (predominantly pulmonary hypertension, pneumonia and dyspnoea) were less frequently observed in the all doses sitaxentan group compared bosentan (9.1% vs. 14.5%, resp), while this proportion was lowest in the placebo group (3.2%). An increased INR was more frequently reported as SAE with sitaxentan compared to all other groups, but the overall absolute incidence was low in the sitaxentan 50-100 mg QD group (0.4%). Notably, the incidence of anaemia reported as SAE was  lower  with  sitaxentan  and  bosentan  compared  to  placebo  ( ≤ 0.4%  vs  1.3%,  resp).  When combining the SAEs hepatic enzyme increased, liver function test abnormal, ALT increased and AST increased, the incidences with sitaxentan 50-100 mg QD and bosentan were comparable (1.0% and 1.2%,  resp)  and  higher  than  placebo  (0.6%).  Overall,  the  SAE  profile  of  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD appears to be comparable to bosentan, although the small number of patients in this latter treatment group  (n=83)  precludes  drawing  robust  conclusions,  in  particular  regarding  relatively  infrequently occurring SAEs such as hepatitis (see below). The incidence of death in the medium-term pivotal studies FPH01, FPH02 and FPH04 was lower with sitaxentan  compared  to  placebo  (1/306=0.3%  sitaxentan;  2/155=1.3%  placebo),  while  no  deaths occurred in the smaller group of patients treated with bosentan (n=61). As expected, most deaths were due to cardiopulmonary causes. In general, the poor prognosis of the disease, the limited amount of patients  treated  and  the  lack  of  a  control  group  make  it  difficult  to  draw  conclusions  about  the causality  of  deaths  in  the  long-term  extension  studies.  The  only  long-term  study  incorporating  a control  arm  for  descriptive  purpose  was  FPH02-X,  in  which  5/125=4.0%  sitaxentan-treated  and 3/65=4.6% bosentan-treated patients died from various causes, thereby posing no safety concerns. One death  of  particular  interest  was  observed  in  the  preceding  phase  2  clinical  study  TBC11251-211-X (extension phase), in which a patient initially dosed with sitaxentan 300 mg BID died from hepatic failure, indicative of drug-related hepatotoxicity. This death urged the applicant to reduce the target dosage ≤ 300 mg QD in the pivotal phase 3 studies. Notably, no clinical significant interactions on the pharmacokinetics  of  sitaxentan  were  found  after  concomitant  administration  of  CYP3A4/5  or CYP2C9  inhibitors  (see  PK  section).  Overall,  the  incidence  of  death  experienced  at  the  SPC recommended dose level does not raise major safety concerns, but any claim towards the prevention of mortality relative to current standards of medical care remains unjustified in the absence of clinical outcome studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Laboratory findings

## Hepatic toxicity

The rates on treatment emergent elevations in ALT values &gt; 5 × ULN in phase 2 and 3 oral studies in PAH  patients  were  0.7%  for  placebo,  4%  for  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD,  and  6%  for  bosentan.  A comparable pattern was observed when analysing a lower aminotransferase threshold, since the rates of elevations in ALT and/or AST values &gt; 3 × ULN were 5% for placebo, 7% for sitaxentan 100 mg

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

QD, and 12% for bosentan. In a head-to-head comparison in the randomised active-controlled studies FPH02 and FPH02-X, the  Kaplan-Meier  risk  of  elevation  in  ALT  and/or  AST  values  &gt;  3  ×  ULN within  the  first  year  of  exposure  was  less  for  sitaxentan  sodium  100  mg  QD  (4%)  than  bosentan (14%).  The  majority  (90%)  of  elevations  in  aminotransferases  occur  by  9  months  and  typically returned to normal or baseline by 4 months in both usual- and special risk patients. The assessment of safety  data  regarding  hard  clinical  endpoints  such  as  hepatic  failure  is  restricted  by  the  infrequent nature  of  these  events,  the  limited  amount  of  PAH  patients  treated,  and  the  frequent  presence  of confounding risk factors in these seriously ill patients. A detailed analysis of patients with ALT &gt; 5 × ULN yielded a total of 7 patients on sitaxentan 100 mg QD that met Hy's rule 2 and/or had clinically symptomatic hepatitis. Two of these 7 patients were reported to have clinically symptomatic hepatitis, of which one proceeded to liver failure. Overall, the data suggest that the hepatotoxicity of sitaxentan is at a comparable level versus bosentan, although firm conclusions should not be drawn on the basis of  these  limited  data  obtained  so  far.  The  SPC  contains  contra-indications,  warnings,  and  strict monitoring plus stopping rules related to hepatic function. Also, sitaxentan will be distributed using a controlled  access  system  and  hepatotoxicity  will  be  monitored  in  a  post-marketing  surveillance system. The underlying mechanism of hepatotoxicity remains unclear at present

In patients using warfarin or warfarin analogues, the incidence of bleeding was higher in the all doses and 100 mg QD sitaxentan groups compared to the placebo group (39/225=17% and 15/110=14% vs. 12/117=10%, resp). This bleeding pattern is likely mainly driven by the interaction between sitaxentan and warfarin (increasing the INR), that was not accounted for during the initial part of the clinical phase 3 programme. The lower bleeding rate with bosentan versus placebo (2/41=4.9% vs. 10%, resp) may be secondary to induction of warfarin metabolism by bosentan. Remarkably, no dose-dependency was noted across sitaxentan 50-300 mg/day. Approximately half way through study FPH01, a protocol amendment was made to reduce the warfarin dose at sitaxentan initiation. Very few cases of bleeding

Haemoglobin reductions In  the  current  placebo-controlled  studies  in  patients  with  PAH,  the  mean  change  in  haemoglobin, hematocrit, RBCs, and WBCs showed a consistent pattern of decreased values at the end of treatment, which was also observed with bosentan. A sitaxentan dose-dependency was noted. The magnitude of the  decreases  in  these  parameters  was  generally  comparable  in  the  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  and bosentan treatment group (e.g. reduction in haemoglobin; 0.5 vs. 0.7 g/dL, resp). The proportion of patients with decrease in haemoglobin ≥ 1.0  g/dL was substantially larger in the sitaxentan 100 mg QD and bosentan treatment group compared to placebo (~60% vs. 32%, resp), while the proportion of patients with ≥ 15% decrease from baseline resulting in a value less than the lower limit of normal was larger  with  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  compared  to  placebo  and  bosentan  (7%  vs.  3%,  resp).  A comparable pattern was observed for hematocrit. The proportionally small mean changes in platelets observed  with  sitaxentan  and  bosentan  were  of  minor  clinical  relevance.  In  patients  exposed  for  at least 6 months, the proportion of patients who experienced at least a 1.0 g/dL decrease from baseline in  haemoglobin  was  comparable  in  the  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  and  bosentan  group  (68%  vs.  66%, resp). Also, the proportion of patients with ≥ 15% decrease from baseline in haemoglobin resulting in a value less than the lower limit of normal was comparable in the sitaxentan 100 mg QD and bosentan group  (8%  vs.  9%,  resp).  Again,  a  similar  pattern  was  observed  regarding  hematocrit.  The  mean reduction in haemoglobin and hematocrit tended to decrease in the course of 12 months. Overall, complementary to previous data obtained with bosentan, these data indicate that haemoglobin (and hematocrit) reductions are a dose-dependent class effect of ETRAs. The cause for this change remains unclear, although underlying mechanisms related to hemodilution, a slow production effect and  slow  blood  loss  have  been  postulated.  Of  note,  anaemia  as  SAE  was  infrequently  reported  on sitaxentan and bosentan, with a lower rate versus placebo ( ≤ 0.4% vs. 1.3%, resp). The SPC on sitaxentan sodium recommends haemoglobin to be measured before initiating treatment and periodically thereafter. Bleeding events Medicinal product no longer authorised

2 Zimmerman HF. Hepatotoxicity: The adverse effects of drugs and other chemicals on the liver. 2 nd Edition. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins, 1999: 428.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

events  associated  with  INR  &gt;  3.5  occurred  after  this  amendment  in  FPH01;  zero  on  placebo,  1  on sitaxentan 100 mg QD (ecchymosis/INR 4.9), and 1 on sitaxentan 300 mg QD (haemoptysis/INR 6). After the protocol amendment, the incidence of INR &gt; 3.5 with sitaxentan 100 mg QD were rather comparable  to  placebo  (3.1%  vs  2.1%,  resp).  The  interpretation  of  these  data  is  hampered  by  the limited amount of patients treated in this study (n=178), but would suggest that INR was generally adequately  controlled  taking  into  account  the  required  warfarin  dose-reduction  prior  to  initiating sitaxentan  treatment  and  subsequent  INR  monitoring  according  to  clinical  practice.  An  initial anticoagulant dose reduction will also be necessary for other Vitamin K antagonists that are CYP2C9 dependent in their metabolism (i.e., acenocoumarol, fenprocoumon and fluindione), which has been reflected in the SPC. Notably, one patient with an INR above 3.5 in the sitaxentan 300 mg group of study FPH01-X did not receive warfarin. The finding was unexplained. In the long-term treatment a significant increase was found only at one visit and a slight increase at the following one. Since there was no obvious drug related rationale, the applicant suggested that the finding was possibly due to a sampling error. A direct effect of sitaxentan on INR is not suggested by this finding.

In the phase 3 placebo-controlled studies in patients with PAH, a large and comparable proportion of patients treated with sitaxentan (92%), placebo (87%) or bosentan (85%) completed the studies. The most common reasons for premature discontinuation in the all doses sitaxentan, sitaxentan 100 mg QD,  placebo  and  bosentan  treatment  groups  were  AEs  (2%,  0%,  3%  and  3%,  resp)  and  need  for additional chronic PAH treatment (2%, 1%, 3% and 7%, resp). In the largest safety pool of all phase 2 and  3  oral  studies  in  patients  with  PAH,  the  overall  AE-associated  discontinuation  rate  was comparable in the sitaxentan &gt;50 to ≤ 100 mg QD and placebo group (9% and 8%, resp), while being higher in the bosentan group (15%). Discontinuations due to cardiac disorders were infrequent across all  treatment  groups  at  rates  below  1.2%,  but  respiratory  disorder-associated  discontinuations  were generally  more  frequently  observed  at  rates  between  3.2%-4.8%.  Clinical  investigations-related discontinuations  (mainly  driven  by  hepatic  function  test  abnormalities)  occurred  most  often  in  the bosentan  group  (placebo  1.3%,  all  doses  sitaxentan  3.9%,  sitaxentan  &gt;50  to ≤ 100  mg  QD  2.8%, bosentan 4.8%). However, in view of small differences in incidences across treatment groups and a

Semen and male fertility hormone evaluations In pre-clinical studies conducted in rats, mild focal abnormalities (atrophic seminiferous tubules) were observed  in  the  testes  of  adult  rats.  In  contrast,  studies  with  beagle  dogs  revealed  no  evidence  for similar testicular effects as observed in the rat. In view of these findings, semen samples from PAH patients  were  collected  on  a  voluntary  basis  during  the  clinical  program.  No  consistent  adverse sitaxentan treatment effects on the total motile sperm count (an indicator for male fertility status) or hormone levels (FSH, inhibin-B, LH, testosterone) were observed, thereby providing no evidence for widespread sitaxentan-induced atrophic tubules in PAH patients. Pre-clinical findings are reflected in section 5.3 of the SPC. ECG/QT A thorough QT study in healthy volunteers was performed  comparing placebo, sitaxentan  100  and 1000  mg  p.o.QD  and  moxifloxacin  8mg.  Neither  the  uncorrected  QT  values  nor  the  QTcI  and  the QTcF  values  indicated  a  signal  of  concern.  When  applying  the  Bazett's  correction  the  placebo corrected upper 95% CI limit for Sitaxentan 1000 mg is 11 ms. This is just above the range of 10 ms that has been suggested as a criterion for a negative thorough QT study (ICH E14 CHMP/ICH/2/04) ensuring  that  a  drug  prolongs  the  mean  QT/QTc  interval  by  around  5  ms  or  less.  This  is  not  of concern, however, and can be explained by an overcorrection using the Bazett's correction at a higher HR.  Similarly, the outlier analysis was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram results from patients with PAH from  Study  FPH02,  including  heart  rate,  PR  interval,  QRS  interval,  QT  interval,  and  QTcB interval, were independently evaluated. Overall, the ECG data did not indicate concerns regarding QT. A specific  analysis  of  ECG  changes  in  patients  with  renal  failure  did  neither  indicate  a  correlation between pharmacokinetics in these patients nor a clinical concern. · Discontinuation due to adverse events Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

low number of bosentan-treated patients, once again it is noted that these data should be cautiously interpreted.

## · Discontinuation of treatment

The potential for any sitaxentan withdrawal events was not formally assessed as part of the phase 3 clinical program. This was due to the fact that these effects are not usually expected with drugs that take  several  weeks  to  show  efficacy,  and  due  to  feedback  from  Investigators  involved  in  the  initial high dose TBC3711-211 study, as well as the FPH01 and bosentan trials. However upon request this point was further analyzed comparing the treatment-emergent AEs reported by the final day of therapy compared to those that occurred 24-72 hours beyond discontinuation.  The conclusion was that even though it is impossible to be definitive with respect to a lack of withdrawal effects, the data continue to  support  the  opinion  of  the  Investigators  that  acute  withdrawal  effects  are  not  a  concern  with sitaxentan sodium or this class of drugs.

| Safety issue                          | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                 | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                      |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Use in Paediatric/adolescent patients | • Routine pharmacovigilance activities. • Additional information from clinical trials | • Contraindication for children and adolescents under 18 years in section 4.3 of the SPC • Educational pack for physicians |

· Post marketing experience There has been no post marketing experience to date. 5 Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system as described by the applicant fulfils the legislative requirements. Risk Management Plan The MAA submitted a risk management plan, which included a risk minimisation plan Table Summary of the risk management plan Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety issue                                                             | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Hepatotoxicity                                                           | • Routine pharmacovigilance activities. • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system. • Investigating the effects of sitaxentan sodium on the ABC efflux-transporters (BSEP) and any other transporters, through use of in vitro and animal models. As appropriate, clinical pharmacology studies in healthy volunteers will be performed to further characterize in humans those effects observed in pre- clinical models. | • Contraindication for patients with pre- existing hepatic disease (Child-Pugh Class A-C) and in patients with pre- treatment elevation of liver aminotransferases above 3 x ULN in section 4.3 of SPC. • Monthly monitoring of liver function with physicians requested to provide results via the proposed database. • Advice on treatment changes should aminotransferase levels rise above 3 x ULN but below 5 x ULN is provided in section 4.4 of the SPC. Treatment should be stopped immediately if aminotransferase levels rise above 5 x ULN. • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning sitaxentan sodium hepatotoxicity. • The pack size will be limited to 28 tablets. authorised |
| Anaemia (decreases in haemoglobin and related red cell parameters)       | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system. no                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning safety concern. • Haemoglobin concentrations are to be checked prior to treatment, after 1 and 3 months, and every 3 months thereafter. Physicians will be requested to provide results via the proposed database. longer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Teratogenicity                                                           | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system. product                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning safety concern. • The SPC (section 4.6 and 5.3) contains appropriate language concerning teratogenicity. • Treatment should not be initiated unless a woman is practicing reliable contraception. • The pack size will be limited to 28 tablets. • Need for negative pregnancy test prior to prescription.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Potential risk for increased adverse events in non- caucasians Medicinal | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Safety issue                                                                        | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pre-existing hepatic disease or pre- treatment elevation of liver aminotransferases | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Monitoring using electronic data capture system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | • Dosage in hepatic impairment is covered in sections 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 of the SPC (see hepatotoxicity)                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Pulmonary oedema / pulmonary veno- occlusive disease                                | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Monitoring using electronic data capture system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | • Physicians will only be allowed to prescribe sitaxentan sodium after pre- certification training through the controlled access programme. • An appropriate warning will be included in section 4.4 of the SPC concerning the potential for this complication to occur.                                 |
| Concomitant use of vitamin K antagonists                                            | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | • Physicians will only be allowed to prescribe sitaxentan sodium after pre- certification training through the controlled access programme. • Appropriate guidance on vitamin K dosage adjustment is included in sections 4.4 and 4.5 of the SPC. authorised                                             |
| Co-administration with OATP Inhibitors                                              | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring of concomitant medication using electronic data capture system. • Investigation of a possible link between OATP inhibitors and plasma levels of sitaxentan will be investigated by means of pre-clinical experimentation including in-vitro determinations of drug-drug interactions and a clinical study with pravastatin. product no | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning sitaxentan sodium safety concerns. • Appropriate warnings included in sections 4.4 and 4.5 of the SPC. longer                                                                                                                     |
| Co-administration of ciclosporin A                                                  | • Routine pharmacovigilance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | • A contraindication is included in sections 4.3 and 4.5 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Usage in combination with sildenafil and prostaglandins Medicinal                   | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Enhanced pharmacovigilance triggered by relevant LLTs • Monitoring using electronic data capture system. • Encysive will perform a clinical study on combination therapy with sitaxentan sodium and sildenafil post approval.                                                                                                                                                                             | • The effect of sitaxentan on sildenafil is included in section 4.5 • Spontaneous reports of adverse events will include recording of concomitant medications to allow the monitoring of safety of the concomitant use of sitaxentan sodium with sildenafil and prostaglandins through analysis of ADRs. |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety issue                   | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                   | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                   |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Phototoxicity                  | • Photosafety: a copy of the final study report for Study LOG0001: Neutral Red Uptake Phototoxicity Assay of Sitaxentan Sodium (TBC11251Na) in 3T3 Mouse Fibroblasts is due by the end of October 2006. |                                                                                                                         |
| Potential for medication error | • Routine pharmacovigilance • Review of ADRs which might suggest medication error                                                                                                                       | • Use of packaging design, colours and labelling to avoid any possible confusion with another product of a similar name |

- That Thelin is hepatotoxic

The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application  is  of  the  opinion  that  the following  risk  minimisation  activities  are  necessary  for  the  safe  and  effective  use  of  the  medicinal product: The  MAH  shall  set  up  a  surveillance  programme  to  collect  information  on:  the  demographics  of patients prescribed Thelin, any adverse reactions and reasons for discontinuation of Thelin. Details of such  a  surveillance  programme  should  be  agreed  with  the  National  Competent  Authorities  in  each member state and put in place prior to marketing of the product. The  MAH  must  agree  the  details  of  a  controlled  distribution  system  with  the  National  Competent Authorities  and  must  implement  such  programme nationally to ensure that, prior to prescribing,  all doctors who intend to prescribe Thelin are provided with a physician information pack containing the following: · Product information · Physician information about Thelin · Patient information card · Partner of patient information card The physician information about Thelin should contain the following key elements: · That Thelin is teratogenic o Need for pregnancy testing prior to first and subsequent prescriptions o Use of effective contraception in women of child bearing age o Possible interaction with oral contraceptives and increased risk of thromboembolism o Need to advise female patients about teratogenicity, need for pregnancy testing and contraception, what to do if they become pregnant o Referral of patients who become pregnant to a physician specialised or experienced in teratology and its diagnosis for evaluation and advice Medicinal product no longer authorised

- o Need for liver function tests prior to and during treatment
- o Contraindication in patients with pre-existing hepatic disease
- o Discontinue sitaxentan sodium immediately if liver enzymes rise above 5 x ULN
- o Need for  close  monitoring  if  liver  enzymes  measure  between  3  and  5 x ULN,  with discontinuation  if  a  repeat  analysis  is  above  3 x ULN,  and  not  restarted  until  levels have returned to below 3 x ULN

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- That  treatment  with  Thelin  often  causes  a  decrease  in  haemoglobin  and  related  red  cell parameters
- o Need  for  full  blood  count  prior  to  use  and  monitoring  at  clinically  appropriate intervals
- That there is an increased risk of bleeding with Thelin
- o Interaction with warfarin and vitamin K antagonists leading to an increased INR
- o Need to decrease established dose of vitamin  K antagonist upon starting  sitaxentan therapy
- o Start  vitamin  K  antagonists  treatment  at  a  reduced  dose  if  already  on  sitaxentan sodium
- That Thelin is hepatotoxic and they will need to attend for regular blood tests

<!-- image -->

o Need for regular monitoring of INR o Co-prescription with sildenafil may increase the risk of haemorrhage o Be aware of the potential for haemorrhage and investigate as appropriate · That there is an interaction with ciclosporin A which may lead to higher blood concentration of Thelin and hence an increased risk of adverse reactions. · That the safety database of Thelin is limited and physicians are encouraged to enrol patients in a  surveillance  programme  to  increase  knowledge  about  the  incidence  of  important  adverse drug reactions (ADRs).  The surveillance programme should prompt doctors to report serious ADRs and certain selected ADRs as below immediately and other non-serious ADRs at three monthly intervals. The information collected should include: o Anonymised patient details - age, sex and aetiology of PAH o Concomitant medications o Reason for discontinuation o ADRs · All serious ADRs · Increase in hepatic enzymes to &gt; 3 x ULN · Anaemia · Haemorrhage · Pregnancy and outcome · Pulmonary oedema · Suspected interactions · Unexpected ADRs according to the SPC. The Patient information card should include the following information · That Thelin is teratogenic · The need for a negative pregnancy test immediately prior to first prescription · The need to ensure that women of child bearing age are using effective contraception and that patients should inform their doctors of any possibility of pregnancy before a new prescription is issued · The need for female patients to contact their treating doctor immediately if they suspect that they might be pregnant. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- That Thelin may cause bleeding
- The need to tell health care practitioners that they are taking Thelin
- The need to tell their doctor about any adverse events

Partner of patient information card should include the following information:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- That  Thelin  is teratogenic  and  that  women  of  child  bearing  age  must  use  effective contraception

The Name Review Group has required monitoring of potential medication errors with Teolin, and as such  this  has  been  reflected  in  the  Risk  Minimisation  activities  and  has  been  included  as  a  postauthorisation commitment.

## 6 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation

## Quality

<!-- image -->

Reproductive toxicology was evaluated only in rats where considerable teratogenicity was observed. This was seen at the lowest tested dose, corresponding in rats at exposures more than 30 times the human  exposure.  Since  lower  doses  have  not  been  tested,  it  is  not  clear  whether  there  is  a  safety margin  for  human,  and  if  the  teratogenic  effects  observed  represent  a  class  effect  of  endothelin receptor  antagonists.  Thus  far,  Bosentan  is  the  only  registered  ET  receptor  antagonist.  Available preclinical information is insufficient to compare the reproduction toxicity findings of sitaxentan with those of bosentan. There are no data on the use of sitaxentan in pregnant women, but there is a need to treat  hypertensive  women  of  child  bearing  potential,  also  in  situations  when  other  treatment alternatives are not suitable. Following with these data the discussion scheme in the Discussion Paper on Contraindications in Pregnancy, it is concluded that there is no need to contraindicate sitaxentan sodium in pregnancy.

There are no unresolved quality issues that could have a negative impact on the benefit/risk balance. The quality of the product is satisfactory. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Sitaxentan  sodium  is  a  highly  selective  ETA  receptor  antagonist  that  has  shown  in  several  animal models to be effective for pulmonary hypertension. Overall, the primary pharmacodynamic studies provided adequate evidence that sitaxentan is effective for  pulmonary  hypertension  (PAH)  in  response  to  hypoxia.  The  safety  pharmacology  studies  using rats, mice and dogs showed that the effects of sitaxentan on the renal, gastrointestinal and respiratory system in different species had no major side effects. The data obtained form the general pharmacokinetic point of view give a good picture of sitaxentan kinetics at high doses in several different animal species, however there is no PK data at lower doses i.e. for human application a dose of 100 mg/day. Sitaxentan binds to high degree to plasma proteins, and its metabolites are weak or potent inhibitors of CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 activity, and possibly  of  CYP2C8.  Sitaxentan  may  induce  enzymes  responsible  for  its  own  metabolism,  and  is eliminated  via  hepatic  and  renal  clearance.  Studies  on  interaction  of  sitaxentan  with  the  hepatic transporter protein and on the metabolite in fraction P8 are still to be performed as post authorisation commitments to further elucidate the mechanism of action and possible toxicity of sitaxentan. The results of the toxicology programme revealed that a QD administration was better tolerated than a BID  dosing  regimen.  Dose-related  liver  changes  (weight,  centrilobular  hypertrophy,  occasionally necrosis), induction of hepatic drug metabolising enzymes and slightly decreased erythron parameters were seen in mice, rats and dogs. At high doses, dose-related increases in prothrombin time (PT) and activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  (APTT)  were  also  seen,  most  prominently  in  rats,  and coagulopathy (bleedings) in rats and dogs, but not mice. The significance of these findings for humans is  unknown.  Genotoxicity  studies  both  in  vivo  and  in  vitro  did  not  provide  any  evidence  for  a clinically relevant genotoxic potential. Carcinogenicity studies gave negative results when conducted for 97-99 weeks in rats, and for 6 months in p53 (+/-) transgenic mice. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Sitaxentan sodium is not recommended for use in children or adolescents under the age of 18 years. To further investigate its use in the children population, the MAH will perform a paediatric clinical programme as a post-authorisation commitment. The MAH has also agreed to perform a phototoxicity study  as  part  of  the  post-authorisation  commitments  in  order  to  evaluate  the  possibility  that  the increased number of skin tumours could be related to phototoxicity.

Repeated-dose  toxicity  studies  and  the  carcinogenicity  study  did  not  reveal  any  concern regarding a possible immunotoxic effect of sitaxentan.

Finally, no ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment (ERA) has been performed as the current Draft 'Note  for  Guidance  on  the  Environmental  Risk  Assessment'  waives  the  need  for  ERA  in  orphan drugs.

<!-- image -->

Overall, the relative improvement in exercise capacity (6-Minute Walk Test distance) with sitaxentan 100 mg QD versus placebo appears to be clinically relevant,  in  view  of  a  numerically  comparable relative improvement observed with the previously licensed medicinal product bosentan. As expected in a rare disease, non-inferiority has not been formally demonstrated.

Efficacy The  main  randomized,  double  blind,  placebo-controlled  studies  designed  to  evaluate  safety  and efficacy  in  patients  with  PAH  were  FPH01,  FPH02  and  FPH04. All  the  patients  included  in  these studies had PAH ranging from NYHA/WHO functional class II to IV, and presented primary, CTDassociated, or CHD-associated PAH.  The primary efficacy endpoint in FPH01 was the change from baseline to Week 12 in percent of predicted peak oxygen uptake (VO2). In the other two pivotal trials the primary efficacy endpoint was the change from baseline to Week 18 in the 6-Minute Walk Test distance.  These  studies  were  not  designed  to  evaluate  long-term  efficacy  of  sitaxentan  or  to demonstrate improved survival. At present, combination studies with  non-conventional  PAH treatments have not been performed, but a clinical study to evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety of sitaxentan  and  sildenafil  (Revatio ® )  in  co-administration  is  has  been  committed  to  as  a  follow  up measure Results  on  study  FPH02  are  considered  of  main  importance,  since  this  study  included  a  sufficient amount  of  patients  per  treatment  group  (n=60),  adjucated  the  6-Minute  Walk  Test  as  a  primary endpoint,  and  incorporated  a  bosentan  active-control  arm  as  well  for  descriptive  purpose.  The improvement  in  6-Minute  Walk  Test  distance  showed  dose  dependency  in  this  study,  and  a statistically  significant  moderate  improvement  in  6-Minute  Walk  Test  distance  was  noted  with sitaxentan 100 mg QD compared to placebo. The results were generally confirmed in study FPH01 also conducted in a predominantly Caucasian WHO functional class III primary and CTD-associated PAH population, showing a comparable placebo-corrected improvement with sitaxentan 100 mg QD at  12  weeks.  The  alternative  primary  endpoint  in  FPH01  reflecting  maximal  aerobic  capacity  was shown to  be  of  questionable  validity  as  it  was  not  consistent  with  the  relative  improvements  in  6Minute Walk Test distance on sitaxentan. The  third  pivotal  study,  FPH04,  was  conducted  in  a  different  population  of  mainly  non-Caucasian patients  with  a  lesser  disease  severity  (WHO  functional  class  II).  A  smaller  placebo-corrected improvement with sitaxentan 100 mg QD was noted in study FPH04 compared to studies FPH01 and FPH02, consistent with an assumption of disease severity-related efficacy. Across studies, sitaxentan 50  mg  QD  showed  insufficient  efficacy,  while  sitaxentan  300  mg  QD  showed  no  larger  efficacy compared to sitaxentan 100 mg QD Medicinal product no longer authorised

Sitaxentan's efficacy was generally consistent in subgroups according to sex, race, age, weight, and region.  No  reliable  conclusions  could  be  drawn  in  patients  below  18  years  of  age,  and  as  such treatment is not recommended under this age. The MAH has agreed to develop a clinical paediatric

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

programme to address the lack of safety and efficacy data. The data from the subgroup analyses did not  provide  compelling  evidence  for  a  clinically  relevant  treatment  effect  in  patients  with  CHDassociated  PAH  that  offsets  the  significant  safety  risk  associated  with  sitaxentan,  limiting  the therapeutic indication to primary pulmonary arterial hypertension and PAH associated to connective tissue  disease.  A  discrepancy  between  the  expected  baseline  walking  distance  for  patients  in  WHO functional  class  II  and  the  reported  mean  baseline  walking  distance  for  patients  in  class  II  in  the clinical  programme  was  also  observed.  The  findings  raise  doubts  on  the  representativeness  of  the enrolled class II population for patients with class II disease severity in clinical practice. In addition, the improvement with sitaxentan 100 mg QD versus placebo in patients with WHO class II disease severity was small, and the conclusion reached was that the data do not allow WHO class II patients to be included in the therapeutic indication for sitaxentan.

## Risk-benefit assessment

Further supportive efficacy data were obtained from the long-term safety studies FPH01-X, FPH02-X and FPH03. Overall, these studies suggested maintenance of sitaxentan's efficacy up to 28 weeks of treatment. Safety Across all phase 2 and 3 studies in patients with PAH, 899 patients had been treated with sitaxentan with a mean exposure of 29 weeks. The most common drug reactions considered to be at least possibly  related  to  sitaxentan  treatment were headache (15%), peripheral oedema (9%) and nasal congestion (9%). Identified  risks,  appropriately  addressed  in  the  submitted  Risk  Management  Plan,  include  hepatic toxicity, reductions in haemoglobin, bleeding events, teratogenicity, OATP interaction with sitaxentan sodium, and pulmonary oedema. The key safety issue is the hepatic toxicity. Cases of symptomatic hepatitis  have  occurred  in  patients  receiving  sitaxentan  100  mg  once  daily.  As  the  effect  of  liver impairment  on  the  pharmacokinetics  is  not  clear  and  non-linear  pharmacokinetics  may  result  in disproportionately  higher  plasma  concentrations  of  sitaxentan  in  patients  with  liver  impairment, sitaxentan  should  not  be  used  in  patients  with  impaired  liver  function.  The  data  suggest  that  the hepatotoxicity  of  sitaxentan  is  at  a  comparable  level  versus  bosentan,  although  firm  conclusions should not be drawn on the basis of these limited data obtained so far. The underlying mechanism of hepatotoxicity remains unclear at present. The SPC contains contra-indications, warnings, and strict monitoring plus stopping rules related to hepatic function. Also, sitaxentan will be distributed using a controlled  access  system  and  hepatotoxicity  will  be  monitored  in  a  post-marketing  surveillance system. From the safety database all the adverse reactions reported in clinical trials have been included in the Summary of Product Characteristics. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed these. All the information has been appropriately translated into the package leaflet for which a user test has been adequately performed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The clinical programme evaluated the efficacy and safety of sitaxentan in a population of patients with mainly  primary  and  connective  tissue  disease  (CTD)-associated  pulmonary  arterial  hypertension (PAH) at WHO functional class II and III. Overall, the relative improvement in exercise capacity (6Minute Walk Test distance) with sitaxentan 100 mg QD versus placebo (~33 meters) is considered clinically  relevant,  in  view  of  a  numerically  comparable  relative  improvement  observed  with  the previously  licensed  medicinal  product  bosentan  (30  meters)  in  a  head-to-head  comparison.  As

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

expected in a rare disease, non-inferiority has not been formally demonstrated. The placebo-corrected improvement in the subgroup of patients dominated by those with WHO class III functional status was 46  meters.  The  findings  were  generally  supported  by  results  on  the  secondary  endpoints  change  in WHO functional classification and rate on clinical worsening. However, the efficacy demonstrated in patients  with  WHO  class  II  functional  status  and  patients  with  CHD-associated  PAH  is  considered insufficient.

| Safety concern                        | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                      |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Use in Paediatric/adolescent patients | • Contraindication for children and adolescents under 18 years in section 4.3 of the SPC • Educational pack for physicians |

The  limited  amount  of  patients  included  in  the  clinical  trial  programme  for  this  orphan  drug application  has  impact  on  the  assessment  of  safety  as  these  studies  had  low  power  to  elucidate potential  clinically  relevant  differences  in  the  occurrence  of  less  frequent  events,  such  as  serious adverse events and deaths. Although the incidence of death and serious adverse events with sitaxentan 100  mg  QD  relative  to  placebo  and  bosentan  raised  no  major  safety  concern,  any  claim  towards reduction  of  mortality  in  PAH  patients  treated  according  to  the  current  standard  of  medical  care remains  unjustified  given  the  limited  sample  size  and  the  absence  of  clinical  outcome  studies. Accordingly, no such claims are made in the currently proposed SPC. Safety concerns exist regarding the  occurrence  of  haemoglobin  reductions  and  the  potential  for  hepatotoxicity.  Limited  safety  data suggested  a  reduced  risk  for  aminotransferase  elevations  with  sitaxentan  100  mg  QD  compared  to bosentan  under  the  protocol-specified  monitoring  and  stopping  rules  for  sitaxentan-treated  patients, but its clinical relevance remains to be established in the absence of a demonstration of a reduced risk for hepatic failure. Cases of symptomatic hepatitis have occurred in patients receiving sitaxentan 100 mg  once  daily.  Some  further  safety  concerns  exist  regarding  the  interaction  with  frequently  used CYP2C9-dependent  anticoagulants  (e.g.  warfarin,  acenocoumarol)  and  associated  bleeding  events. These safety issues are addressed in the SPC and the Risk Management Plan. Overall, the data suggest that oral sitaxentan 100 mg QD has a benefit/risk ratio comparable to the non-selective endothelin receptor antagonist bosentan. The  benefit/risk ratio relative to other authorised  medicinal  products  for  the  indication  of  PAH  is  difficult  to  assess,  since  no  direct comparative data on clinical efficacy are available besides bosentan. Posology advantages apply over the  indwelling  catheter  needed  for  continuous  intravenous  administration  of  epoprostenol  (risk  for infection and  sepsis), the subcutaneous  administration of treprostinil, and  the frequent daily inhalations  required  for  iloprost  (6-9  times  a  day).  No  significant  safety  advantage  over  the  oral medicinal  product  sildenafil  would  be  expected  given  sitaxentan's  potential  for  hepatotoxicity requiring  strict  monitoring.  Given  the  difference  in  mechanism  of  action  between  the  oral  agents sitaxentan  and  sildenafil,  a  clinical  study  to  evaluate  the  clinical  efficacy  and  safety  of  coadministration was considered necessary. It  was  concluded  that  sitaxentan  sodium  could  be  approvable  for  patients  with  primary  pulmonary arterial hypertension and CTD-associated PAH in WHO/NYHA class III disease severity. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that pharmacovigilance activities in addition to  the  use  of  routine  pharmacovigilance  were  needed  to  investigate  further  some  of  the  safety concerns, and the following additional risk minimisation activities were required: Safety concern Use in Paediatric/adolescent patients · Contraindication for children and adolescents under 18 years in section 4.3 of the SPC Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Safety concern                                                                      | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Hepatotoxicity                                                                      | • Contraindication for patients with pre-existing hepatic disease (Child-Pugh Class A-C) and in patients with pre- treatment elevation of liver aminotransferases above 3 x ULN in section 4.3 of SPC. • Monthly monitoring of liver function with physicians requested to provide results via the proposed database. • Advice on treatment changes should aminotransferase levels rise above 3 x ULN but below 5 x ULN is provided in section 4.4 of the SPC. Treatment should be stopped immediately if aminotransferase levels rise above 5 x ULN. • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning sitaxentan sodium hepatotoxicity. • The pack size will be limited to 28 tablets. |
| Anaemia (decreases in haemoglobin and related red cell parameters)                  | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning safety concern. • Haemoglobin concentrations are to be checked prior to treatment, after 1 and 3 months, and every 3 months thereafter. Physicians will be requested to provide results via the proposed database. authorised                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Teratogenicity                                                                      | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning safety concern. • The SPC (section 4.6 and 5.3) contains appropriate language concerning teratogenicity. • Treatment should not be initiated unless a woman is practicing reliable contraception. • The pack size will be limited to 28 tablets. • Need for negative pregnancy test prior to prescription. no longer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Pre-existing hepatic disease or pre- treatment elevation of liver aminotransferases | • Dosage in hepatic impairment is covered in sections 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4 of the SPC (see hepatotoxicity).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Pulmonary oedema / pulmonary veno-occlusive disease                                 | • Physicians will only be allowed to prescribe sitaxentan sodium after pre-certification training through the controlled access programme. • An appropriate warning will be included in section 4.4 of the SPC concerning the potential for this complication to occur. product                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Concomitant use of vitamin K antagonists                                            | • Physicians will only be allowed to prescribe sitaxentan sodium after pre-certification training through the controlled access programme. • Appropriate guidance on vitamin K dosage adjustment is included in sections 4.4 and 4.5 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Co-administration with OATP Inhibitors Medicinal                                    | • Physicians and patients will receive educational material concerning sitaxentan sodium safety concerns. • Appropriate warnings included in sections 4.4 and 4.5 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Co-administration of ciclosporin A                                                  | • A contraindication is included in sections 4.3 and 4.5 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety concern                                          | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Usage in combination with sildenafil and prostaglandins | • The effect of sitaxentan on sildenafil is included in section 4.5 • Spontaneous reports of adverse events will include recording of concomitant medications to allow the monitoring of safety of the concomitant use of sitaxentan sodium with sildenafil and prostaglandins through analysis of ADRs. |
| Potential for medication error                          | • Use of packaging design, colours and labelling to avoid any possible confusion with another product of a similar name                                                                                                                                                                                  |

<!-- image -->

Similarity with authorised orphan medicinal products The CHMP is of the opinion that Thelin is not similar to Tracleer, Ventavis or Revatio, within the meaning of Article 3 of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 847/200. See appendix 1 Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of Thelin in the treatment of patients with primary pulmonary arterial hypertension and in pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with connective tissue disease, classified  as  WHO  functional  class  III,  to  improve  exercise  capacity  was  favourable  and  therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. In addition, the CHMP, with reference to Article 8 of Regulation EC No 141/2000, considers Thelin not to be similar (as defined in Article 3 of Commission Regulation EC No. 847/2000) to Tracleer, Ventavis or Revatio for the same therapeutic indication. Medicinal product no longer authorised