---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:11:07
document_pages: 18
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/ultratard-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: ultratard-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.2225068
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-27 15:45:57.465627
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

Medicinal Product no longer authorised This  module  reflects  the  initial scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Ultratard.  For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8. 1. Introduction Diabetes  mellitus  is  a  group  of  metabolic  diseases  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia  resulting  from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both. Acute, life-threatening consequences of diabetes are  hypoglycaemia,  and  hyperglycaemia  with  ketoacidosis  or  non-ketotic  hyperosmolar  syndrome. Long-term complications  of  diabetes  include  retinopathy  with  potential  loss  of  vision,  nephropathy leading to renal failure, and peripheral neuropathy causing foot ulcers, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and sexual dysfunction. The disease is also accompanied by an increased incidence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular, peripheral vascular and cerebrovascular disease. Type  1  diabetes ,  which  usually  is  of  childhood  or  adolescence  onset,  accounts  for  5  to  10%  of diagnosed diabetes; it is characterised by loss of insulin production due to destruction of pancreatic ß cells as a result of an autoimmune response or idiopathic causes. Patients with Type 1 diabetes depend on exogenous insulin for survival. Type 2 diabetes , which usually is of adult onset, is by far the more common form of diabetes. In the Western  World,  it  constitutes  approximately  90%  of  all  cases  of  diabetes.  Type  2  diabetes  is characterised by impaired insulin secretion, insulin  resistance, increased  hepatic glucose  output and lipid disorders. Patients with Type 2 diabetes generally do not require insulin treatment for survival, although  a  substantial  number  (20-30%)  of  patients  need  insulin  to  achieve  acceptable  metabolic control. Marketing authorisation for this human insulin for has been obtained for the treatment of patients with diabetes  mellitus.  The  active  substance  of  Ultratard  is  human  insulin  manufactured  by  recombinant DNA  technology  in  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  The  product  is  a  long-acting  protracted  insulin formulation consisting of a suspension of crystalline (rhombohedral) insulin at neutral pH. Ultratard  is  intended  for  marketing  in  dose  strengths  of  40  IU/ml  and  100  IU/ml  in  2  different presentations as follows: Ultratard 40 IU/ml, 10ml vial Ultratard 100 IU/ml, 10ml vial 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The formulation  designed  for  long  duration  of  action  is  a  suspension  of  crystalline  (rhombohedral) insulin  at  neutral  pH.    The  formulation  contains  the  following  agents  for  functions  as  follows:  zinc (protracting agent -crystal forming), sodium chloride (isotonicity), sodium acetate (buffer) and methyl para-hydroxybenzoate (preservative). Ultratard is  presented in 10  ml vials in two strengths: 40 IU/ml and 100 IU/ml. The vial is a glass container  sealed  with  a  laminated  insoprene/brombutyl  rubber  sropper  (disc)  and  snap-off  cap composed of aluminium and plastic. The glass container is produced from type I Ph.Eur. colourless glass. Active substance The active substance of Ultratard, human Insulin (rDNA) complies with Ph.Eur. monograph 1999:838 with additional tests as follows: Identification by Amino acid composition

Nitrogen content

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Total viable count (CFU/g)

## DNA content

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Methods  of  analysis  for  the  additional  tests  developed  by  the  applicant  are  fully  described  with relevant validations. Development Genetics Human insulin  is  produced  using  a  genetically  modified  strain  of Saccharomyces  cerevisiae .    The strain carries a plasmid which codes for the expression of a single chain insulin precursor attached to a pre-pro leader region of the yeast mating factor (MF α 1) gene. The  yeast  transformant  used  to  produce  the  insulin  precursor  is  a  transformant  of Saccharomyces cerevisiae carrying the expression plasmid described above. The applicant has presented the complete DNA sequence of the plasmid. The sequencing presented is assembled from published sequences and in-house sequence determinations as relevant. The gene has also been fully characterised from isolated plasmids  from  long-term  production  scale  fermentation  and  cell  bank  (Original  Mother  Culture (OMC)). Constructional  stability  has  been  investigated  in  production  strain,  prolonged  and  very  long  term fermentation and cell bank (OMC). Cell bank system The cell bank system consists of Original Mother Culture (OMC), New Mother Culture (NMC), MCB and  WCB.  Satisfactory  details  of  the  preparation  of  the  different  types  of  cell  banks  have  been provided and a clear description given of the numbering and origin of the various cell banks and their sublots. Production of active substance The encoded product of secretion during fermentation is a single chain insulin precursor consisting of the first 29 amino acid residues of the insulin B chain linked with three amino acids to the insulin A chain.  This  single  chain  precursor  is  converted  enzymatically  to  an  insulin  methyl  ester,  which  is subsequently hydrolysed to yield human insulin, consisting of two chains (A and B) linked together with disulphide bridges. The purification process employs several chromatography and precipitation steps  for  isolation  of  the  precursor,  the  intermediates,  and  the  active  substance  respectively.  This process is well established and it should be noted the applicant has manufactured that human insulin rDNA over a period of many years during which time a number of improvements have been made. Validation data have been provided for the fermentation, recovery and purification processes. In each case, critical parameters in these processes have been identified and investigated. Satisfactory  analytical  data  are  provided  for  10  recently  produced  batches  of  human  insulin demonstrating a high degree of consistency in the manufacturing process. Stability of active substance The  applicant  has  provided  results  of  testing  of  20  batches  from  the  ongoing  stability  programme. Testing parameters include dry substance, insulin polymer, insulin dimer, A21 desamido insulin, other related  substances  and  assay.  The  data  confirm  that  active  substance  is  stable  for  60  months  when stored at the recommended temperature. Other ingredients All excipients comply with Ph.Eur. specifications. Product development and finished product Development Pharmaceutics

The  current  formulation  represents  an  accumulation  of  experience  the  applicant  has  gained  with  a wide  variety  of  insulin  products  over  the  years  dating  back  to  the  early  1950's.  The  present formulation  was  developed in connection with the  switchover from  animal to semisynthetic human insulin  in  the  early  1980's  and  the  introduction  of  genetically  engineered  human  insulin  in  the  late 1980's. There have been no changes to the formulation since then.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Emphasis has been placed on correct insulin crystal size and form in the product. This is  achieved through  a  combination  of  optimised  zinc  concentrations  in  the  formulation  and  through  a  carefully defined and controlled manufacturing process.

Although  a  certificate  of  suitability  has  been  provided  by  the  applicant  for  bovine  insulin  from German sourced pancreas (RO-CEP 200-135-Rev OO), suitability of the material for its intended use in  the  finished  product  must  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  chance  of  contamination  of  German sourced  pancreases  used  to  produce  the  current  batch  of  microcrystals  is  remote.  In  addition,  the

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Compatibility  of  the  container  components  and  product  is  shown  to  be  satisfactory  via  stability studies. Sterilisation by filtration is essential given the heat sensitivity of the active ingredient. Manufacturing process The  insulin  and  buffer  solutions  are  made  separately  and  are  mixed  after  sterile  filtration  into  a crystallisation tank. The solution is then allowed to crystallise with gentle mixing. After crystallisation sterile  solutions  containing  zinc,  preservative  and  base  are combined  with  the  sterile  crystal suspension to form the formulated bulk. The formulated bulk is aseptically filled into the final vial container. Filling occurs in a grade A zone. Vials are inspected individually by manual or automated inspection. Due to the nature of this application i.e. transfer  of  MRP product to the centralised procedure, and based  on  the  extensive  experience  the  applicant  has  with  their  products,  no  new  validation  studies have been initiated for this application. An overview of the processes used together with a description of  the  critical  production  parameters  is  provided.  Summary  results  have  also  been  provided  for Ultratard products manufactured at the approved sites and in different batch sizes. Available data show a consistent, well-controlled manufacturing process. Ultratard complies with the requirements of the following Ph.Eur. monographs: 01/2002:0854 Insulin Preparations, Injectable 1999:0836 Insulin Zinc Injectable Suspension (crystalline) In addition to monograph tests the products are tested by in-house methods for crystal size, identity and ID and content of preservative. Full methodologies have been provided for all in-house methods. A complete justification of the tests employed has been provided. Batch analysis data have been provided for 3 recently produced batches of the 100 IU/ml presentation and 2 recently produced batches of the 40 IU/ml presentation. All batches comply with their respective specifications. Stability of the Product Stability reports are provided covering the different strengths and production sites for Ultratard. Results  have  been  generated  by  validated,  stability  indicating  methods  and  indicate  satisfactory stability. These results support the shelf life stated in the SPC. Viral Safety and TSE risk assessment A number of animal derived raw materials are used in the production of human insulin, rDNA. These are peptone, beef extract and pepticase which are used in the preparation and storage of cell banks, Lthreonine and trypsin used in the purification process to convert human insulin precursor to human insulin methyl ester. Bovine insulin microcrystals are used for seeding the crystals in the product. Lthreonine  is  sourced  from  avian  feathers  and  porcine  gelatine,  trypsin  from  porcine  pancreas,  and bovine insulin from bovine pancreas. Pepticase falls outside the scope of the TSE Guideline as it is derived from casein from milk from healthy cows only and no other ruminant materials are used in its preparation. For  peptone  (CEP-2000-175)  and  beef  extract  (CEP-2000-181)  Certificates  of  Suitability  of  the EDQM have been submitted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

manufacturing process for bovine insulin is stated to provide a total reduction of 8.7 logs for BSEagents in the early steps of insulin extraction. Therefore, it is considered that the risk of transmission of  BSE  is  highly  unlikely.  However,  the  applicant  should  undertake  to  source  glands  from  lands categorised as GBR 1 or 2 in future.

| Affinity for Insulin Receptor   | Affinity for IGF1-Receptor   |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| =100%                           | 0.03%                        |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The risk of transmission of TSE from Ultratard to human beings has been appropriately addressed in accordance  with  CPMP/CVMP  Note  for  Guidance  for  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting  animal spongiform encephalopathy via medicinal products (EMEA/410/01). Viral safety issues have been addressed and compliance with relevant guidelines are considered to be met. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Satisfactory  evidence  is  provided  that  product  manufacture  is  well  controlled,  that  consistency  of production is achieved and that a stable product results. The requirements of the relevant directives and guidelines are met. The pharmaceutical portions of the SPC, package insert and product label are supported by the information provided in the dossier. Several minor quality issues will be addressed by the applicant on an ongoing (post-approval) basis. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects The active substance of Ultratard is human insulin manufactured by recombinant DNA technology in Saccharomyces cerevisiae .  Ultratard  is  very  long  acting  insulin  with  the  protracting  principle  being based on addition of a small amount of zinc ions provided that the preparation has a neutral pH and that no interfering ions, like phosphate and citrate, are present. Ultratard is presented in two strengths, 40 IU/ml and 100IU/ml. The  preclinical  evaluation  of  the  present  product  is  based  on  the  documentation  for  the  active ingredients;  insulin  human  (rDNA)  and  protamine-insulin  human.  The  programme  includes  recent studies performed with the insulin analogue insulin aspart. In several studies, insulin human (rDNA) was used as a reference substance. Pharmacodynamics · Primary pharmacology programme. The programme includes studies performed in the eighties demonstrating the similarity between insulin human (rDNA) and semi-synthetic insulin human, later studies supplementing above studies and recent studies where insulin human (rDNA) was used as a reference substance for insulin analogues. · In vitro studies Insulin is a hormone composed of two polypeptides (two protein chains named A and B chains having respectively  30  and  21  amino-acids).  Two  disulfide  bonds  link  these  two  chains.  The  structure  of  the insulin  is  similar  of  those  of  several  other  hormones  or  growth-factors  (including  insulin-like  growth factors  IGF-1 and IGF-2). IGF-1 and IGF-2 have some affinity for the insulin receptor, however both growth factors have their own receptors. The insulin and IGFs receptors both belong to the tyrosine kinase family receptors. The activation of the receptors is obtained when the endogenous ligand occupies the receptor.  Once  activated  the  signal  transduction  produced  by  these  receptors,  which  mediates  the physiological  action  of  the  hormone,  starts  with  an  autophosphorylation  of  the  receptor.  The in  vitro studies  explored  the  affinity  of  insulin  analogues  for  other  receptors  belonging  to  the  tyrosine  kinase family. The  receptor  binding  activity  of  insulin  human  was  studied  in  connection  with  the  pre-clinical development of the insulin aspart (see table 1 below). Table 1: Determination of the receptor affinity of insulin human (rDNA).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · In vivo studies

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The effect on blood glucose in diabetic rats after subcutaneous administration was studied in diabetic rats which received by a single subcutaneous injection either insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin or vehicle. The effect on blood glucose was measured by blood sampling. Insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin showed dose and time dependant antidiabetic effect. The pharmacological effect of insulin human 40 U/ml was studied in a cross-over assay in rabbits. A standard crossover study (British Pharm., 1980) of the hypoglycaemic effect after SC administration in Rabbits (n=36) was done. There was no difference between equivalent preparations made from human insulin or semi-synthetic insulin. · Safety pharmacology programme. In the Irwin test, a few mice showed a slight reduction in exploratory and spontaneous activity. In the Animex test, which is more sensitive, mice showed a decrease in motor activity at the highest dose (5 U/kg). Reduced performance in the rotarod test was also observed in mice at the highest dose (5 U/kg) in one study, but no effects were observed at 100 U/kg in a later study. The locomotion activity in rats were slightly reduced at 100 U/kg, which was the only dose tested. Newer studies support the original ones. The  time  from  disappearance  to  reappearance  of  the  righting  reflex  (sleeping  time)  induced  by pentobarbital in mice was prolonged after treatment with 5 U/kg. The same applies to hexobarbital after treatment with 100 U/kg; the effect was reversed with glucose administration. A dose of 100 U/kg after administration of ethanol significantly increased the mortality and sleeping time. No antagonistic effect on pentylenetetrazol-induced convulsions in mice was observed at 100 U/kg, and this treatment did not act as a  pro-convulsant  either.  Insulin  human  did  not  show  any  inhibitory  effects  on  acetic  acid  induced writhing in mice at 100 U/kg (P-27), indicating absence of analgesic potential. The Body temperature in mice  was  unaffected  by  100  U/kg  (P-28).  Neither  insulin  human  nor  semi  synthetic  insulin  human produced any 'curarizing' effect on neuromuscular transmission after treatment of rats up to 5 U/kg IV. No effects attributed to treatment were observed in an in vitro preparation of guinea-pig ileum and vas deferens . No effects on cardiovascular and respiratory system attributed to treatment were observed in cats and in pigs. The gastro-intestinal motility of mice was unaffected. A transient fall in diuresis was observed in rats, however this effect was reversed after SC administration of glucose. A bromsulphtalein-test showed no indications of pathological effects to liver parenchyma in pigs. Blood platelets of human Rich Platelet Plasma were not affected after in vitro treatment with insulin human. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. Pharmacokinetics Single Dose Pharmacokinetics Studies The pharmacokinetics properties of insulin human were investigated after a single dose IV and SC in the Rat. These experiments have all shown that insulin human has regular, predictable kinetics in the rat after SC injection of various high doses. A single dose pharmacokinetic study in the pig where insulin human was administered IV and SC showed that  T max equals  79  min  [T max is  the  time  at  which  the  highest  drug  concentration  occurs  following administration of an extra vascular dose. Tmax is expressed in min or hr]. Multiple Dose Pharmacokinetics Studies A multiple SC dose kinetics study was performed in rats and compared the pharmacokinetic profile of insulin aspart and insulin human. A small relative increase in the tmax and Cmax of insulin human after SC administration twice daily for 7 days has been observed. The kinetics after multiple doses were basically similar to those after single doses injected SC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2:  Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Insulin Human (rDNA)

|                |               | Insulin human (rDNA)   | Insulin human (rDNA)      | Insulin human (rDNA)   | Insulin human (rDNA)   |
|----------------|---------------|------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Administration | Endpoint      | Man 022/UK (0.1 U/kg)  | Pig NN 950475 (0.125U/kg) | Dog NN 960548 (1U/kg)  | Rat NN 960550 (6U/kg)  |
| SC             | t ½ (min)     | 122                    | 121                       | 57                     | 23                     |
| SC             | C max (pM)    | 102                    | 122                       | 2871                   | 18000                  |
| SC             | T max (min)   | 145                    | 99                        | 60                     | 15                     |
| IV             | Cl (l·min/kg) |                        | 0.021                     | 0.048                  | 0.058                  |

<!-- image -->

MCF-7  human  breast  cancer  cells  were  incubated  with  different  concentrations  of  insulin  aspart, insulin human and an experimental insulin analogue. Dose response curves from seven studies were the same for insulin aspart and insulin human, whereas the experimental insulin analogue had at least 10-times their mitogenic potential.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised As the majority of the insulin human preparation is of same composition as the semi-synthetic insulin human preparations, no pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in the original preclinical programme. Linearity concerning AUC/dose was confirmed in different species, meaning that there was no insulin accumulation. Toxicokinetics Toxicokinetic studies were done during the 52 weeks repeated dose toxicity studies in the rat and the dog and the Segment II test (teratogenicity studies) in the pregnant rabbit. They demonstrated linearity of the plasma levels of insulin human with the dose, the Cmax, occurred 1-5 hours after administration of either type of insulin. The plasma levels and AUCs of insulin human remained directly related to dose throughout the 52 weeks of treatment and that the rate of elimination did not increase with time. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity studies. Mice and Rats were given a single dose of insulin human subcutaneous at dosage up to 4000 U/kg. In higher dosage groups insulin human was compared to semi-synthetic insulin. Apart from few sporadic hypoglycaemic reactions on the day of dosing, no treatment related signs were seen. No significant difference between insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin was observed. · Repeated doses toxicity. The subacute toxicity was examined in rats and dogs during a 4weeks SC study in Wistar Rats and a 13 weeks SC study in Beagle Dogs. Insulin human was administrated subcutaneous for 1 year to Sprague Dawley Rats. At necropsy, there was an increased incidence of mammary gland cyst and mammary tumours were found at microscopic examination.  The  incidence  of  total  number  of  mammary  tumours  as  well  as  fibroadenomas  and adenocarcinomas were however not significant from the control group. There were no other treatmentrelated effects in any organ, including the pituitary. Beagle  dogs  were  given  insulin  human  1  U/kg  twice  daily  SC  for  12 months.  Besides  one  case  of abnormal weight gain, there were no other important effects of the treatments. · Genotoxicity. The genotoxic potential of insulin human was evaluated through a bacterial reverse mutation test in 4 strains  of Salmonella  typhimurium ,  a  clastogenic  activity  test  in  cultured  human  lymphocytes,  a mutagenic activity test on the HGPRT-locus in chinese hamster V79 cells and a micronucleus test in bone marrow erythrocytes. In all the tests insulin human was found non-mutagenic. Insulin  human  was  included  as  reference  substance  in  a  gene  mutation  study  in  mouse  lymphoma L5178Y cells (TFT-resistance). Negative findings were obtained with no signs of cytotoxicity. · Carcinogenicity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In an exploratory 12-month test and in the formal 12-month toxicity study in the Sprague-Dawley rat the effects of chronic administration of insulin aspart and insulin human on mammary tissues in the Rat were explored.  In  these  studies  some  animals  developed  neoplasms  of  mammary  tissue.  All  animals  in  all treatment groups showed hyperplasia of mammary glandular epithelial cells. In both tests most mammary gland  tumours  were  fibroadenomas  all  had  a  typical  histological  appearance.  The  small  number  of adenocarcinomas had remained local and had not metastasised. The pituitary glands appeared normal.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised A study exploring the effects of repeated subcutaneous injection of insulin aspart and insulin human for 52 weeks in rats has been conducted. This study has been performed in Sprague-Dawley rats. A doserelated increase in palpable subcutaneous masses has been observed at 30 and 75 U/kg twice daily. A statistically significant (p&lt;0.01) increased incidence of female animals bearing mammary gland tumours at  75  U/kg/bid were found. The increase was evident in benign/malign combined as well as in malign tumours  alone.  No  evidence  of  mammary  gland  hyperplasia  or  of  tumours  was  seen  in  the  test  up  to 12 months in the dog. Particularly under certain experimental conditions insulin may induce mammary tumours in the female Sprague  Dawley  rat  (a  sensitive  species,  strain  and  sex)  probably  related  to  a  mitogenic  and  growthpromoting action of insulin mediated by the insulin receptor. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley  rats.  In  one  12  month  study,  there  was  a  statistically  significant  increase  of  female  animals bearing  benign  and  malign  mammary  gland  tumours  at  the  highest  dose.  There  was  no  increase  of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12 month dog study. · Reproduction Toxicity. Fertility  and  Embryo-Foetal  Development  studies  have  been  conducted  in  the  Sprague  Dawley  Rat. Fertility was not affected. Males showed slight reduction in the epididymal sperm count. Dams treated with  high  doses  (200  U/kg)  of  insulin  human  showed  pre-  and  post-implantation  loss,  and  a  specific pattern of anatomical abnormalities of the foetuses was seen. The findings are regarded as a consequence of the severe maternal hypoglycaemia. The pre-  and  post-natal  development  of  Sprague  Dawley  rats  born  from  pregnant  females  exposed  to insulin human has been studied. Maternal hypoglycaemia with a few deaths and effects on weight gain and food consumption were observed in the dams. Newborn pups showed slightly increased weight gain, which had become normalised by weaning. There were a few other variations in F1 animals but no major effect was found. Embryo-foetal  development  of  rabbits  born  from  pregnant  females  exposed  to  insulin  human  has  also been studied. The high doses of insulin led to increased food consumption and accelerated weight gain, which persisted to the end of the experiment. There was a dose-related reduction in plasma glucose. In the mid-  and  low  doses  it  had  recovered  by  4h  after  the  first  dose.  Top-dose  group  (5  U/kg)  showed embryonic deaths and related depression of litter size and weight. At 1.5 U/kg and above, foetuses showed skeletal abnormalities. These effects were considered to be due to the induced maternal hypoglycaemia. In Segments I/II study, fertility was not affected in rats given insulin human. Males had a slightly reduced epididymal sperm count. Pre- and post-implantation loss was increased and a proportion of foetuses had characteristic  abnormalities  attributed  to  reduction  of  maternal  blood  glucose.  In  an  embryo-foetal development study in rabbits, an increase in early embryonic deaths with associated decrease in litter size and  litter  weight  was  observed  at  10  U/kg.  A  dose-dependent  increase  in  foetuses  with  skeletal abnormalities was seen. During gestation, abortion and foetal death and malformations were seen, but only during severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women. · Local Tolerance. The local tolerance was studied in rabbits after IM injections of insulin human. It was concluded that insulin  human  caused  damages  which  were  similar  to  those  found  after  injection  of  isotonic  saline solution.

A  test  for  local  irritation  in  rabbits  showed  that  there  were  no  differences  in  the  damages  caused  by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Immunotoxicity studies.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Insulin  antibodies,  even  in  moderate  and  low  amounts,  may  prevent  rapid  rise  in  free  blood  insulin, thereby  leading  to  higher  postprandial  glucose  levels,  or  cause  increased  risk  of  hypoglycaemia  when insulin is released from circulating insulin antibody complexes. The purity of the injected insulin has been shown to be of crucial importance on the amount of insulin antibody formed. Thus, 5-times crystallised porcine insulin induces more insulin antibodies than the same preparation containing mono component insulin. The  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  has  been  studied  in  Rabbits.  Freund's  adjuvant  and  20  U  of respectively insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin and 5 times crystallized porcine insulin were injected intramuscularly to groups of rabbits twice a week. Serum insulin binding was estimated until 97 days. No statistically  significant  differences  between  the  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  and  semi-synthetic insulin  was  found,  whereas  they  both  were  demonstrated  to  be  significantly  less  immunogenic  that  5times crystallized porcine insulin. It was concluded, that insulin human fulfils the demand of low potential to induce insulin antibodies in accordance with other mono component insulins. There was no statistically significant difference between the immunogenicity in rabbits of insulin human and semi synthetic human insulins. These insulins were found to be significantly less immunogenic than 5 times crystallised pork insulin. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low. · Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk Assessment. Insulin  human  is  considered  readily  degradable,  hence  do  not  suggest  any  environmental  risk  for clinical  use.  The  containers  and  devices  in  which  it  is  supplied  are  appropriate  for  disposal  by  the means normally employed for simple medical devices. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects The main purpose in the studies for primary and secondary pharmacodynamics was to demonstrate the similarity between the new insulin human and semi synthetic human insulin. Effects seen in the safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. As the majority of the insulin human preparation is of same composition as the semi-synthetic insulin preparations, no pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in the original preclinical programme. Linearity concerning AUC/dose was confirmed in different species, meaning that there was no drug accumulation. The  toxic  effects  seen  in  the  single  dose  and  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were  attributed  to  the hypoglycaemic activity and thus an exaggerated pharmacological effect caused by the high doses of the insulin. Increased weight, depressed activity, convulsions and death were some of these effects. The noted effects  on embryos and foetuses were only seen at severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women. All conducted genotoxicity studies were negative for mutagenic potential. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley rats. It is concluded that  the  increased  incidence  of  mammary  tumours  seen  in  rats  is  probably  caused  by  mitogenic  and growth-promoting  action  via  the  insulin  receptor,  but  is  probably  also  related  to  the  fact  that  Sprague Dawley rats  are  especially  sensitive  and  were  given  large  doses.  There  was  no  increase  of  mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12-month dog study. Finally; a test for local irritation in rabbits showed that there were no differences in the damages caused by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects

Diabetes  is  a  group  of  metabolic  disorders  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia  due  to  defects  in  insulin secretion and/or insulin action. The two most common forms of diabetes mellitus are type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is characterised by an absolute deficiency of insulin due to destruction of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pancreatic β -cells.  Although  the  rate  of β -cell  destruction  is  variable,  all  type  1  diabetic  patients  will eventually require exogenous insulin for survival. In contrast, type 2 diabetes is characterised by insulin resistance,  relative  impairment  of  insulin  secretion  and  increased  hepatic  glucose  output.  In  general, patients  with  type  2  diabetes  do  not  require  exogenous  insulin  for  survival.  Nevertheless,  during  the course of the disease, a large minority of these patients will be treated with exogenous insulin to correct persistent hyperglycaemia.

| Study                                                    | Population (number of subjects)                                      | Design                                                   | Dose regimens                                                                                                                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Healthy subjects.                                        |                                                                      |                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Seigler et al. 1991                                      | Healthy subject (6-9 per preparation)                                | Placebo-controlled, single-dose, single-centre.          | One single dose of five different ultralente insulin formulations including Ultratard human insulin, and placebo. The dose of the insulin preparations was 0.4 U/kg. |
| Owens et al. 1986                                        | Healthy males (6 subjects)                                           | Randomised, cross-over, single- dose, single-centre.     | One single dose of Ultratard human, Ultratard porcine, Ultratard bovine and diluent. The dose of the insulin preparations was 0.3 U/kg.                              |
| Patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. | Patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus.             | Patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. |                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Hildebrandt et al. 1985                                  | Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes (8 subjects)           | Randomised, cross-over, single- dose, single-centre.     | 125-I labelled Ultratard (human insulin) and 125-I-labelled Ultralente MC (bovine insulin). The doses were 6 and 24 U.                                               |
| Edsberg et al. 1987                                      | Medicinal Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes (9 subjects) | Cross-over, multiple-dose, single- centre.               | Ultratard (human insulin)30 min before breakfast for a 14-day period and Ultratard (human insulin) at 2200 h for a 14-day period.                                    |
| Jørgensen et al. 1989                                    | Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes (7 subjects)           | Randomised, cross-over, multiple- dose, single-centre.   | 125-I labelled Ultratard (human insulin) 16 U daily for 4 days and 125-I-labelled long- acting insulin analogue 16 U daily for 4 days.                               |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The goal of insulin treatment is to mimic the physiologic pattern of insulin secretion, which under normal conditions consist of a basal secretion and meal related short peaks. The most commonly used insulin regimen is the so-called basal-bolus regimen in which basal insulin requirements are provided by one or two  injections  of  long  (intermediate)  -acting  insulin  and  mealtime  requirements  are  provided  by  meal related  injections  of  fast/rapid  acting  soluble  human  insulin/insulin  analogues.  Instead  of  separate injections  of  long  (intermediate)-acting  and  fast-acting  insulins,  the  two  insulin  preparations  may  be mixed (by the patient or as ready-made premixed insulin) before injection. It is generally accepted that the basal-bolus regimen offers the best glycaemic control. However, many patients, especially type 2 diabetic patients who produce significant amounts of insulin themselves, may be adequately controlled on twicedaily injections of long (intermediate)-acting insulins or mixtures of fast-acting and long (intermediate)acting  insulins.  Although  this  regimen  may  not  offer  optimal  glycaemic  control,  patient  compliance  is generally is better for this simpler regimen than for the multiple injections regimens. Therefore, for some patients, the twice-daily regimen may be an acceptable alternative to the basal-bolus regimens. Intensified  insulin  therapy  can  reduce  the  incidence  of  complications,  and  delay  the  progression  of existing  complications  in  Type  1  and  2  diabetes.  One  type  of  intensified  insulin  therapy  is  multiple injection  therapy,  which  attempts  to  mimic  the  physiological  insulin  secretion  of  normal  man.  Basal insulin  requirements  are  supplied  as  injections  of  long/intermediate  acting  insulin,  and  meal-related insulin requirements are supplied by bolus injections of regular fast-acting human insulin (HI). Clinical pharmacology Nine different studies are supporting the pharmacodynamics of Ultratard. Of these, two were conducted in healthy subjects, six studies were conducted in type 1 diabetics (including two performed in children/adolescents) and two trials enrolled type 2 diabetics patients (two studies were performed in both type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients, see table 3 below). Table 3: Clinical pharmacodynamics trials Study Population (number of subjects) Healthy subjects. Seigler et al. 1991 Healthy subject (6-9 per preparation) Owens et al. 1986 Healthy males (6 subjects) Patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. Hildebrandt et al. 1985 Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes (8 subjects) Edsberg et al. 1987 Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes (9 subjects) Jørgensen et al. 1989 Male and female patients with type 1 diabetes

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Mellvig et al. 1990   | Male and female children/adolescents with type 1 diabetes (15 subjects)                | Double-blind, randomised, cross- over, multiple-dose, single-centre.   | Ultratard daily for 3 months and a long- acting human insulin daily for 3 months.                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Bougnères et al. 1992 | Male and female children/adolescents with type 1 diabetes (205 subjects) (18 subjects) | Randomised, parallel-group, multiple-dose, multi-centre.               | authorised Three injection regimen (including fast- acting insulin human alone or in combination with Ultratard) or two-injection regimen (including fast-acting insulin human and a long-acting human insulin). Duration 1 year. |
| Holman et al. 1984    | Male and female patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes                                | Randomised, double-blind, cross- over, multiple-dose, single-centre.   | Ultratard (human ultralente insulin) for 6 weeks and highly purified beef ultralente insulin for 6 weeks.                                                                                                                         |
| Iwamoto et al. 1987   | Male and female patients with type 2 diabetes (8 subjects)                             | Multiple-dose, uncontrolled, single-centre.                            | Ultratard (insulin human) 0.3 U/kg before breakfast for an 8-day period.                                                                                                                                                          |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Bougnères et al. 1992 Male and female children/adolescents with type 1 diabetes (205 subjects) Randomised, parallel-group, multiple-dose, multi-centre. Three injection regimen (including fastacting insulin human alone or in combination with Ultratard) or two-injection regimen (including fast-acting insulin human and a long-acting human insulin). Duration 1 year. Holman et al. 1984 Male and female patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes Randomised, double-blind, crossover, multiple-dose, single-centre. Ultratard (human ultralente insulin) for 6 weeks and highly purified beef ultralente insulin for 6 weeks. Iwamoto et al. 1987 Male and female patients with type 2 diabetes (8 subjects) Multiple-dose, uncontrolled, single-centre. Ultratard (insulin human) 0.3 U/kg before breakfast for an 8-day period. Pharmacodynamics in healthy subjects A first study ( Seigler et al. 1991 ) compared the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic properties of five different  ultralente  insulin  preparations  from  different  species  of  origin  (beef,  pork,  human)  including Ultratard  human  insulin  and  different  manufacturers.  A  placebo  comparator  was  also  included  in  the study. Six to nine healthy young fasting subjects (per product) received a subcutaneous injection in the abdominal wall.  The  dose  was  0.4  U/kg.  Blood  glucose  was  maintained  as  basal  levels  for  a  40-hour period by a euglycaemic clamp using dextrose infusion. Plasma insulin and plasma C-peptide levels were obtained during the 40-hour period following injection. From the dextrose infusion profiles for Ultratard human  insulin,  the  mean  time  of  onset  was  5.3h,  mean  time  of  peak  action  was  15.2h,  and  average duration of action was 32.5h. Another study (Owens et al. 1986) compared the pharmacodynamic properties (hypoglycaemic activity, plasma insulin and c-peptide concentrations) of three Ultratard preparations (human, porcine and bovine). Six healthy fasting male subjects were given injections of each product in randomised cross-over design. The dose administered subcutaneously to the subjects was 0.3 U/kg in the anterior abdominal wall. The study also included treatment with a diluent medium as control. During the 32-h study period, the subjects remained  fasting.  During  this  period  of  time  plasma  glucose,  plasma  C-peptide  and  plasma  insulin concentrations were measured. For the Ultratard human insulin preparation, the hypoglycaemic response started 3-4 h after injection and progressed to a nadir at 20-24 h (see figure 1 below). The euglycaemic clamp technique is the appropriate method to assess the pharmacodynamics of insulins. This has only been done to a limited extent for Ultratard. Seigler et al. found duration of action to be 32.5 h. From the study by Owens et al. it seems that blood glucose was still below the control (diluent) at 32 h. The onset of action for Ultratard is obtained within about 5 hours, reaches a maximum effect within 8-24 hours and the entire time of duration is about 32 hours.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1: Plasma  glucose,  plasma  C-peptide  and  plasma  insulin  and  serum  C-peptide measured  after injections  of  human,  porcine  and  bovine  Ultratard.  Human Ultratard = · . Diluent control = ∆ .(Owens et al. 1986).

<!-- image -->

Mellvig et  al. 1990 compared  Ultratard  and  a  long-medium-acting  human  insulin  as  basal  insulin  in children/adolescents  aged  12-19  years  with  diabetes  mellitus.  In  a  double-blind,  crossover  design,  15 patients were given each insulin type for three months. The dose was calculated as 35% of the total daily insulin requirement and administered at bedtime. In addition, fast-acting insulin was given before meals and larger snacks 4-5 times daily. Blood glucose was monitored 7 times daily on one day per week. Free insulin and blood glucose profiles were obtained after each 3-month period. The mean levels of fasting

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pharmacodynamics in type 1 diabetic patients Nine type 1 diabetic patients were given Ultratard either in the morning before breakfast or at bedtime for a 14-day period in crossover design ( Edsberg et al. 1987 ). The patients also received a fast acting insulin human except for a 24-h profile period at the end of each study period. The doses of Ultratard and the fast acting insulin human were estimated from the patient's previous total insulin doses. The chosen Ultratard doses were the maximum, which the patient could tolerate without experiencing hypoglycaemia at night or between meals (the Ultratard dose was adapted to each patient but remained constant during the entire study period). The blood glucose profiles during the two periods were very similar with no significant differences. Plasma glucose levels were relatively high during both periods, probably reflecting the fact that fast acting insulin was not administered during the 24-h profile period. Holman et al. 1984 compared the pharmacodynamics of Ultratard human insulin and bovine ultralente insulin. Nine type 1 and nine type 2 diabetic patients received treatment for six weeks with each insulin type in a randomised crossover design. Fast acting insulin was administered as soluble porcine insulin. Doses were chosen individually for each patient. The patients were seen every 14 days for blood glucose measurements and at the end of each study period for a plasma glucose profile from 17:30 to 7:00. The blood glucose was generally well controlled. However for a group of four type 1 diabetic patients, blood glucose control was less optimal with mean blood glucose values from 12-16 mmol/l. Two  studies in children/adolescents have been performed. None  of these studies are clinical pharmacological studies in a strict sense.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

blood glucose were quite high in the Ultratard group as well as the long-medium-acting human insulin group, 12.3 mmol/l and 10.8 mmol/l, respectively. However, glycosylated haemoglobin HbA1c decreased in both groups to 7.4% and 7.5%, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences between the two insulin types, both with regard to glycaemic control and hypoglycaemic episodes.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Bougnères et al. 1992 conducted a large study in 205 children with diabetes mellitus. A three-injection regimen or to a two-injection insulin regimen was randomly allocated to the patients. The three-injection regimen included a fast-acting insulin 15 min before breakfast and lunch, and Ultratard mixed with the fast-acting insulin 15 before dinner. Patients in the two-injection regimen continued to be treated with prebreakfast and pre-dinner injections of a mixture of fast-acting insulin and a long-acting human insulin. The patients were evaluated after one year. Glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) decreased from 9.8% to 9.3% in the three-injection group, but increased in the two-injection group from 9.5% to 9.8%, resulting in a small, but statistically significant difference between the two regimens. The frequencies of hypoglycaemia were similar in the two groups. Pharmacodynamics in type 2 diabetic patients One study ( Holman et al. 1984 ) enrolled both type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients (see above). Iwamoto et  al. 1987 investigated the pharmacodynamic effect of a pre-breakfast injection of Ultratard HM. The product was administered during eight days to eight patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus not adequately controlled with a diet. The dose was 0.3 U/kg administered before breakfast as a subcutaneous injection in the thigh. Daily profiles of plasma glucose, serum insulin and serum C-peptide were obtained before and during the study. Before Ultratard treatment, plasma glucose at all times remained higher than 160 mg/dl (8.9 mmol/l) with a mean whole-day level of 223 mg/dl (12.4 mmol/l). On the first day of Ultratard treatment, plasma glucose levels began to decrease significantly about 6 hours after injection and remained lower throughout the day with mean whole-day plasma glucose at 174 mg/dl (9.6 mmol/l). On the eighth day, the mean whole-day plasma glucose was 151 mg/dl (8.4 mmol/l) (see figure 2 below).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 2: Plasma  glucose,  serum  (immunoreactive)  insulin  and  serum  c-peptide  before measured during first day and during eighth day of Ultratard treatment. (Iwamoto et al. 1987).

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Pharmacokinetics · Absorption and bioavailability In the study in healthy subjects by Siegler et al. 1991, the insulin profile of Ultratard human insulin mirrored the pharmacodynamic results. Tmax was about 10-15 h, and insulin levels returned to basal level  approximately  after  30h.  Owens et  al. 1986  investigated  the  insulin  and  C-peptide  profiles  in healthy  subjects  treated  with  Ultratard  human  insulin  0.3  U/kg.  Calculated  exogenous  insulin concentrations increased to reach maximum at 14 h. The study by Edsberg et al. 1987 in type 1 diabetic patients found similar plasma insulin profiles. A tendency towards higher insulin levels from 1:00 to 13:00 was seen when Ultratard was injected at bedtime, but the only statistically significant difference was seen at 12:00. Hildebrandt et  al. 1985  compared  the  absorption  of  Ultratard  human  insulin  with  that  of  highly purified beef ultralente insulin at different dose levels in eight type 1 diabetic patients. The study had a in a randomised crossover design. The mean age of the patients was 36.8 years. The doses were 6 and 24  U  administered  subcutaneously  alternating  between  different  sites.  A  dose-dependent  absorption was found for bovine ultralente insulin with significantly higher residual activity (percentage) in the high dose compared to the low dose. Concerning Ultratard [containing insulin human], the mean time for half of the initial activity to disappear was 9.4 h (after the administration of 6 IU in the abdominal wall), 13.0 h (after the administration of 6 IU in thigh), and 15.1 h (after the administration of 24 IU in thigh). There were no statistically significant differences between the two doses of human Ultratard. Four and six hours after the administration there was significantly higher residual activity in the thigh than in the abdomen. From the residual activity versus time curves it appears that absorption starts within 4 h after injection and lasts approximately 32 h.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  a  similar  study,  Jørgensen et  al. 1989  investigated  the  absorption  and  intra-individual  and  interindividual  variations  in  absorption  of  Ultratard  (human  insulin).  The  patients  enrolled  in  this  study were seven type 1 diabetic patients. These patients were given 16 IU administered subcutaneously into alternating sites of the thighs once daily (morning) over four days in a randomised crossover design. The patients  received their  usual  doses  of  mealtime  insulin.  The  mean  blood  glucose  concentration during  Ultratard  HM  treatment  was  9.5 mmol/l.  The  mean  time  for  half  of  the  initial  activity  to disappear was 25.5 h. The mean variation in absorption observed in the same patient (intra-individual variation) was 44.5% and the variation observed among all the patients enrolled in the study (interindividual) was 36.9%.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Finally  in  one  study  conducted in  type  2  diabetic  patients (Iwamoto et  al. 1987)  insulin  levels reached  at  peak  at  14.30  h  (6½  h  after  injection),  and  insulin  levels  were  significantly  higher  than before Ultratard treatment. · Distribution No formal distribution  studies  were  performed  with  insulin  human.  Insulin  is  not  bound  to  plasma proteins unless circulating antibodies directed against insulin are present. · Elimination Ultratard  cannot  be  administered  intravenously  therefore  clearance  after  intravenous  administration could not be studied. As the half-life of intravenously injected human insulin is relatively short, the terminal  half-life  of  human  insulin  following  subcutaneous  injection  is  a  measure  of  the  terminal absorption rather than the elimination of insulin from plasma per se . The terminal elimination half-life of  human  insulin  following  subcutaneous  injection  of  Ultratard  has  not  been  calculated  in  the publications. Metabolism Metabolism  of  insulin  human  was  not  formally  investigated.  From  previously  published  data  it  is known that insulin is catabolised by various proteases. The degradation products are not active. Excretion Excretion  of  Ultratard  was  not  formally  investigated.  As  insulin  is  eliminated  by  metabolism, excretion of unchanged drug is minimal or non-existent. · Pharmacokinetics in special populations Patients with impaired renal or hepatic function The  applicant  has  not  submitted  any  data  on  the  pharmacokinetics  in  patients  with  impaired renal/hepatic  function.  It  is  known  that  the  liver,  the  kidneys  and  the  muscles  are  primary  sites  of insulin  degradation.  Renal  and  hepatic  impairment  may  reduce  insulin  degradation  and  thus  reduce insulin requirements. Pregnancy and lactation No studies have been performed. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of complications during pregnancy and congenital malformations in the baby. Optimising metabolic control before and during pregnancy can reduce this risk. For most of the patients with type 2 diabetes and all patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin is the only way of optimising metabolic control. Insulin can be administered during pregnancy and lactation. · Interaction studies. No  formal  interaction  studies  have  been  performed.  There  are  no  literature  reports  of  direct pharmacokinetic interactions between insulin and other products. The products which interfere with glucose metabolism through various mechanisms are well identified. · Conclusion on pharmacokinetic studies. Ultratard is a very long acting human insulin. It is a crystalline zinc suspension.

Onset  of  action  is  within  about  5  h,  and  the  peak  effect  is  reached  within  8-24  h.  The  duration  of action is about 32 h.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The pharmacodynamic data correspond well with the pharmacokinetic results. No specific pharmacodynamic/kinetic  data  on  Ultratard  with  regard  to  the  effect  of  age,  gender,  ethnic  origin, hepatic and renal impairment are available. Like with all subcutaneously injected insulins, the terminal elimination  half-life  is  determined  by  absorption  rather  than  elimination.  The  terminal  elimination half-life of Ultratard has not been documented. The elimination half-life of intravenously administered human insulin is short (minutes). Human insulin is eliminated through degradation in various organs and  tissues.  There  are  no  active  metabolites.  Numerous  drugs  interact  with  insulin  on  the  dynamic level by affecting glucose metabolism. There are no known pharmacokinetic interactions with other products (different from insulin).

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Clinical efficacy Main studies (phase III = therapeutic confirmatory trials). These studies include four published studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients and two in type 2 diabetic patients. Studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients. · Tunbridge et al. 1989. This study ( Tunnbridge et al. 1989 ) compared the effect of a long-acting human insulin and Ultratard administered in a twice-daily regimen, mixed with fast acting human insulin on fasting blood glucose. It was a 6-month double blind crossover study in 66 type 1 diabetes patients. Fasting blood glucose obtained after the administration of Ultratard regimen was significantly lower than  with  the  other  long-acting  human  insulin  regimen  (6.6±0.8  vs.  8.2  ±  0.5  mmol/l)  (no  further significant differences between these two long-acting insulins were noted on the 8-point blood glucose profile). However a significant difference between the two insulins was not observed for those patients with fasting blood glucose previously over the median (patients enrolled in this study had previously been  enrolled  in  a  similar  study  comparing  NPH  insulin  and  the  long-acting  human  insulin,  see Tunnbridge et al. 1989). Overall blood glucose control, fructosamine and HbA1c were similar for both treatments. The evening dose of Ultratard was slightly but significantly lower than the evening longacting human insulin dose (14.9 ±0.8 vs. 15.5 ± 0.8 IU) confirming the lowering effect of Ultratard on fasting  blood  glucose.  However,  the  incidence  of  serious  hypoglycaemic  effects  was  significantly higher with Ultratard compared to the long-acting human insulin, with the majority of nocturnal events occurring between 5 a.m. and breakfast. · Parillo et al. 1992. The  prevention  of  early  morning  hyperglycaemia,  assessed  by  fasting  blood  glucose  was  the  main interest of this study. In a randomised cross-over trial with 6-week treatment periods ten patients with persistent fasting hyperglycaemia were studied (fasting blood glucose FBG&gt;10mmol/l). These patients were treated with the basal bolus regimen with intermediate insulin as basal insulin. The basal bolus regimen was used, with either Ultratard or NPH insulin being the basal insulin. Fasting blood glucose were significantly lower with Ultratard compared to NPH insulin (6.26 mmol/l ± 0.88 vs. 10.82 ±4.27 mmol/l).  The  other  blood  glucose  values  during  the  day  were  not  different  for  the  two  treatments. Glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was similar for both treatments the same is true for insulin doses and hypoglycaemic reactions. · Mansell et al. 1992. In contrast Mansell et al. found that fasting blood glucose measurements were significantly lower for another NPH insulin (intermediate-acting human insulin) compared to Ultratard, despite lower doses used with the NPH insulin than Ultratard. This study was a randomised, cross-over study comparing NPH insulin and Ultratard as bedtime insulin (soluble human insulin administered to the meals) in 20 diabetic  patients  in  12  weeks  periods.  The  remaining  parameters  (fructosamine,  HbA1c,  mean  daily blood glucose concentrations) were similar with either insulin. It is noteworthy that the basal insulin was administered before the evening meal in the previous study (Parillo et al. ) and at bedtime in this study  (Mansell et  al. ).  In  addition,  patients  with  morning  hyperglycaemia  were  enrolled  in  the previous study (Parillo et al. ).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Mellvig et al. 1990.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Mellvig et  al. compared a long-acting  human insulin and Ultratard administered  as  basal  insulin  at bedtime in a basal bolus regimen in 15 diabetic adolescents aged from 12 to 19 years old. Three of the patients  had  already  used  the  multiple  injection  regimen.  The  study  had  a  double-blind  cross-over design  with  each  period  lasting  3  months.  The  mean  levels  of  fasting  blood  glucose  were  high (12.3 mmol/l  for  Ultratard  and  10.8 mmol/l  for  the  long-acting  human  insulin)  on  the  other  hand, HbA1c decreased significantly during the study period but no difference was found between the longacting  human  insulin  and  Ultratard.  The  insulin  dose  tended  to  increase  when  the  conventional regimen was replaced by the multiple injection regimen, patients weight increased as well. The basal insulin portion constituted approximately 40% of the daily insulin dose. The number of hypoglycaemic episodes was higher with the long-acting human insulin compared to Ultratard but the difference was not significant. Studies performed in type 2 diabetic patients. Two studies ( Mansell et al. 1992 and Holman et al. 1987 ) suggest the addition of long-acting insulin such as Ultratard to oral hypoglycaemic treatment when glycaemic control is not satisfactory. Discussion on clinical efficacy The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  insulin  has  been  established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  life saving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is  required  by  many  patients  with  type  2 diabetes. It  is  not  possible  to  mimic  the  physiological  plasma  insulin  profiles;  human  insulin  tends  to  selfassociate in a hexameric form after injection into the subcutaneous issue resulting in a relatively slow absorption. Fast-acting insulin human may be given intravenously (e.g. in diabetic ketoacidosis) and intramuscularly  but  is  predominantly  administered  subcutaneously.  Ultratard  is  for  subcutaneous administration. No standard scheme of administration exists and doses to obtain an optimal glycaemic control  vary  individually.  Several  large  studies  have  demonstrated  that  best  results  not  only  on glycaemic control but also on long-term microvascular complications are obtained in both type 1 and type  2  diabetic  patients  with  intensified  regimens,  i.e.  either  with  an  insulin  pump  providing continuously subcutaneous insulin infusion or by injecting human insulin three or more times to the meals guided by frequent blood glucose monitoring in addition to a long- or very-long acting insulin injected  once  or  twice  daily  covering  the  basal  insulin  requirements  (see  for  further  reference:  The Diabetes control and complications trial research group: The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on  the  development  and  progression  of  long-term  complications  in  insulin  dependent  diabetes mellitus.  N  Engl  J  Med  1993, 329 :14-23  and  UKPDS  group:  Intensive  blood  glucose-control  with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes. Lancet 1998. 352 :837-53.) The  addition  of  zinc  ions  in  insulin  preparations  (such  as  in  Ultratard)  leads  to  a  change  in  the pharmacokinetic properties. Therefore Ultratard is a very long-acting insulin which is usually injected once  daily  as  basal  insulin  in  the  basal-bolus  regimen.  Injections  of  Ultratard  as  part  of  the conventional regimen, as monotherapy or in combination with oral hypoglycaemic agents in type 2 diabetes patients belong as well to the scope of its administration. The long acting effect of Ultratard was  addressed  in  several  publications  (concerning  both  type  1  and  type  2  diabetes  patients)  which support Ultratard efficacy. Clinical safety The data concerning the safety profile  of  Ultratard  have  been obtained  from  the  published  efficacy studies  mainly  including  data  on  Ultratard  containing  semi-synthetic  human  insulin,  which  was marketed  until  1988  and  from  periodic  safety  reports  concerning  insulin  human  (rDNA)  zinc suspension preparation marketed since 1988. Post-marketing experience

An extensive post-marketing experience (more than 31  million patient years of  exposure)  has been gathered  with  human  insulin  since  1988  when  the  first  genetically  engineered  human  insulin  was

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

marketed  and  no  new  concern  regarding  the  safety  of  human  insulin  have  been  raised  following assessment of postmarketing experience.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The  most  common  spontanously  reported  reactions  are  hyper-  and  hypoglycaemia,  injection  site reaction and -pain, therapeutic response decreased, allergic reaction and rash or pruritus. Since the report from Teuscher and Berger (Hypoglycaemia unawareness in diabetics transferred from beef/porcine  insulin  to  human  insulin.  Lancet  1987,  ii.382-5)  there  had  been  focus  on  diminished awareness of hypoglycaemia after changing from animal insulin to human insulin. A review of clinical and epidemiological studies prepared by the applicant could not support this hypothesis, neither could an update of this paper including literature research up to May 1997 could either. Two changes have been made in the summary of product characteristics for safety reasons: a more detailed description of the symptoms of hypo- and hyperglycaemia and a more detailed description of possible  generalised  hypersensitivity  reactions.  Apart  from  these  amendments,  no  regulatory  or manufacturer actions have been taken for safety reasons. Discussion on clinical safety Based on the review of the safety data from the extensive post marketing experience, no new safety issue to be included in the product information was identified. The most frequent adverse reactions are hypo-or hyperglycaemia. The safety profile of Ultratard is well characterised. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  Safety  and  Batch  to  batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  test  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology The  toxic  effects  seen  in  the  single  dose  and  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were  attributed  to  the hypoglycaemic activity and thus an exaggerated pharmacological effect caused by the high doses of the insulin. Increased weight, depressed activity, convulsions and death were some of these effects. No specific studies were conducted on toxicity of Ultratard (containing the recombinant human insulin), as  the  active  component  is  similar  to  Actrapid  (containing  the  recombinant  human  insulin).  An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley rats. In one 12 months study, there was a statistically significant increase of female animals bearing  benign  and  malign  mammary  gland  tumours  at  the  highest  dose.  It  is  concluded  that  the increased incidence of mammary tumours seen in rats is probably caused by mitogenic and growthpromoting action via the insulin receptor, but is probably also related to the fact that Sprague Dawley rats are especially sensitive and were given large doses. It is concluded that newer studies conducted since the original marketing authorisation for insulin human support the older documentation and do not give reason for new safety concerns. Efficacy The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  insulin  has  been  established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  life saving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is  required  by  many  patients  with  type  2 diabetes

A number of different insulin regimens have been proposed for treatment of diabetes. It is generally accepted that the so-called basal-bolus insulin regimen (one or two injections of long-acting insulin covering  basal  insulin  requirements  in  combination  with  generally  three  injections  of  fast-acting insulin  to  cover  meal-related  insulin  requirements)  generally  yields  the  best  glycaemic  control  in diabetes.  However a number of patients, especially patients with type 2 diabetes can be adequately

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

regulated  by  twice  daily  injections  of  long  acting  insulin  with  or  without  concomitant  injection  of soluble insulin.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The addition of zinc ions in Ultratard leads to a change in the pharmacokinetic properties whereby Ultratard becomes a very long-acting, insulin which is usually injected once daily as basal insulin in the basal-bolus regimen. Injections of Ultratard as part of the conventional regimen, as monotherapy or  in  combination with oral hypoglycaemic agents in type 2 diabetes patients belong as well to the scope of its administration. The long acting effect of Ultratard was addressed in several publications (concerning both type 1 and type 2 diabetes patients) which support Ultratards expected efficacy. Safety Based on the review of the safety data from the vast post marketing experience, no new safety issues were revealed that should be included in the present SmPC. The most frequent adverse reactions are hypo-or hyperglycaemia. The safety profile of Ultratard is well described and acceptable. Benefit/risk assessment Based  on  the  submitted  documentation  on  pharmacodynamic,  pharmacokinetic  and  clinical  data  as well  as  the  well-established  use  of  Ultratard,  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  Ultratard  is  considered adequately demonstrated. Recommendation Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Ultratard in the treatment of diabetes mellitus was favourable.