---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:34:04
document_pages: 32
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/velosulin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: velosulin-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 17.565789
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-27 16:20:03.709678
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Velosulin. For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Diabetes  mellitus  is  a  group  of  metabolic  diseases  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia  resulting  from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action, or both. Acute, life-threatening consequences of diabetes are  hypoglycaemia,  and  hyperglycaemia  with  ketoacidosis  or  non-ketotic  hyperosmolar  syndrome. Long-term complications  of  diabetes  include  retinopathy  with  potential  loss  of  vision,  nephropathy leading to renal failure, and peripheral neuropathy causing foot ulcers, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and sexual dysfunction. The disease is also accompanied by an increased incidence of atherosclerotic cardiovascular, peripheral vascular and cerebrovascular disease.

Nitrogen content

Medicinal product no longer authorised Type  1  diabetes ,  which  usually  is  of  childhood  or  adolescence  onset,  accounts  for  5  to  10%  of diagnosed diabetes; it is characterised by loss of insulin production due to destruction of pancreatic ß cells as a result of an autoimmune response or idiopathic causes. Patients with type 1 diabetes depend on exogenous insulin for survival. Type 2 diabetes , which usually is of adult onset, is by far the more common form of diabetes. In the Western  World,  it  constitutes  approximately  90%  of  all  cases  of  diabetes.  Type  2  diabetes  is characterised  by  impaired  insulin secretion,  insulin  resistance,  increased  hepatic  glucose  output  and lipid disorders. Patients with type 2 diabetes generally do not require insulin treatment for survival, although  a  substantial  number  (20-30%)  of  patients  need  insulin  to  achieve  acceptable  metabolic control. Marketing  authorisation  for  this  human  insulin  manufactured  by  recombinant  DNA  technology  in Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been obtainied. The active substance of Velosulin is fast acting buffered insulin  human  (rDNA)  intended  for  the  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  by  continuous  subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) with external insulin infusion pumps. For continuous infusion therapy insulin need to be administered as a buffered solution, otherwise there is a risk that the insulin will precipitate and the pump will no longer function correctly. 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The  formulation,  designed  for  subcutaneous  infusion  via  an  insulin  pump,  is  a  buffered  solution containing  insulin  human  (rDNA)  as  active  ingredients  and  agents  for  functions  as  follows:  zinc (stabilising), glycerol (isotonic), metacresol (preservative) and disodium phosphate dihydrate (buffer). Velosulin is presented in 10 ml, type I Ph. Eur., colourless glass vials sealed with a laminated rubber stopper (disc) and an aluminium cap. Active substance The active substance of Velosulin, human insulin (rDNA) complies with Ph.Eur. monograph 1999:838 with additional tests as follows: Identification by Amino acid composition

Total viable count (CFU/g)

## DNA content

Methods of analysis developed by the applicant are fully described with relevant validations.

## Development Genetics

Human insulin  is  produced  using  a  genetically  modified  strain  of Saccharomyces  cerevisiae .    The strain carries a plasmid which codes for the expression of the single amino acid chain insulin precursor

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

attached to a pre-pro leader region of the yeast mating factor (MF α 1) gene. The plasmid is constructed based on the yeast 2 µ plasmid.

The  yeast  transformant  used  to  produce  the  insulin  precursor  is  a  transformant  of Saccharomyces cerevisiae carrying the expression plasmid described above. The applicant has presented the complete DNA sequence of the plasmid. The sequencing presented is assembled from published sequences and in-house sequence determinations as relevant. The gene has also been fully characterised from isolated plasmids  from  long-term  production  scale  fermentation  and  cell  bank  (Original  Mother  Culture (OMC)).

Medicinal product no longer authorised Constructional  stability  has  been  investigated  in  production  strain,  prolonged  and  very  long  term fermentation and cell bank (OMC). Cell bank system The cell bank system consists of Original Mother Culture (OMC), New Mother Culture (NMC), MCB and  WCB.  Satisfactory  details  of  the  preparation  of  the  different  types  of  cell  banks  have  been provided and a clear description given of the numbering and origin of the various cell banks and their sublots. Production of active substance The encoded product of secretion during fermentation is a single chain insulin precursor consisting of the first 29 amino acid residues of the insulin B chain linked with three amino acids to the insulin A chain.  This  single  chain  precursor  is  converted  enzymatically  to  an  insulin  methyl  ester,  which  is subsequently hydrolysed to yield human insulin, consisting of two chains (A and B) linked together with disulphide bridges. The purification process employs several chromatography and precipitation steps  for  isolation  of  the  precursor,  the  intermediates,  and  the  active  substance  respectively.  This process is well established and it should be noted that human insulin rDNA has been manufactured by the applicant over a period of many years during which time a number of improvements have been made. Validation data have been provided for the fermentation, recovery and purification processes. In each case, critical parameters in these processes have been identified and investigated. Satisfactory  analytical  data  are  provided  for  10  recently  produced  batches  of  human  insulin demonstrating a high degree of consistency in the manufacturing process. Stability of active substance The  applicant  has  provided  results  of  testing  of  20  batches  from  the  ongoing  stability  programme. Testing parameters include dry substance, insulin polymer, insulin dimer, A21 desamido insulin, other related  substances  and  assay.  The  data  confirm  that  active  substance  is  stable  for  60  months  when stored at the recommended storage temperature. Other ingredients All excipients comply with Ph.Eur. specifications apart from metacresol which is USP standard. Product development and finished product Development Pharmaceutics

The formulation is designed for fast onset of action and optimised for use in a pump system so as to avoid the risk of precipitation of insulin and obstruction in the catheter. In this respect, a phosphate buffer is utilised and the content of zinc has been optimised to obtain optimal physical and chemical stability of the product.

Compatibility  of  the  container  components  and  product  is  shown  to  be  satisfactory  via  stability studies.  Suitability  for  use  in  external  infusion  pump  systems  has  also  been  documented  during stability studies.

Sterilisation by filtration is essential given the heat sensitivity of the active ingredient.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Manufacturing process

The  product  is  prepared  by  mixing  a  number  of  solutions.  The  solutions  are  sterile  filtered  into  a filling  tank.  Filling  occurs  in  a  grade  A  zone  and  the  vials  are  inspected  individually  by  manual or automated inspection.

The applicant  provides  a  summary  validation  overview  in  which  both  physical/chemical  issues  and process qualification issues are described. The applicant emphasises their large experience with human insulin  products  in  general  and  the  fact  that  pharmaceutical/chemical  properties  of  the  various products  have  been  investigated  over  the  years  through  development  and  adaptation  to  first  animal insulin  of  increasing  purity  and  then  highly  purified  human  insulin.  The  applicant's  experience  of manufacturing insulin products for the European market has been taken into consideration by CPMP. On the basis that filling processes for Velosulin are practically identical to those for other fast-acting human insulin products (for which many years experience have been gained), and based on the actual specific  validation  data  provided  for  Velosulin  in  the  dossier,  the  manufacture  of  Velosulin  is considered  to  be  suitably  validated.  The  manufacturing  process  is  properly  described  and  well controlled.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Velosulin complies with the requirements of the following Ph.Eur. monographs: · 1999:0854 Insulin Preparations, Injectable · 1997:0834 Insulin Injection, Soluble In addition to monograph tests the product is tested by in-house method for identity and content of preservative. Full methodologies have been provided for all in-house methods. A complete justification of the tests employed has been provided. Batch  analysis  data  have  been  provided  for  3  production  batches  of  Velosulin  and  for  1  batch  of Velosulin  BR  (rDNA),  the  US  marketed  version.  All  batches  comply  with  the  respective  finished product specification. Stability of the Product Stability reports are provided covering the different strengths, presentations and production sites for Velosulin. Results  have  been  generated  by  validated,  stability  indicating  methods  and  indicate  satisfactory stability. These results support the shelf life stated in the SPC. Physical and chemical stability of 2 production batches of product has been tested in conjunction with the Disetronic  pump  system.  Velosulin  has  been  demonstrated  suitable  for  use  in  the  Disetronic  pump system. Other possible pump systems should only be used if the parts coming into contact with the product are made of made of polyethylene, polypropylene or glass. Viral safety and TSE risk assessment A number of animal derived raw materials are used in the production of insulin human (rDNA). These are peptone, beef extract and pepticase which are used in the preparation and storage of cell banks, and L-threonine and trypsin- used in the purification process to convert human insulin precursor to human insulin methyl ester. Pepticase falls  outside  the  scope  of  the  TSE  Guideline  as  it  is  derived  from  casein  from  milk  from healthy cows only and no other ruminant materials are used in its preparation.

For  peptone  (CEP-2000-175)  and  beef  extract  (CEP-2000-181)  Certificates  of  Suitability  of  the EDQM have been submitted.

L-threonine is sourced from avian feathers and porcine gelatine and trypsin-calcium acetate solution from porcine pancreas.

The risk of transmission of TSE from Velosulin to human beings has been appropriately addressed in accordance  with  CPMP/CVMP  Note  for  Guidance  for  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting  animal spongiform encephalopathy via medicinal products (EMEA/410/01).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Viral safety issues have been addressed and compliance with relevant guidelines is considered to be met.

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

Satisfactory  evidence  is  provided  that  product  manufacture  is  well  controlled,  that  consistency  of production is achieved and that a stable product results. The requirements of the relevant directives and guidelines are met. The pharmaceutical portions of the SPC, package insert and product label are supported by the information provided in the dossier. Several minor quality issues will be addressed by the applicant on an ongoing (post-approval) basis.

<!-- image -->

| Affinity for Insulin Receptor   | Affinity for IGF1-Receptor   |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| =100%                           | 0.03%                        |

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects The  preclinical  evaluation  of  the  present  product  is  based  on  the  documentation  for  the  active ingredients;  insulin  human  and  protamine-insulin  human.  The  programme  includes  recent  studies performed with the insulin analogue insulin aspart. In several of these studies, Insulin human was used as a reference substance. Pharmacodynamics · Primary pharmacology programme. The programme includes studies performed in the eighties demonstrating the similarity between insulin human and semi-synthetic  insulin  human,  later  studies  supplementing  above  studies  and  recent  studies where insulin human was used as a reference substance for insulin analogues. · In vitro studies Insulin is a hormone composed of two polypeptides (two protein chains named A and B chains having respectively  30  and  21  amino-acids).  Two  disulfide  bonds  link  these  two  chains.  The  structure  of  the insulin  is  similar  of  those  of  several  other  hormones  or  growth-factors  (including  insulin-like  growth factors  IGF-1  and  IGF-2).  IGF-1  and  IGF-2  have  some  affinity  for  the  insulin  receptor,  however  both growth factors have their own receptors. The insulin and IGFs receptors both belong to the tyrosine kinase family  receptors.  The  activation  of  the  receptors  is  obtained  when  the  endogenous  ligand  occupies  the receptor.  Once  activated  the  signal  transduction  produced  by  these  receptors,  which  mediates  the physiological  action  of  the  hormone,  starts  with  an  autophosphorylation  of  the  receptor.  The in  vitro studies  explored  the  affinity  of  insulin  analogues  for  other  receptors  belonging  to  the  tyrosine  kinase family. The  receptor  binding  activity  of  insulin  human  was  studied  in  connection  with  the  pre-clinical development of the insulin aspart (see table 1 below). Table 1: Determination of the receptor affinity of insulin human (rDNA). Affinity for Insulin Receptor · In vivo studies The effect on blood glucose in diabetic rats after subcutaneous administration was studied in diabetic rats which received by a single subcutaneous injection either insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin or vehicle. The effect on blood glucose was measured by blood sampling. Insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin showed dose and time dependant antidiabetic effect.

The pharmacological effect of insulin human 40 U/ml was studied in a cross-over assay in rabbits. A standard crossover study (British Pharm., 1980) of the hypoglycaemic effect after SC administration in Rabbits (n=36) was done. There was no difference between equivalent preparations made from human insulin or semi-synthetic insulin.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Safety pharmacology programme.

In  the  Irwin  test,  a  few  mice  showed  a  slight  reduction  in  exploratory  and  spontaneous  activity.  In  the Animex test, which is more sensitive, mice showed a decrease in motor activity at the highest dose (5 U/kg). Reduced performance in the rotarod test was also observed in mice at the highest dose (5 U/kg) in one study, but no effects were observed at 100 U/kg in a later study. The locomotion activity in rats were slightly reduced at 100 U/kg, which was the only dose tested.

Newer studies support the original ones.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  time  from  disappearance  to  reappearance  of  the  righting  reflex  (sleeping  time)  induced  by pentobarbital in mice was prolonged after treatment with 5 U/kg. The same applies to hexobarbital after treatment with 100 U/kg; the effect was reversed with glucose administration. A dose of 100 U/kg after administration of ethanol significantly increased the mortality and sleeping time. No antagonistic effect on pentylenetetrazol-induced convulsions in mice was observed at 100 U/kg, and this treatment did not act as a pro-convulsant either. Insulin human did not show any inhibitory effects on acetic acid induced writhing in mice at 100 U/kg (P-27), indicating absence of analgesic potential. The Body temperature in mice was unaffected by 100 U/kg (P-28). Neither insulin human nor semi synthetic insulin human produced any 'curarizing'  effect  on  neuromuscular  transmission  after  treatment  of  rats  up  to  5  U/kg  IV.  No  effects attributed to treatment were observed in an in vitro preparation of guinea-pig ileum and vas deferens . No effects on cardiovascular and respiratory system attributed to treatment were observed in cats and in pigs. The gastro-intestinal motility of mice was unaffected. A transient fall in diuresis was observed in rats, however this effect was reversed after SC administration of glucose. A bromsulphtalein-test showed no indications  of  pathological  effects  to  liver  parenchyma  in  pigs.  Blood  platelets  of  human  Rich  Platelet Plasma were not affected after in vitro treatment with insulin human. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. Pharmacokinetics Single Dose Pharmacokinetics Studies The pharmacokinetics properties of insulin human were investigated after a single dose IV and SC in the Rat. These experiments have all shown that insulin human has regular, predictable kinetics in the rat after SC injection of various high doses. A single dose pharmacokinetic study in the pig where insulin human was administered IV and SC showed that  T max equals  79  min  [T max is  the  time  at  which  the  highest  drug  concentration  occurs  following administration of an extra vascular dose. Tmax is expressed in min or hr]. Multiple Dose Pharmacokinetics Studies A multiple SC dose kinetics study was performed in rats and compared A multiple SC dose kinetics study was performed in rats and compared the pharmacokinetic profile of insulin aspart and insulin human. A small relative increase in the tmax and Cmax of insulin human after SC administration twice daily for 7 days has  been  observed.  The  kinetics  after  multiple  doses  were  basically  similar  to  those  after  single  doses injected SC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2: Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Insulin Human (rDNA)

|                |               | Insulin human (rDNA)   | Insulin human (rDNA)      | Insulin human (rDNA)   | Insulin human (rDNA)   |
|----------------|---------------|------------------------|---------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Administration | Endpoint      | Man 022/UK (0.1 U/kg)  | Pig NN 950475 (0.125U/kg) | Dog NN 960548 (1U/kg)  | Rat NN 960550 (6U/kg)  |
| SC             | t ½ (min)     | 122                    | 121                       | 57                     | 23                     |
|                | C max (pM)    | 102                    | 122                       | 2871                   | 18000                  |
|                | T max (min)   | 145                    | 99                        | 60                     | 15                     |
| IV             | Cl (l·min/kg) |                        | 0.021                     | 0.048                  | 0.058                  |

## · Genotoxicity.

Medicinal product no longer authorised As the majority  of  the  insulin  human  preparation  is  of  same  composition  as  the  semi-synthetic  insulin human preparations, no pharmacokinetic studies were conducted in the original preclinical programme. Linearity  concerning  AUC/dose  was  confirmed  in  different  species,  meaning  that  there  was  no  insulin accumulation. Toxicokinetics Toxicokinetic studies were done during the 52 weeks repeated dose toxicity studies in the rat and the dog and the Segment II test (teratogenicity studies) in the pregnant rabbit. They demonstrated linearity of the plasma levels of insulin human with the dose, the Cmax, occurred 1-5 hours after administration of either type of insulin. The plasma levels and AUCs of insulin human remained directly related to dose throughout the 52 weeks of treatment and that the rate of elimination did not increase with time. Toxicology · Single dose toxicity studies. Mice and Rats were given a single dose of insulin human subcutaneous at dosage up to 4000 U/kg. In higher dosage groups insulin human was compared to semi-synthetic insulin. Apart from few sporadic hypoglycaemic reactions on the day of dosing, no treatment related signs were seen. No significant difference between insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin was observed. · Repeated doses toxicity. The subacute toxicity was examined in rats and dogs during a 4weeks SC study in Wistar Rats and a 13 weeks SC study in Beagle Dogs. Insulin human was administrated subcutaneous for 1 year to Sprague Dawley Rats. At necropsy, there was an  increased  incidence  of  mammary  gland  cyst  and  mammary  tumours  were  found  at  microscopic examination.  The  incidence  of  total  number  of  mammary  tumours  as  well  as  fibroadenomas  and adenocarcinomas were however not significant from the control group. There were no other treatmentrelated effects in any organ, including the pituitary. Beagle  dogs  were  given  insulin  human  1  U/kg  twice  daily  SC  for  12 months.  Besides  one  case  of abnormal weight gain, there were no other important effects of the treatments.

The genotoxic potential of insulin human was evaluated through a bacterial reverse mutation test in 4 strains  of Salmonella  typhimurium ,  a  clastogenic  activity  test  in  cultured  human  lymphocytes,  a mutagenic activity test on the HGPRT-locus in chinese hamster V79 cells and a micronucleus test in bone marrow erythrocytes. In all the tests insulin human was found non-mutagenic.

Insulin  human  was  included  as  reference  substance  in  a  gene  mutation  study  in  mouse  lymphoma L5178Y cells (TFT-resistance). Negative findings were obtained with no signs of cytotoxicity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Carcinogenicity.

MCF-7  human  breast  cancer  cells  were  incubated  with  different  concentrations  of  insulin  aspart, insulin human and an experimental insulin analogue. Dose response curves from seven studies were the same for insulin aspart and insulin human, whereas the experimental insulin analogue had at least 10times their mitogenic potential.

In an exploratory 12-month test and in the formal 12-month toxicity study in the Sprague-Dawley rat the effects of chronic administration of insulin aspart and insulin human on mammary tissues in the Rat were explored.  In  these  studies  some  animals  developed  neoplasms  of  mammary  tissue.  All  animals  in  all treatment groups showed hyperplasia of mammary glandular epithelial cells. In both tests most mammary gland  tumours  were  fibroadenomas  all  had  a  typical  histological  appearance.  The  small  number  of adenocarcinomas had remained local and had not metastasised. The pituitary glands appeared normal.

In Segments I/II study, fertility was not affected in rats given insulin human. Males had a slightly reduced epididymal sperm count. Pre- and post-implantation loss was increased and a proportion of foetuses had characteristic  abnormalities  attributed  to  reduction  of  maternal  blood  glucose.  In  an  embryo-foetal development study in rabbits, an increase in early embryonic deaths with associated decrease in litter size and  litter  weight  was  observed  at  10  U/kg.  A  dose-dependent  increase  in  foetuses  with  skeletal abnormalities was seen.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A study exploring the effects of repeated subcutaneous injection of insulin aspart and insulin human for 52 weeks in rats has been conducted. This study has been performed in Sprague-Dawley rats. A dose-related increase in palpable subcutaneous masses has been observed at 30 and 75 U/kg twice daily. A statistically significant  (p&lt;0.01)  increased  incidence  of  female  animals  bearing  mammary  gland  tumours  at  75 U/kg/bid were found. The increase was evident in benign/malign combined as well as in malign tumours alone. No evidence of mammary gland hyperplasia or of tumours was seen in the test up to 12 months in the dog. Particularly  under  certain  experimental  conditions  insulin  may  induce  mammary tumours in the female Sprague  Dawley  rat  (a  sensitive  species,  strain  and  sex)  probably  related  to  a  mitogenic  and  growthpromoting action of insulin mediated by the insulin receptor. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley rats. In one 12-month study, there was a statistically significant increase of female animals bearing benign and malign mammary gland tumours at the highest dose. There was no increase of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12-month dog study. · Reproduction Toxicity. Fertility  and  Embryo-Foetal  Development  studies  have  been  conducted  in  the  Sprague  Dawley  Rat. Fertility was not affected. Males showed slight reduction in the epididymal sperm count. Dams treated with  high  doses  (200  U/kg)  of  insulin  human  showed  pre-  and  post-implantation  loss,  and  a  specific pattern of anatomical abnormalities of the foetuses was seen. The findings are regarded as a consequence of the severe maternal hypoglycaemia. The  pre-  and  post-natal  development  of  Sprague  Dawley  rats  born  from  pregnant  females  exposed  to insulin human has been studied. Maternal hypoglycaemia with a few deaths and effects on weight gain and food consumption were observed in the dams. Newborn pups showed slightly increased weight gain, which had become normalised by weaning. There were a few other variations in F1 animals but no major effect was found. Embryo-foetal development of rabbits born from pregnant females exposed to insulin human has also been studied. The high doses of insulin led to increased food consumption and accelerated weight gain, which persisted to the end of the experiment. There was a dose-related reduction in plasma glucose. In the midand low doses it had recovered by 4h after the first dose. Top-dose group (5 U/kg) showed embryonic deaths and related depression of litter size and weight. At 1.5 U/kg and above, foetuses showed skeletal abnormalities. These effects were considered to be due to the induced maternal hypoglycaemia.

During gestation, abortion and foetal death and malformations were seen, but only during severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Local Tolerance.

The local tolerance was studied in rabbits after IM injections of insulin human. It  was  concluded that insulin  human  caused  damages  which  were  similar  to  those  found  after  injection  of  isotonic  saline solution.

A  test  for  local  irritation  in  rabbits  showed  that  there  were  no  differences  in  the  damages  caused  by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human.

## · Immunotoxicity studies.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Insulin antibodies, even in moderate and low amounts, may prevent rapid rise in free blood insulin, thereby leading to higher postprandial glucose levels, or cause increased risk of hypoglycaemia when insulin is released from circulating insulin antibody complexes. The purity of the injected insulin has been shown to be  of  crucial  importance  on  the  amount  of  insulin  antibody  formed.  Thus,  5-times  crystallised  porcine insulin induces more insulin antibodies than the same preparation containing mono component insulin. The  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  has  been  studied  in  Rabbits.  Freund's  adjuvant  and  20  U  of respectively insulin human, semi-synthetic insulin and 5 times crystallized porcine insulin were injected intramuscularly to groups of rabbits twice a week. Serum insulin binding was estimated until 97 days. No statistically  significant  differences  between  the  immunogenicity  of  insulin  human  and  semi-synthetic insulin was found, whereas they both were demonstrated to be significantly less immunogenic that 5-times crystallized porcine insulin. It was concluded, that insulin human fulfils the demand of low potential to induce insulin antibodies in accordance with other mono component insulins. There was no statistically significant difference between the immunogenicity in rabbits of insulin human and semi synthetic human insulins. These insulins were found to be significantly less immunogenic than 5 times crystallised pork insulin. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low. · Ecotoxicity/Environmental Risk Assessment. Insulin  human  is  considered  readily  degradable,  hence  do  not  suggest  any  environmental  risk  for clinical  use.  The  containers  and  devices  in  which  it  is  supplied  are  appropriate  for  disposal  by  the means normally employed for simple medical devices. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects The  main  purpose  in  the  original  studies  for  primary  and  secondary  pharmacodynamics  was  to demonstrate the similarity between the new insulin human and marketed semi synthetic variant. Newer studies support the conclusion from the original ones that insulin human and semi-synthetic insulin have identical blood sugar lowering effect. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. As the majority  of  the  insulin  human  preparation  is  of  same  composition  as  the  semi-synthetic  insulin preparations,  no  pharmacokinetic  studies  were  conducted  in  the  original  preclinical  programme.  Newer studies  showed  no  or  in  some  cases  minor  differences  in  pharmacokinetics  between  insulin  aspart  and insulin HM(ge). Linearity concerning AUC/dose was confirmed in different species, meaning that there was no drug accumulation. The  toxic  effects  seen  in  the  single  dose  and  repeated  dose  toxicity  studies  were  attributed  to  the hypoglycaemic activity and thus an exaggerated pharmacological effect caused by the high doses of the insulin. Increased weight, depressed activity, convulsions and death were some of these effects.

Insulin is known to have teratogenic potential. The noted effects on embryos and foetuses were only seen at severe maternal hypoglycaemia and are already known to occur in incorrectly treated diabetic women.

All conducted genotoxicity studies were negative for mutagenic potential. An increase in the number of benign mammary adenomas and fibroadenomas has been shown in Sprague Dawley rats. It is concluded that  the  increased  incidence  of  mammary  tumours  seen  in  rats  is  probably  caused  by  mitogenic  and growth-promoting  action  via  the  insulin  receptor,  but  is  probably  also  related  to  the  fact  that  Sprague Dawley rats are especially sensitive and were given large doses. There was no increase of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12-month dog study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Finally; a test for local irritation in rabbits showed that there were no differences in the damages caused by isotonic saline solution and by insulin human. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low.

## 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects

Diabetes  is  a  group  of  metabolic  disorders  characterised  by  hyperglycaemia  due  to  defects  in  insulin secretion and/or insulin action. The two most common forms of diabetes mellitus are type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is characterised by an absolute deficiency of insulin due to destruction of the pancreatic β -cells.  Although  the  rate  of β -cell  destruction  is  variable,  all  type  1  diabetic  patients  will eventually require exogenous insulin for survival. In contrast, type 2 diabetes is characterised by insulin resistance,  relative  impairment  of  insulin  secretion  and  increased  hepatic  glucose  output.  In  general, patients with type 2 diabetes do not require exogenous insulin for survival. Nevertheless, during the course of the disease, a large minority of these patients will be treated with exogenous insulin to correct persistent hyperglycaemia.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The goal of insulin treatment is to mimic the physiologic pattern of insulin secretion, which under normal conditions  consist  of  a  basal  secretion  and  meal  related  short  peaks.  The  most  commonly  used  insulin regimen is the so-called basal-bolus regimen in which basal insulin requirements are provided by one or two injections of slow-acting or intermediate-acting insulin and mealtime requirements are provided by meal  related  injections  of  short  acting  soluble  human  insulin/insulin  analogues.  Instead  of  separate injections of intermediate-acting and fast-acting insulins, the two insulin preparations may be mixed (by the patient or as ready-made premixed insulin) before injection. It is generally accepted that the basal-bolus regimen offers the best glycaemic control. However, many patients, especially type 2 diabetic patients who produce significant amounts of insulin themselves, may be adequately controlled on twice-daily injections of intermediate-acting insulins or mixtures of fast-acting and intermediate-acting insulins. Although this regimen may not offer optimal glycaemic control, patient compliance is generally is better for this simpler regimen than for the multiple injections regimens. Therefore, for some patients, the twice-daily regimen may be an acceptable alternative to the basal-bolus regimens. Intensified insulin therapy can reduce the incidence of complications, and delay the progression of existing complications  in  Type  1  and  2  diabetes.  One  type  of  intensified  insulin  therapy  is  multiple  injection therapy,  which  attempts  to  mimic  the  physiological  insulin  secretion  of  normal  man.  Basal  insulin requirements  are  supplied  as  injections  of  long/intermediate  acting  insulin,  and  meal-related  insulin requirements are supplied by bolus injections of regular fast-acting human insulin (HI). The active constituent of the fast acting insulin preparation Velosulin is human insulin manufactured by recombinant DNA technology [human insulin HM(ge)]. Velosulin is a buffered insulin (to ensure a stable pH during pump use) which was designed to be used with insulin pumps. The changes made in relationship  to  other  fast  acting  human  insulin  HM(ge)  preparations  not  aimed  at  being  used  with insulin pumps are minor: a phosphate buffer has been added and the zinc concentration was reduced slightly. Clinical pharmacology Seven different studies are supporting the pharmacodynamics of Actrapid. Four of those were conducted in healthy subjects, two studies in type I diabetics (including one performed in children/adolescents) and one trial has been conducted in type II diabetics patients. These studies are recent studies performed with the insulin analogue insulin aspart (sometimes referred to as X14) in which human insulin HM(ge) was used as a comparator (see table 3 below).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3: Clinical pharmacodynamy trials

<!-- image -->

| Studies                                | Population (Number of subjects)                                                         | Design                                                                                                                       | Objectives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 022, 023, 026 and 027 - clamp trials   | Healthy volunteers 022: 25 subjects 023: 24 subjects 026: 20 subjects 027:.20 subjects. | Randomised, double blind 2 period cross-over (022 and 023) 6-period cross-over (026) Parallel group (027).                   | longer authorised 022: To compare the plasma profile of rapid acting insulin aspart with that of human insulin. 023: To compare the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic response to a single dose of rapid acting insulin aspart with that of insulin human, human insulin by means of euglycaemic clamp. 026: To compare the pharmacokinetic profiles and the pharmacodynamic response to single doses of rapid acting insulin aspart and insulin human, human insulin injected SC using three different injection sites during an euglycaemic clamp. To compare these profiles with profiles of insulin human, human insulin injected at the same sites. 027: Primary: To investigate the intra- subject variation in the time action profile after four independent injections with either rapid acting insulin aspart or insulin human. Secondary: To investigate inter-subject |
| 024 and 043 - children and adolescents | Type 1 diabetic patients 024: 24 subjects. 043: 18 subjects.                            | product no Randomised double blind 3- period cross-over (024). Randomised double blind 2- period cross-over meal test (043). | 024:To compare the postprandial serum glucose profile of rapid acting insulin aspart when given at time t=0 min. to the postprandial plasma glucose profile of insulin human, human insulin when give at time t=0 min and t=30 min in relation to the standard meal. 043: Primary: To compare the pharmacokinetics of rapid acting insulin aspart with insulin human, human insulin in paediatric type 1 diabetic subjects to verify that the pharmacokinetic differences observed in adults also apply to children. Secondary: To compare the postprandial serum glucose profiles of rapid acting insulin aspart with those of insulin human.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Medicinal 030                          | Type 2 diabetic patients 25 subjects.                                                   | Randomised double blind 3- period cross-over.                                                                                | To compare the postprandial serum glucose profile of rapid acting insulin aspart when given at time t=0 min to the postprandial plasma glucose profile of insulin human, insulin human when given at time t=0min and t=30 min in relation to the standard meal.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Pharmacodynamics in healthy subjects

The  study ANA/DCD/022/UK (also  denoted  by  022/UK)  was  aimed  at  comparing  the  plasma  insulin profile  of  a  single  dose  of  rapid  acting  insulin  aspart  with  that  of  Actrapid,  insulin  human  in  healthy volunteers. Plasma glucose, plasma insulin and C-peptide profiles after a single dose of 0.1 U/kg of rapid acting  insulin  aspart  and  Actrapid,  insulin  human  injected  subcutaneously  in  the  abdominal  wall  were compared in 24 healthy male subjects. Other endpoints were the mean residence time for insulin (denoted

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

by  MRT(ins)),  the  area  under  the  serum  glucose  concentration  to  time  curve  denoted  by  AUC (BG) ,  the maximum change from baseline to minimum concentration ∆ Cmin(BG) and  T min(BG) derived  from  plasma glucose profiles in an interval from 0-480 minutes, as well as Cmax(ins), Tmax(ins) , and AUC(ins) [respectively highest  insulin(s)  concentration  measured  in  the  plasma,  the  time  when  this  highest  concentration  was observed  and  the  area  under  the  plasma  insulin(s)  concentration-time  curve]  derived  from  the  serum insulin profiles in an interval from 0-480 minutes.

The results  of  the  study  show  that  AUC(BG)  was  435.8  (131.4)  min.mmmol/l, ∆ Cmin(BG)  was  1.4  (0.4) mmol/l and Tmin(BG) was 226.4 (119.6) min.

<!-- image -->

IA

/ISCP/24MAY02/

i

23

/

i

23

Medicinal product no longer authorised The study 023/D is a two period double-blind randomised cross-over trial to compare the pharmacodynamic response to a single dose of rapid acting insulin aspart with that of Actrapid, insulin human in healthy volunteers during a euglycaemic clamp. The pharmacodynamic response to a single dose of 0.2 U/kg insulin aspart and Actrapid, insulin human respectively, injected SC in the abdominal wall, was compared in 24 male healthy subjects. The primary endpoints, derived from the glucose infusion rate in the interval 0-600 minutes (glucose infusion rates profile) were AUCGIR, GIRmax, TGIRmax, TAUC½ (time to half of the area under the glucose concentration-time curve, it reflects the median of the integrated glucose infusion rate profile). The secondary endpoints i.e. the area under the concentration-time curve (AUCins), the highest concentration observed in the plasma (Cmax) and the time when it was observed (Tmax), and the mean residence time (MRT) were derived from serum insulin profiles in the interval 0-600 minutes. The primary  glucose  endpoints  were  the  following  (expressed  in  means  with  SD  in  brackets)  for  Actrapid AUCGIR 3.7 (0.7) g/kg, GIRmax 12.1 (2.6) mg/(min x kg), TGIRmax 180.8 (56.8) min, TAUC½ 235.9 (23.4) min. Based on TAUC½, the duration of action for Actrapid is approximately 8 hours. The maximum effect was obtained 3 hours after the injection. Figure 1: Mean glucose infusion rates profiles for Actrapid, insulin human. Mean GIR (m g/(min*kg)) 0 3 6 9 12 Elapsed time (min) -90 -30 30 90 150 210 270 Study 026/US was a six-period double-blind randomised cross-over trial aimed at comparing the action profile  of  rapid  acting  insulin  aspart  in  healthy  subjects  using  different  injection  sites  during  an euglycaemic clamp, and to compare rapid acting insulin aspart profiles with profiles of Actrapid, insulin human. The primary efficacy endpoints were derived from the glucose infusion rates profiles in the time interval from  0-600  minutes.  The  primary  efficacy  endpoints  were  AUCGIR,  GIRmax,  TGIRmax  and  TAUC½..  The secondary endpoints were derived from the insulin profiles in the time interval 0-600 minutes: AUCins, Cmax, Tmax, and the mean residence time (MRT).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4:  The pharmacodynamic parameters for Actrapid, insulin human are displayed in the table below.

| Injection site   | Deltoid        | Abdomen        | Thigh          |
|------------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| AUC (mg)         | 204519 (56189) | 192010 (47896) | 205773 (53704) |
| GIRmax (mg/min)  | 736 (243)      | 708 (204)      | 720 (229)      |
| Tmax(min)        | 192 (51)       | 173 (62)       | 193 (60)       |
| T AUC½ (min)     | 243 (37)       | 235 (46)       | 243 (37)       |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Glucose infusion rates indicate a more rapid glucose lowering action when the insulin is injected in the abdomen than deltoid or thigh injection sites. The TAUC½ and Tmax after an injection in the abdomen were slightly shorter than after an injection in the deltoid or in the thigh. The total amount of glucose infused was less after an abdominal injection than for the other injection sites. The maximum glucose infusion rate was lower for abdomen than the other injection sites. Study 026/US was conducted in healthy volunteers but the results of the study can be extrapolated to the type  1  diabetic  patients  according  to  published  studies  (such  comparison  between  SC  injection  in  the abdomen or in the thigh has been published in 'Effects of the anatomical region used for insulin injections on glycaemia in  type  1  diabetes  subjects.  Bantle et  al. ,  Diabetes  care  1993; 16 (12):1592-7;  and  in  the comparison between a subcutaneous injection in the abdomen or in thigh and intramuscular injection in thigh has also been done (see 'Impact of injection sites for soluble insulin on glycaemic control in type 1 diabetic patients treated with a multiple insulin injection regimen. Henriksen et al. , Diabetologia 1993; 36 : 752-8'). As type 2 diabetic patients usually have a higher body mass index and a thicker subcutaneous tissue, especially thicker abdominal wall, this could explain why the absorption may be different. Study 027/D is  a  parallel  randomised double-blind trial to investigate the intra-subject and inter-subject variations  in  action  profiles  after  injection  with  rapid  acting  insulin  aspart  or  Actrapid  during  a euglycaemic clamp. Four independent doses (0.2 U/kg) of either insulin aspart or Actrapid, insulin human were given in this euglycaemic clamp trial subcutaneously into the abdominal wall to 18 healthy male subjects.  The  primary  endpoints  derived  from  the  glucose  infusion  rate  and  secondary  endpoints  were related to insulin in the time interval 0-600 minutes. Intra-subject variability and inter-subject variability were determined. There is a considerable inter-subject variation of absorption and action characteristics of all known insulin preparations in normal  subjects, and  in particular in diabetic patients with  different degrees  of lipodystrophy. Moreover the most important in the daily clinical practice is the predictability of absorption and  action  characteristics  of  insulin  from  day-to-day  in  the  individual  patient,  rather  than  the  absolute predictability of absorption and action profile of the insulin preparation when administered to a patient. Therefore the intra-subject variability should preferably have been investigated in diabetic patients instead in healthy subjects.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5:  Pharmacodynamic  parameters  measured  in  healthy  subjects  [studies  ANA/DCD/023/D, 026/USA  and  027/D].  The  medians  (1st  to  3rd  quartile)  are  displayed  for  TAUC½  and TGIRmax.

| Trialª   | Actrapid N   | AUC GIR (g/kg)   | GIR max (mg/min kg)   | t AUC½    | t GIRmax (min)   |
|----------|--------------|------------------|-----------------------|-----------|------------------|
| 023/D    | 24           | 3.7              | 12.1                  | 237       | 182              |
|          |              | (0.7)            | (2.6)                 | (222-249) | (144-235)        |
| 026/USA  | 19           | 2.5              | 9.4                   | 230       | 168              |
|          |              | (0.6)            | (2.7)                 | (209-273) | (136-212)        |
| 027/D    | 37           | 3.6              | 13.0                  | 234       | 187              |
|          | b            | (0.8)            | (3.1)                 | (219-259) | (163-222)        |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised AUCGIR and GIR values are mean (SD). tAUC1/2 and tGIRmax are median (1 st to 3 rd quartile) ª In all three trials, the dose was 0.2 U/kg administered s.c. into the abdominal wall. b There were 10 patients in the treatment group; N represents the total number of insulin profiles for all the patients for the 4 dosing days. Pharmacodynamics in type 1 diabetic patients The study ANA/DCD/024/UK compared the effects on postprandial glycaemic excursion of rapid acting insulin aspart given immediately before a test meal, with the excursion obtained after administration of Actrapid,  insulin  human  given  immediately  before  or  30 minutes  before  a  test  meal  in  type  1  diabetic patients [ Note: Postprandial glucose excursion is calculated by subtracting a fasting blood glucose level from the after meal value at the one or two hour points. Post- meal blood glucose excursions should be around 1.7-2.2 mM ]. This trial compared the postprandial glycaemic excursions obtained after the injection of 0.15 U/kg insulin aspart immediately before a test meal to the effect obtained after a similar dose of insulin human given either  immediately  or  30  min  before  a  standard  test  meal.  Twenty-two  type  1  diabetic  subjects  were enrolled in the study. Blood glucose excursions were calculated and compared primarily over the period 0 to  240  min  after  the  test  meals.  During  this  period,  the  total  excursion  of  blood  glucose  denoted  by EXC(BG) was lower after insulin human given 30 min prior to the meals. The Cmax, glu was lower when Actrapid was given 30 min before the meal and AUCins and Cmax, ins were slightly higher when insulin human was administered 30 min before the meal. The time when the maximum plasma insulin concentration was observed (Tmax ins) was reached in half the time when Actrapid, insulin human was given 30 minutes before the meal compared to administration immediately before the meal. Therefore administration of Actrapid, insulin human 30 minutes before a meal is advantageous compared to administration of Actrapid, insulin human immediately before a meal with respect to postprandial blood glucose control. It has a lower maximum blood glucose concentration, which is consistent with a higher maximum insulin concentration, the maximum insulin concentration is reached faster.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 6: The main glucose pharmacodynamic data for the 0 to 240 minutes assessment period together with the main insulin pharmacokinetic data for the full 0 to 360 minutes study period are presented below.

<!-- image -->

| EFFICACY RESULTS Primary blood glucose endpoint: Means (SD)   | EFFICACY RESULTS Primary blood glucose endpoint: Means (SD)   | EFFICACY RESULTS Primary blood glucose endpoint: Means (SD)               | EFFICACY RESULTS Primary blood glucose endpoint: Means (SD)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| Actrapid t=0(0-240min) Actrapid t=-30(0- 240min)              | EXC (BG) (mmol/l x min) 1311.36 (511.66) 1105.82 (571.35)     |                                                                           |                                                               |
| authorised Secondary blood glucose endpoints: Means (SD)      | authorised Secondary blood glucose endpoints: Means (SD)      | authorised Secondary blood glucose endpoints: Means (SD)                  | authorised Secondary blood glucose endpoints: Means (SD)      |
| Actrapid t=0(0-240min) Actrapid t=-30(0- 240min)              | C max(BG) (mmol/l) 16.37 (3.37) 14.45 (3.47)                  | C min(BG) (mmol/l) 10.03 (3.53) 9.10 (2.61) T max(BG) (min) 102.73 121.14 |                                                               |
| Secondary insulin endpoints: Means (SD)                       | Secondary insulin endpoints: Means (SD)                       | Secondary insulin endpoints: Means (SD)                                   |                                                               |
| Actrapid t=0(0-360min) Actrapid t=-30(-30- 330min)            | AUC (ins) (mU/l x min) 8820.64 (4932.83) 9427.75 (4952.84)    | no longer MRT (ins) (min) 162.44 (18.76) 122.55 (15.65)                   |                                                               |
| Actrapid t=0(0-360min) Actrapid t=-30(-30- 330min)            | product C max(ins) (mU/l) 35.86 (20.13) 39.89 (21.87)         | T max(ins) (min) 100.68(44.86) 55.23 61.79)                               |                                                               |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 2: Mean glucose and insulin profiles during the full 0 to 360 minutes study periods. (HI = Actrapid, insulin human).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Pharmacodynamics in type 2 diabetic patients

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  study 025/UK compared  the  metabolic  control  obtained  with  rapid  acting  insulin  aspart,  with  the metabolic control obtained with Actrapid, insulin human in type 1 diabetic patients. One hundred and four adult patients with type 1 diabetes for at least 2 years and a HBA1c &lt;9% were randomised in the study, 90 of them completed the trial. The treatment periods lasted 4 weeks each. Primary efficacy endpoint was fructosamine.  Secondary  endpoints  were  23-hour  in-patient  plasma  glucose  profiles  at  the  end  of  each treatment period, weekly 8-point blood glucose profiles, ratio of bolus to basal insulin. The safety profile was assessed with the incidence of hypoglycaemia. The study demonstrated that the mean fructosamine levels after treatment with Actrapid, insulin human were 3.82 mmol/l (0.56). Figure 3: 23-hourt Mean blood glucose profiles ANA/DCD/025/UK/14AUG02/fig25 act.sas/fig25 act.cgm

Study 030/DK/N compared  the  effects on postprandial glycaemic  excursions  of  Actrapid  given immediately before or 30 minutes and insulin aspart before a test meal in insulin treated type 2 diabetic patients.

Twenty-two  subjects  with  type  2  diabetes  were  enrolled  in  this  study.  Euglycaemic  clamps  were performed overnight before each of the 3 study days. The primary endpoint was the glucose excursions determined during the period from 0 to 360 minutes after the insulin injections.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7: The mean serum glucose profiles shown below were observed with different treatments: insulin human administered either immediately before or 30 minutes before a test meal.

<!-- image -->

|        | C max (mU/l)   | T max (min) a   | MRT (min)   | AUC (mU/lxh) b   |
|--------|----------------|-----------------|-------------|------------------|
| 022/UK | 17.5 (4.3)     | 120 (15-360)    | 217 (30.3)  | 77.8 (13.9)      |
| 023/D  | 55.2 (8.5)     | 120 (30-270)    | 238 (21.7)  | 303 (31.7)       |
| 027/UK | 46.5 (9.5)     | 150 (30-420)    | 240 (25.5)  | 251 (35)         |

Medicinal product no longer authorised The mean glucose excursion measured with Actrapid, insulin human administered 30 minutes before the meal was 868 mmol/l x min (standard deviation = 374). The mean maximum glucose concentration for Actrapid, insulin human administered 30 minutes before the meal was (11.1 ± 1.8 mmol/l), it was slightly higher  when  Actrapid,  insulin  human  was  administered  immediately  before  the  test  meal  (12.0  ±  2.4 mmol/l). Mean Cmin was comparable for the two treatments (6.3, and 6.6 mmol/l). Overall, The blood glucose excursions in study 030/DK/N in type 2 diabetic patients appeared to be lower compared to the ones in type 1 diabetic patients as observed in study 024/UK. In both studies, the injection of Actrapid, insulin human 30 minutes before a meal was more favourable regarding the blood glucose excursions compared to injection immediately before the test meal. The studies conducted in healthy volunteers, type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients mainly by using the euglycaemic clamp technique, confirm the glucose lowering action of Actrapid, insulin human. The studies performed in healthy subjects confirmed the time to onset, the duration of action and the time of  the  maximum  effect.  From  the  studies  in  diabetic  subjects  it  can  be  concluded  that  the administration of insulin human 30 minutes before a meal (instead of directly before the meal) is more favourable as regards the total excursions of blood glucose concentrations. Pharmacokinetics · Absorption and bioavailability Insulin human and rapid acting insulin aspart were given subcutaneously at 0.1 U/kg in study 022/UK and 0.2 U/kg in studies 023/D and 027/D. Table 8: The  pharmacokinetics  properties  of  insulin  human  have  been  explored  in  studies 022/UK, 023/D, and 027/D in healthy subjects (see tables, standard deviations from the means are indicated in brackets).

a. median (range)

b: 0-8h in 022/UK, in the other studies 0-10h

The  median  Tmax  for  insulin  human  was  120  min.  Absorption  from  three  different  injection  sites (abdomen, deltoid and thigh) was evaluated in study 026/USA and the absorption was found to be faster from the abdominal wall than after an injection in deltoid whereas the slowest absorption was observed after an administration in the thigh.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 9: Absorption  from  three  different  injection  sites  (abdomen,  deltoid  and  thigh)  from study 26/USA

| Injection site     | Deltoid       | Abdomen       | Thigh        |
|--------------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|
| AUC (pmol x min/l) | 47013 (10469) | 47362 (11881) | 44171 (5294) |
| C max (pmol/l)     | 220 (99)      | 227 (93)      | 188 (71)     |
| T max (min)        | 103 (74)      | 110 (64)      | 124 (75)     |
| MRT (min)          | 198 (44)      | 186 (43)      | 198 (48)     |

<!-- image -->

Finally, study ANA/DCD/44/UK was  a  randomised  double-blind  single  centre  two-way  cross-over trial  comparing  the  bioequivalence  of  two  insulin  aspart  analogues  produced  by  two  different production methods in healthy volunteers. From the results of this study it would appear unlikely that the  small  amounts of  phosphate  would  result  in  differences  in  pharmacokinetics  between  Velosulin and another fast acting human insulin preparation not aimed at being used with insulin pumps.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · Distribution No formal distribution  studies  were  performed  with  insulin  human.  Insulin  is  not  bound  to  plasma proteins unless circulating antibodies directed against insulin are present. · Elimination Metabolism Metabolism  of  insulin  human  was  not  formally  investigated.  From  previously  published  data  it  is known that insulin is catabolised by various proteases. The degradation products are not active. Excretion The terminal half-life of insulin following a subcutaneous administration is determined by the rate of absorption from the subcutaneous tissue since the half-life in the blood stream is very short (only a few minutes). The mean terminal half-life for insulin human is 220 minutes. Figure 4: Mean terminal half-life X14-023/14AUG02/fig6 act.sas

Study 008/US was  designed  to  demonstrate  the  bioequivalence  of  semisynthetic  with  recombinant Velosulin. The study also gives valuable information on the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic profile of Velosulin.

This is an open-label two-period cross-over study in healthy male volunteers to test the bioequivalence between Velosulin regular buffered insulin human and Velosulin buffered human insulin from semi synthetic  origin.  The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  evaluate  the  bioequivalence  of  Velosulin  (containing insulin  human)  100  u/l  and  of  Velosulin  (containing  semi-synthetic  human  insulin)  100  U/l.  The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients enrolled in the study included 26 male healthy volunteers, aged 18 to 40 years. Every day test subjects received a single subcutaneous injection (in the abdominal wall) of 0.1 U/kg of Velosulin (ge) or Velosulin (ss). The primary efficacy parameter was the area under the curve (AUC) and maximal concentration  Cmax  for  the  insulin  profile  from  0  to  720  minutes.  Secondary  efficacy  parameters included the the time to maximal concentration Tmax, minimal concentration Cmin and time to minimal concentration Tmin for the insulin profile as well as the pharmacodynamic response parameters AUC, Cmax, Tmax, Cmin and Tmin for the C-peptide and glucose profiles. Twenty-four subjects completed the study, 12 in each group.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised As  regards  the  primary  efficacy  parameters  AUC  and  Cmax  for  the  insulin  profile  there  were  no statistically  significant  difference  between  test  and  reference  product.  As  regards  the  secondary endpoints Cmin, Tmax and Tmin for the insulin profiles as well as AUC, Cmax, Cmin, Tmax and Tmin for the C-peptide and glucose profiles, there were no significant differences between Velosulin (containing recombinant human insulin) and Velosulin (containing semi-synthetic human insulin). Figure 5: Concentrations for mean insulin, C-peptide and glucose

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 10: Insulin pharmacokinetic parameters.

| Parameter               | rDNA n=24          | semi synthetic N=24   | Ratio (90% CI)   | p-value    |
|-------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------|
| Primary Variables       |                    |                       |                  |            |
| AUC insulin (min·uU/mL) |                    |                       |                  |            |
| Mean (SD)               | 12058.88 (2253.59) | 12529.72(3120.16)     | 0.974            | 0.268      |
| Median                  | 11286.38           | 11568.75              | (0.94, 1.01)     |            |
| Range                   | 8130.75-16881.00   | 8108.25-19509.00      |                  |            |
| C max (insulin) (uU/mL) |                    |                       |                  |            |
| Mean (SD)               | 44.00(13.99)       | 46.27(12.11)          | 0.941            | 0.191      |
| Median                  | 42.35              | 47.45                 | (0.87, 1.02)     |            |
| Range                   | 26.10-90.70        | 28.40 - 83.60         |                  | authorised |
| Secondary Variables     |                    |                       |                  |            |
| C min (insulin) (uU/mL) |                    |                       |                  |            |
| Mean (SD)               | 6.95 (2.46)        | 6.77 (2.39)           | 1.019            | 0.624      |
| Median                  | 6.50               | 6.05                  | (0.95, 1.09)     |            |
| Range                   | 3.00 - 12.40       | 3.50-13.80            |                  |            |
| T max (insulin) (min)   |                    | longer                |                  |            |
| Mean (SD)               | 90.63 (36.34)      | 90.63 (63.25)         | 0.000 a          | 0.519      |
| Median                  | 90.00              | 75.00                 |                  |            |
| Range                   | 30.00-150.00       | 30.00 - 360.00        |                  |            |
| T min (insulin) (min)   | no                 |                       |                  |            |
| Mean (SD)               | 625.00 (90.07)     | 582.50 (103.89)       | 60.00 a          | 0.173      |
| Median                  | 660.00             | 600.00                |                  |            |
| Range                   | 360.00 - 720.00    | 360.00 - 720.00       |                  |            |

•

In study 024/UK the pharmacokinetic profile of insulin human in type 1 diabetic patients was shown to be similar to the pharmacokinetic profile in healthy volunteers.

Medicinal product no longer authorised a - Difference for Tmax, and Tmin· P-values and 90% CI for between group comparison in AUC, Cmax, Cmin, were calculated from ANOVA based on the crossover model, using log-transformed data.  For secondary variables, Tmax and Tmin, the differences between test and reference groups were estimated as the median of the difference within each subject, using raw data, the p-values were calculated using Signed Rank test. The present study demonstrates that Velosulin (containing recombinant human insulin) and Velosulin (containing semi-synthetic human insulin ) are equivalent both in terms of bioavailability (bioequivalent) and in terms of pharmacodynamic effect after a single dose. The study shows that the pharmacodynamic profile Velosulin is similar to that of insulin human. In addition, the pharmacokinetic properties of Velosulin are comparable to those of another fast acting human insulin preparation not aimed at being used with insulin pumps. Pharmacokinetics in the target population Diabetic patients

When  insulin  human  was  injected  30  minutes  before  a  meal  Tmax  was  80  minutes  whereas  it  was reached after 97 minutes when it was administered at mealtime. The maximum concentration (Cmax) was 36 mU/l when injected at meal and 39.9 mU/l when injected 30 minutes before meal. The halflives for insulin human measured after the different times of administration were equal to 169 and 193 minutes respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study D/ANA/098/INA compared the glycaemic control achieved in type 1 diabetic patients during one day after the injection of Actrapid or after the injection of insulin aspart analogues formulations (one containing zinc, one not containing zinc).

The  study  indicates  that  even  major  changes  in  zinc  content  only  have  a  modest  influence  on bioavailability.  Therefore,  small  differences  in  zinc  content  would  unlikely  result  in  differences  in pharmacokinetics between Velosulin and a fast acting human insulin preparation not aimed at being used with insulin pumps.

Children with type 1 diabetes.

| Parameters                | 6-12 years (n=9)   | 13-17 years (n=9)   | All       |
|---------------------------|--------------------|---------------------|-----------|
| C max(ins ) (mU/l)        | 59 (16)            | 82 (40)             | 70 (32)   |
| AUC 0-5h (ins) (mU/l x h) | 179 (69)           | 313 (186)           | 246 (153) |
| T max(ins) (min)          | 77 (28)            | 99 (48)             | 88 (40)   |
| AUC 0- ∞ (ins) mU x h/l)  | no 275 (139)       | 612 (451)           | 444 (367) |
| T ½(ins) (h)              | 3.0 (1.4)          | 4.0 (2.4)           | 3.5 (2.0) |
| MRT ins (min)             | 129 (16)           | 141 (13)            | 135 (38)  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Study 043/DK compared  the  pharmacokinetics  of  rapid  acting  insulin  aspart  and  Actrapid,  insulin human in children with type 1 diabetes. This study was a single centre randomised double-blind crossover trial. Eighteen subjects were included half aged between 6 and 12 years old and half between 13 and 17 years old. The insulin was administered subcutaneously into the abdominal wall immediately before breakfast at 0.15IU/kg for both rapid acting insulin aspart and Actrapid, insulin human. The different pharmacokinetic parameters measured in this study were the maximum insulin plasma concentration Cmax(ins) ,  the  time  when it  was reached Tmax(ins) ,  and  the  areas  under the concentrationtime  curve  measured  at  different  time  intervals  AUC0-5h  (ins) ,  EXC0-4h(glu).  Other  parameters  included total baseline corrected glucose excursion. Table 11: Pharmacokinetic  parameters  of  Actrapid,  insulin  human  when  administered  to children. The mean values are given with standard deviation to the means indicated in brackets. The  highest  insulin  concentration  observed  in  plasma  Cmax(ins) appeared  to  be  higher  in  adolescents than in the age group 6-12 years. In addition this parameter Cmax(ins) appeared to be higher in diabetic children (both age groups) than in adult with type 1 diabetes patients (see results of study 024/UK ). The  area  under  the  plasma  insulin  concentration-time  measured  between  0  and  4  hours  AUCins(0-4h) appeared to be higher in adolescents compared to adults (study 024/UK ).  The half-life of insulin in paediatric patients equals to 3-4 hours differed from the half-life measured in adults (2-3 hours). · Pharmacokinetics in special populations Patients with impaired renal or hepatic function The  applicant  has  not  submitted  any  data  on  the  pharmacokinetics  in  patients  with  impaired renal/hepatic  function.  It  is  known  that  the  liver,  the  kidneys  and  the  muscles  are  primary  sites  of insulin  degradation.  Renal  and  hepatic  impairment  may  reduce insulin  degradation  and  thus  reduce insulin requirements.

## Pregnancy and lactation

No studies have been performed. Diabetes is associated with an increased risk of complications during pregnancy and congenital malformations in the baby. Optimising metabolic control before and during pregnancy can reduce this risk. For most of the patients with type 2 diabetes and all patients with type 1 diabetes, insulin is the only way of optimising metabolic control. Insulin can be administered during pregnancy and lactation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Interaction studies.

No  formal  interaction  studies  have  been  performed.  There  are  no  literature  reports  of  direct pharmacokinetic interactions between insulin and other products. The products, which interfere with glucose metabolism through various mechanisms, are well identified.

## · Conclusion on pharmacokinetic studies.

The fact that the maximum plasma concentration is reached within 1.5-2 hours after SC administration is  supported by the results from the studies conducted in healthy volunteers. Absorption is different dependent on the injection sites and is fastest from the abdomen and slowest from the thigh.

| Studies   | Population (Number of patients)                                                                                                             | Design                                                                 | Objectives                                                                                                                                        |
|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 009/US    | Type 1 diabetic patients (20 male patients).                                                                                                | no Open-label cross-over pump study in diabetic males.                 | Compare the efficacy and safety of Velosulin BR (recombinant DNA origin) to those of Velosulin BR (semi synthetic).                               |
| 035/EU    | product Type 1 diabetic patients (1070 patients enrolled in the study - 708 received insulin aspart and 362 received human insulin HM(ge)). | Six-month multicentre multinational randomised parallel open-labelled. | Compare the efficacy and safety of insulin aspart and insulin human on glycaemic control as measured by HbA1c in type 1 diabetic subjects.        |
| 036/US    | Medicinal Type 1 diabetic patients (884 patients enrolled in the trial - 597 received insulin aspart and 287 human insulin HM(ge)).         | Six-month multicentre randomised parallel open-label study.            | Compare the efficacy and the safety profile of insulin aspart and insulin human in a multiple-injection regimen in patients with type 1 diabetes. |
| 037/US    | Type 2 diabetic patients (182 patients were randomised, 91 to each treatment group).                                                        | Six-month multicentre randomised parallel open-label study.            | Compare the efficacy and the safety profile of insulin aspart and insulin human in a multiple injection.                                          |

Medicinal product no longer authorised No formal distribution studies were performed with insulin human. It is established that human insulin is not bound to plasma proteins unless circulating insulin antibodies are present. Metabolism of insulin human was not formally investigated as well. From previously published data it is  known  that  human  insulin  is  degraded  by  various  proteases.  The  degradation  products  are  not active. Presumably, these degradation products are broken down into amino acids. The  half-life  after  subcutaneous  injection  is  determined  by  the  absorption  which  is  subject  to  an important inter-and intra-individual variation. The  applicant  has  not  submitted  any  data  on  the  pharmacokinetics  in  patients  with  impaired renal/hepatic function. Renal and hepatic impairment may reduce insulin degradation and thus reduce insulin requirements. Clinical efficacy Table 12: Main study (phase III = therapeutic confirmatory trials).

One  open-label  study  was  aimed  at  comparing  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  Velosulin  containing  the insulin human to the semi-synthetic one. Three other studies have been conducted with another fast acting insulin human preparation not aimed at being used with insulin pumps. These studies include two  6-months  multi-centres  and  open-labelled  active-controlled  trials  performed  in  type  1  diabetic patients and one 6-months multicentre and open-labelled active-controlled trial performed in type 2 diabetic patients.

Studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Study 009/US

Study 009/US was  an  open-label  cross-over  pump  study  in  diabetic  males  aimed  at  comparing  the efficacy  and  safety  of  Velosulin  BR  (recombinant  DNA  origin)  to  those  of  Velosulin  BR  (semi synthetic).

## 1. Description of the study

The aim of the study was to compare the efficacy and the safety profile of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) of recombinant insulin Velosulin BR with those of the semisynthetic human insulin formulation Velosulin RB(ss). The study had an open-label cross-over design.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2. Eligibility criteria The study included 20 male patients with type 1 diabetes who had been on continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) via a pump for at least 3 months before the study. All patients included had disease duration of at least one year (and no more than 25 years), a body mass index (BMI) between 22 and 30 kg/m 2 ,  HbA1c less than 12% and absence of autonomic neuropathy. The treatments were randomly allocated to the patients who received 4 weeks of treatment with either Velosulin BR(ge) or Velosulin BR(ss). The starting dose of insulin was identical to the dose the patients received prior to the inclusion in the study. The first week of the 4 weeks treatment period was an equilibrium period used to adjust the patient's insulin dose to obtain a glycaemic control similar to what was obtained before inclusion. After the end of the first 4 weeks treatment period, the patient switched to other type of insulin (without-washout period) and received 4 weeks of treatment with this type of insulin. As in the first treatment period, the first week of the second treatment period was considered an equilibrium period used for adjustment of insulin dose to achieve a similar regulation as in the previous period. The primary efficacy parameter was average daily dose of insulin measured for during the last 3 weeks of each 4 weeks treatment period. Secondary endpoints included fructosamine levels at the end of each 4  week  treatment  period,  mean  daily  fasting  pre-lunch,  pre-dinner  and  bedtime  glucose  levels compared  separately  over  3  weeks,  number  of  fingerstick  glucose  determinations  greater  than 22.2 mmol/l or less than 3.3 mmol/l, number of obstructions/leakages of infusion sets over 3 weeks. 3. Statistical analysis The data (insulin dose, fructosamine and bedtime glucose levels) have been analysed with an analysis of  variance  (ANOVA)  or  a  Wilcoxon  signed  rank  test  (all  other  variables).  The  study  aimed  at demonstrating equivalence between the two treatments. 4. Study population Mean daily dose of insulin was 0.576 IU/kg during treatment with Velosulin BR(recombinant human insulin)  and  0.563  IU/kg  during  treatment  with  Velosulin  BR(semi-synthetic  human  insulin).  The difference  was  statistically  insignificant.  The  treatment  difference  was  -0.014  IU/kg  with  a  95% confidence  interval  (CI)  between  -0.042  and  0.014  IU/kg.  Change  from  screening  in  fructosamine levels did not differ between treatments, the treatment difference was -2.6 µ mol/l with a 95% CI of 13.2 to 8.0 µ mol/l. Blood glucose levels are listed in the table below:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 13: average pre-meal and bedtime blood glucose levels

|                       | rDNA          | semisynthetic   | Between Treatment Comparison   | Between Treatment Comparison   | Between Treatment Comparison   |
|-----------------------|---------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| No. Treated           | 20            | 20              | Difference                     | 95% Confidence Interval        | p-value*                       |
| Blood Glucose (mg/dl) |               |                 |                                |                                |                                |
| Pre-Breakfast         |               |                 |                                |                                |                                |
| Mean (SD)             | 141.2 (28.74) | 132.3 (31.27)   | -8.9                           | (-17.1, -0.7)                  | 0.035                          |

<!-- image -->

This study was a randomised open label parallel groups study. In addition to the comparison of effects of  insulin  aspart  with  insulin  human  on  the  glycaemic  control,  the  secondary  objectives  were  the comparison of insulin aspart with insulin human on 8-point blood glucose profiles after 6 months of treatment.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Apart  from  pre-breakfast  levels,  glucose  levels  did  not  differ  between  treatments.  The  number  of fingerstick  glucose  measurements  above  22.2  mmol/l  or  below  3.3  mmol/l  was  similar  during  both treatments. None of the patients reported leakages in pumps. As regards to treatment difference measured with the primary efficacy parameter (average daily dose of insulin), the margins for clinical relevance should have been specified beforehand since a post-hoc definition is difficult and subject to data derived decisions. Nevertheless it is acknowledged that the present results demonstrate that the treatment difference (if any) is small and clinically irrelevant. For a 70 kg person it corresponds to less than 1 IU/day 95%CI = [-3 IU/day ; 1 IU/day]. There were no clinically relevant differences between treatments concerning the secondary parameters (pre-meal and bedtime blood glucose levels). A statistically significant treatment difference has been shown concerning the pre-breakfast blood glucose levels (-0.5 mmol/l 95%CI = [-0.9 mmol/l; -0.04 mmol/l]. This difference is not considered clinically relevant. The  present  study  demonstrates  that  Velosulin  RB  (recombinant  human  insulin)  and  Velosulin  RB (semi-synthetic  human  insulin)  are  equivalent  as  regards  short  term  efficacy  and  safety.  Similar glycaemic control was achieved without differences in the average daily dose of insulin. · Study 035/EU Study 035/EU was  a  six-month  multicentre  multinational  randomised  parallel  open-labelled  study comparing  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  insulin  aspart  and  insulin  human  on  glycaemic  control  as measured by HbA1c in type 1 diabetic subjects. 1. Description of the study

The safety profiles of the two insulins were assessed with the incidence of hypoglycaemic episodes and adverse reactions during 6 months of treatment. Other biological parameters including antibodies directed against insulin were also monitored.

The duration of the treatment phase was 6 months. Patients included were required to have a type 1 diabetes duration of at least 24 months, currently treated with insulin human in any treatment regimen

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

for  at  least  12  months.  Finally,  the  patients  enrolled  in  the  study  had  the  following  characteristics: age ≥ 18 years, with a body mass index (BMI) ≤ 35 kg/m2 and an HBA1c ≤ 11.0%.

Patients with impaired hepatic or renal function, cardiac disease, uncontrolled hypertension, recurrent severe hypoglycaemia, active proliferative retinopathy and patients with a need of a total insulin dose of ≥ 1.4 IU/kg were not included in this study.

## 2. Primary endpoints/assays

The primary endpoint was described above. Secondary endpoints derived from the 8-point BG profiles after 6 months of treatment were the prandial blood glucose increment after 3 meals (evaluated as the difference  between  pre-and  post-meal  blood  glucose  values  averaged  over  the  3 meals)  and  the variability of the 8-point blood glucose profile (the standard deviation of the blood glucose values at the 8 time points).

| product   |
|-----------|

Study 036/US was a six-month multicentre randomised parallel open-label study aimed at comparing the efficacy and the safety profile of insulin aspart and insulin human in a multiple-injection regimen in patients with type 1 diabetes.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3. Study population A total of 1070 patients were randomised in the study (362 received insulin human). The safety data have been obtained from 1065 patients who received the study medications. A total of 1047 patients defined the intent to treat population (described in ICH E9 as being the patients who were followedup, assessed and the data analysed irrespective of their compliance to the planned course of treatment) (349 patients received insulin human). Finally 1006 patients constituted the per protocol population (defined in ICH E9 as being the patients who complied sufficiently with the protocol to ensure that the data  obtained  with  these  patients  reflected  the  effects  of  treatment)  332  were  in  the  group  insulin human). A total of 27 subjects withdrew during treatment with insulin human. 4. Efficacy results For both treatments, Haemoglobin A1c levels remained relatively stable over the 6 months. Table 14: Efficacy results in study 035/EU · Study 036/US

## 1. Description of the study

The design of this study was identical to the design of the previous study.

A total of 884 subjects were randomised in this trial (287 to insulin human). The intend to treat (ITT) population consisted of 866 patients (279 in the insulin human treatment group). The per protocol (PP) population  included  a  total  of  803  patients  (257  for  human  insulin).  A  total  of  24  subjects  (8.4%)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

withdrew from the study while treated with insulin  human.  The  rates  of  discontinuation  due  to the occurrence of adverse effects or lack of efficacy were low in patients treated with insulin human.

## 2. Efficacy results

Haemoglobin A1c levels remained relatively stable over the 6 months.

Table 15: Efficacy results in study 036/US

| authorised   |
|--------------|

Medicinal product no longer authorised The doses of meal related insulin remained almost constant over the treatment period. The mean basal insulin  doses  increased  slightly  for  human  insulin  HM(ge)  from  0.25  IU/kg  at  baseline  8  and  at  3 months to 0.27 IU/kg at 6 months. Studies performed in type 2 diabetic patients. · Study 037/US Study 037/US was  six-month  multicentre  randomised  parallel  open-label  study.  It  was  aimed  at comparing  the  efficacy  and  the  safety  profile  of  insulin  aspart  and  insulin  human  in  a  multiple injection regimen in subjects with type 2 diabetes. 1. Description of the study The design of this trial was the same as the 2 phase III trials in type I diabetic patients. The endpoints used to assess the clinical efficacy as well as the statistical methodology were identical to those used in the previous trials. 2. Study population A total of 182 subjects were randomised. The intent to treat population (ITT) consisted of 177 patients (87 with insulin human). The per protocol population PP included 156 patients. A total of 9 (9.9%) subjects  withdrew  while  receiving  insulin  human.  Three  patients  from  the  insulin  human  group withdrew due to an adverse event (myocardial infarction, colon carcinoma, cerebrovascular disorder) and 4 due to other (unspecified) reasons.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 16: Results from study 037/US

|                         | IAsp   | IAsp   | IAsp   | HI   | HI   | IAsp-HI   | IAsp-HI   | IAsp-HI                   |         |
|-------------------------|--------|--------|--------|------|------|-----------|-----------|---------------------------|---------|
|                         | N      | Mean   | (SEM)  | N    | Mean | (SEM)     | Mean      | 95% C.I.                  | P-Value |
| HbA 1c (%)              | 90     | 7.70   | (0.09) | 86   | 7.82 | (0.10)    | -0.12     | [-0.38 - 0.14]            | 0.3684  |
| Prandial                |        |        |        |      |      |           |           |                           |         |
| BG Increment (mmol/l)   | 87     | 1.20   | (0.20) | 82   | 1.32 | (0.20)    | -0.12     | authorised [-0.67 - 0.43] | 0.6662  |
| BG Variability (mmol/l) | 85     | 2.49   | (0.13) | 80   | 2.78 | (0.14)    | -0.29     | [-0.66 - 0.09]            | 0.1302  |
| Meat-related/           |        |        |        |      |      |           |           |                           |         |
| Basal Insulin Ratio     | 88     | 1.80   | (0.11) | 87   | 2.01 | (0.11)    | -0.21     | [-0.50 - 0.08]            | 0.1524  |
| Total Insulin           | 89     | 0.67   | (0.02) | 87   | 0.70 | (0.02)    | -0.03     | [-0.08 - 0.01]            | 0.1747  |

Medicinal product no longer authorised BG Increment (mmol/l) 87 1.20 BG Variability (mmol/l) 85 2.49 Meat-related/ Basal Insulin Ratio 88 1.80 Total Insulin 89 0.67 All adjusted for baseline value and centre, (ITT  population) Haemoglobin A1c levels remained relatively stable over the 6 months. · Intravenous use of insulin for the treatment of the acute complications of diabetes or acute concurrent conditions. Severe hyperglycaemia in non-diabetic patients, including blood glucose levels in the diabetic range, detected in stress situations as infections, trauma, surgery and other catabolic conditions, is according to  WHO  criteria  of  diabetes  mellitus  not  diagnostic  for  diabetes.  A  recent  review  of  15  studies revealed  a  strong  association  between  stress  induced  hyperglycaemia  in  diabetic  as  well  as  nondiabetic  patients  with  myocardial  infarction,  and  an  increased  risk  of  in-hospital  mortality  and morbidity,  suggesting  that  glucose  is  an  important  risk  factor  for  morbidity  and  mortality  after myocardial  infarction  also  in  non  diabetic  patients  (The  Lancet  355:  773-78,  2000).  It  should  be emphasised  that  these  studies  are  observational  studies,  from  which  it  cannot  be  concluded  that reversal of the hyperglycaemia improves clinical outcome. Likewise, another recent published observational study of 2030 patients admitted to general wards inhospital revealed association between hyperglycemia and poor clinical outcome and mortality among patients with known diabetes as well in patients without known diabetes (J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87: 978-82,2002). In  the  Diabetes  and  Insulin-Glucose  infusion  in  Acute  Myocardial  Infarction  (DIGAMI)  study hyperglycaemic  patients  with  myocardial  infarction  were  randomised  to  intensified  insulin  therapy with insulin-glucose infusion followed by multi dose insulin regime or routine anti diabetic therapy (J Am Coll Cardiol 26:57-65, 1995). Intensified insulin therapy improved long term prognosis in these patients. The study population comprised known diabetics as well as 10% unknown diabetics or stress induced hyperglycaemic patients. Whether the conclusion drawn from the study also applies to nondiabetic stress induced hyperglycaemic patients was not revealed.

A meta-analysis of all properly randomised trials of infusion of glucose-insulin-potassium (GIK) in patients with myocardial infarction, involving about 2000 patients, showed a reduction in mortality of 28% in patients receiving this therapy (Circulation 96:1152-56, 1997). Later, another randomised (not blinded) pilot study of 407 patients with myocardial infarction revealed a 66% reduction in the relative in-hospital  mortality  in  patients  receiving  high-dose  GIK  therapy  compared  to  the  control  group (Circulation 98: 2227-2234, 1998). There were, however, no differences in glucose levels between the groups and the study was not designed to reduce plasma glucose. Nevertheless these findings suggest that metabolic modulations with GIK infusion after myocardial infarction are highly beneficial.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In a newly published study from van den Berghe et al. (N Engl J Med 345:1359-67, 200) the question whether normalisation of blood glucose levels with intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients with  hyperglycaemia  improves  prognosis,  was  addressed.  The  study  was  a  randomised  prospective controlled study including 1548 patients (2500 patients was planned to be enrolled, but the study was terminated  prematurely  after  12  month).  The  study  population  comprised  critically  ill  patients admitted to a surgical intensive care unit (ICU). Only surgical patients were studied, two thirds of the patients  were  cardiac  surgical  patients  needing  mechanically  ventilatory  assistance  and  13%  of  the study population had a history of diabetes. The patients were randomly assigned to receive intensive insulin  therapy  (maintenance  of  blood  glucose  in  the  level  4.4  -  6.1  mmol/l)  or  to  conventional treatment  (insulin infusion when blood glucose exceeded 12 mmol/l).  Primary outcome measure was death from any cause during intensive care. Secondary outcomes include death in hospital, number of days in hospital, number of days in ICU, need for ventilatory support, renal replacement therapy or other support and markers of infection and inflammation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised At  12  month  the  ICU  mortality  was  4.6%  in  the  intervention  group  compared  to  8%  in  the conventionally treated group, yielding a significant risk reduction in mortality of 42 %. Similarly, the in-hospital  mortality  was  significantly  reduced  in  the  intervention  group  (risk  reduction  of  34  % compared to control group). The significant effect on mortality appeared only in patients treated more than 5 days therapy in ICU. Also, morbidity was reduced in the intervention group compared to the conventionally treated group. Intensive insulin therapy reduced the duration of admission in the ICU, length  of  requirement  of  ventilatory  support  and  renal  replacement  therapy.  Also  episodes  of septicaemia were significantly reduced in this group. Hypoglycaemia defined as blood glucose of 2.2 mmol/ or less occurred in 39 in the intervention group and in  6  patients  in  the  control  group.  No  instances  of  convulsions  or  haemodynamic  deterioration were observed. Although these results seem convincing, criticism can be raised. With respect to the interpretation and conclusion of this study a major concern is that the study was not blinded and was carried out in a single  intensive  care  unit.  Furthermore,  the  study  population  represent  a  highly  selected  group  of intensive  care  patients  (major  surgery).  These  patients  are  not  directly  comparable  with  patients admitted  to  common  intensive  care  units,  where  patients  suffering  from  different  non-surgical disorders comprise a considerable fraction. Therefore, although the results of this study are of great interest  and  may  have  important  implications  for  the  treatment  of  stress  induced  non-diabetic hyperglycaemia, interpretation and generalisation of the results should be done with caution. Discussion on clinical efficacy The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  insulin  has  been  established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  life saving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is  required  by  many  patients  with  type  2 diabetes. It  is  not  possible  to  mimic  the  physiological  plasma  insulin  profiles;  human  insulin  tends  to  selfassociate in a hexameric form after injection into the subcutaneous issue resulting in a relatively slow absorption. Insulin human may be given intravenously (e.g. in diabetic ketoacidosis) and intramuscularly but is predominantly administered subcutaneously. No standard scheme of administration exists and doses to obtain an optimal glycaemic control vary individually. Several large studies  have  demonstrated  that  best  results  not  only  on  glycaemic  control  but  also  on  long-term microvascular complications are obtained in both type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients with intensified regimens, i.e. either with an insulin pump providing continuously subcutaneous insulin infusion or by injecting human insulin three or more times to the meals guided by frequent blood glucose monitoring in addition to a long- or very-long acting insulin injected once or twice daily covering the basal insulin requirements. (see for further reference: The Diabetes control and complications trial research group: The  effect  of  intensive  treatment  of  diabetes  on  the  development  and  progression  of  long-term complications  in  insulin  dependent  diabetes  mellitus.  N  Engl  J  Med  1993, 329 :14-23  and  UKPDS group:  Intensive  blood  glucose-control  with  sulphonylureas  or  insulin  compared  with  conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes. Lancet 1998. 352 :837-53.)

The assessment of efficacy of insulin human is based on previously reported studies comparing insulin human and insulin aspart. These studies are uncontrolled as far as the efficacy of insulin human is

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

concerned.  Insulin  aspart  cannot  be  considered  an  adequate  comparator  since  the  assessment  of efficacy  of  insulin  aspart  relies  on  comparisons  with  insulin  human.  However,  the  absence  of controlled trials is acceptable as it would be unethical to perform a placebo controlled study and since insulin (especially fast acting insulin) is the mainstay in treatment of diabetes. The data obtained from uncontrolled studies from the studies performed with insulin aspart does however provide evidence of the long-term efficacy of insulin human.

In  three  open-label,  6-month  treatment  studies  in  type  1  and  2  diabetes  patients,  comparing  the efficacy of insulin aspart with insulin human a total of 2136 patients were randomised. Seven hundred and forty patients received a treatment with insulin human. Patients were moderately well controlled at baseline In studies 036/US and 035/EU the mean HbA1c at baseline was equal to 7.87% [the standard deviations were respectively 1.25 and 1.6 in studies 036/US and 035/EU]. The mean HbA1c was equal to 7.83% (1.08) in study 037/EU. The duration of the diabetes was long-standing in all trials, with an average of 15-16 years for the type 1 diabetic patients and 13 years in the type 2 patients. Patients with major secondary complications were, however, excluded. Recommended injection sites were abdomen for the meal-related insulin and thigh for basal insulin.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Regarding the primary endpoint (HbA1c measured at 6 months) a greater reduction of this parameter had been achieved with insulin aspart compared to human insulin in both trials conducted with type 1 diabetic patients. However the difference with human insulin was small (0.12 - 0.15%). The  present  studies  demonstrate  that  acceptable  glycaemic  control  can  be  maintained  with  insulin human as meal-time related bolus injections in combination with long-acting insulins. Existing data from intervention studies in diabetic patients have shown that intensive insulin treatment of hyperglycemia improve long-term prognosis in patients with myocardial infarction. Furthermore a range  of  observational  studies  in  non-diabetic  hyperglycaemic  patients  strongly  indicate  that  blood glucose  represent  a  significant  risk  factor  for  mortality  and  morbidity  after  myocardial  infarction. Furthermore, accumulating data suggests that GIK infusion in non-diabetic patients with myocardial infarction  is  beneficial.  Also  very  recent  data  suggests  but  does  not  prove  that  maintenance  of normoglycemia in non-diabetic critically ill patients, improve survival and reduce risk of infections. In conclusion, from a strict regulatory perspective the present data, although very suggestive, does not allow a firm conclusion on the benefit of treatment of stress induced hypoglycaemia in non-diabetic subjects and for that reason it is not considered appropriate to include this indication. From a  clinical  perspective  the  distinction  between  stress  induced  hyperglycaemia  in  non-diabetics and  diabetics  is  somewhat  academic.  During  acute  stress  situations  hyperglycemic  patients  with previous  unknown  diabetes  may  not  be  distinguished  from  non-diabetic  patients  with  transitory hyperglycemia.  Thus  most  acutely  ill  patients  with  hyperglycaemia  will  receive  insulin  as  diabetes cannot be ruled out until after the acute disease. This practical approach is considered covered by the simplified indication 'treatment of diabetes'. Clinical safety Patient exposure A total of 644 received insulin human. An additional 91 patients with type 2 diabetes were exposed to insulin human. Few subjects were excluded from the trials due to the occurrence of adverse events, five type 1 diabetic patients receiving insulin human (&lt;1%) and three (3%) type 2 diabetics receiving insulin human. In addition, an important marketing experience with human insulins has been gathered. Since 1993 an estimated total of at least 6.5 million individual patients have been exposed to these human insulins.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discontinuation due to adverse events

The incidence of adverse events was low and comparable for both treatments in studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients (studies 035/EU and 036/US).

In  study  037/US  conducted  in  type  2  diabetic  patients  a  total  of  9  (9.9%)  subjects  withdrew  while treated with insulin human. Three patients from the human insulin group withdrew due to an adverse event (myocardial infarction, colon carcinoma, cerebrovascular disorder) and 4 for another reason.

## Hypoglycaemic reactions

## Studies performed in type 1 diabetic patients - Study 035/EU

<!-- image -->

Overall  on  these  studies,  major  hypoglycaemic  events  occurred  less  frequently  in  type  2  diabetic patients.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  incidence  of  major  hypoglycaemic  episodes  (defined  as  requiring  intravenous  glucose  or glucagon)  was  approximately  the  same  in  the  two  groups  of  patients  (see  below).  The  major hypoglycaemic episodes predominantly occurred in the early morning hours (0-4 a.m.). Figure 6: Frequency of hypoglycaemic episodes Approximately  75%  of  the  patients  treated  with  insulin  human  experienced  minor  hypoglycaemic episodes. There were relatively slightly more subjects with no or few (0-5) minor episodes and slightly fewer subjects with frequent (&gt;30) minor hypoglycaemic episodes in the insulin human group. Study 036/US The  proportion  of  subjects  having  a  major  hypoglycaemic  episode  was  19%  for  insulin  human. Approximately  8%  had  more  than  1  major  hypoglycaemic  episodes  in  the  treatment  phase.  Some patients from the insulin human group experienced major hypoglycaemias during the early morning hours (0-8 a.m.). Studies performed in type 2 diabetic patients - Study 037/US The proportion of patients receiving insulin human who experienced a major hypoglycaemic episode was low (approximately 5.5%). Minor hypoglycaemic episodes occurred in about 64% of the patients treated with human insulin. The mean rate of minor hypoglycaemic episodes was the highest in the afternoon.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 17: Frequencies of adverse events (Aes), serious adverse events (SAEs) and hypoglycaemic episodes observed in the clinical trials performed in type 1 (035/EU 036/US) and type 2 (037/US) diabetic patients. In the table insulin human is denoted by HI.

|                        | Type 1 diabetic subjects (studies 035/EU and 036/US are combined)   | Type 1 diabetic subjects (studies 035/EU and 036/US are combined)   | Type 1 diabetic subjects (studies 035/EU and 036/US are combined)   | Type 1 diabetic subjects (studies 035/EU and 036/US are combined)   | Type 2 diabetic subjects (study 037/US)   | Type 2 diabetic subjects (study 037/US)   | Type 2 diabetic subjects (study 037/US)   |
|------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
|                        | IAsp (n=1303)                                                       | IAsp (n=1303)                                                       | HI (n=644)                                                          | HI (n=644)                                                          | IAsp (n=91) HI                            | IAsp (n=91) HI                            | (n=91)                                    |
|                        | N (%)                                                               |                                                                     | N (%)                                                               |                                                                     | N (%)                                     | authorised                                | N (%)                                     |
| All AEs                | 983(75%)                                                            | 3220                                                                | 468(73%)                                                            | 1554                                                                | 80 (88%) 261                              | 71 (78%)                                  | 221                                       |
| SAEs                   | 58 (4%)                                                             | 66                                                                  | 36 (6%)                                                             | 41                                                                  | 6 (7%) 7                                  | 7 (8%)                                    | 9                                         |
| Hypoglycaemic episodes |                                                                     |                                                                     |                                                                     |                                                                     | longer                                    |                                           |                                           |
| Major                  | 216(17%)                                                            | 580                                                                 | 120(19%)                                                            | 309                                                                 | 9 (10%) 12                                | 5 (5%)                                    | 8                                         |
| A                      |                                                                     | 512                                                                 |                                                                     | 272                                                                 | 9 11                                      | 4                                         | 7                                         |
| B                      |                                                                     | 68                                                                  |                                                                     | 37                                                                  | 1 1                                       | 1                                         | 1                                         |
| Minor                  |                                                                     | 22863                                                               |                                                                     | 10647                                                               | 57 773                                    | 58                                        | 677                                       |

## Post-marketing experience

Medicinal product no longer authorised Major A=requiring third party help Major B=requiring i.v. insulin or glucagon treatment Antibody formation In  study  035/EU,  insulin  antibodies  were  categorised  as  specific  for  either  insulin  human  or  crossreacting.  Insulin  human  specific  antibodies  were  rare.  Cross-reactive  antibodies  decreased  from baseline to the 6-months evaluation in the insulin human group. On the same way, in study 036/US as regards  to  insulin  antibodies,  mean  cross-reactive  antibodies  decreased  slightly  from  baseline  to  6 months in the patients treated with human insulin. Finally, in study 037/US (performed in type 2 diabetic patients) a decrease of cross-reacting antibodies was noted from baseline to 6 months in the insulin human group of patients. Other adverse events and serious adverse event/deaths observed in the clinical trials The  most  frequent  adverse  events  were  upper  respiratory  tract  infections  (by  more  than  20%  of patients), headache and accidental injuries (&gt;10% of patients), pharyngitis, sinusitis, nausea, diarrhoea, and  back  pain  (each  of  these  reactions  were  observed  in  more  than  5%  of  the  patients).  The  most frequent serious adverse reactions in type 1 diabetic patients were related to glycaemic control, in type 2  patients  the  most  frequent  serious  events  were  cardiovascular  events,  unlikely  related  to  trial medication.  No  deaths  occurred  in  the  insulin  human  groups.  There  were  no  consistent  trends  or significant changes from baseline in laboratory tests.

An extensive post-marketing experience (more than 31 million patient years of exposure) has been gathered  with  human  insulin  since  1988  when  the  first  genetically  engineered  human  insulin  was marketed. Two periodic safety update reports (PSURs) covering the period from March 1993 to end of June 2000 have been assessed.

Since the report from Teuscher and Berger (Hypoglycaemia unawareness in diabetics transferred from beef/porcine  insulin  to  human  insulin.  Lancet  1987,  ii.382-5)  there  had  been  focus  on  diminished awareness of hypoglycaemia after changing from animal insulin to human insulin. A review of clinical

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

and epidemiological studies prepared by the applicant could not support this hypothesis, neither could an update of this paper including literature research up to May 1997 could either.

The  most  common  reactions  were  hyper-  and  hypoglycaemia,  injection  site  reaction  and  pain, therapeutic response decreased, allergic reaction and rash or pruritus.

A total of 29 serious adverse reaction reports were classified as serious unlisted. Of these a total of three  cases  of  toxic  epidermal  necrolysis/Stevens  Johnson  syndrome  have  been  reported.  As  of  30 August  2000,  a  total  of  6  cases  of  epidermal  necrolysis/Stevens  Johnson  syndrome/erythema multiforme  have  been  reported  in  association  with  insulin  human.  In  5  of  these  cases  concomitant medication provided a more likely explanation than insulin human.

An  increase  in  the  number  of  benign  mammary  adenomas  and  fibroadenomas  has  been  shown  in Sprague Dawley rats. In one 12 months study, there was a statistically significant increase of female animals bearing benign and malign mammary gland tumours at the highest dose. It is concluded that the  increased  incidence  of  mammary  tumours  seen  in  rats  is  probably  caused  by  mitogenic  and growth-promoting action via the insulin receptor, but is probably also related to the fact that Sprague Dawley rats are especially sensitive and were given large doses. There was no increase of mammary gland hyperplasia or tumours in the 12 months dog study.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In the last PSUR (1999-2000), the Company received 20 reports of impaired liver function (9 of these being serious). All these cases occurred in Japan. No reports on impaired liver function were received from other countries. Such reports have already been published (especially increased liver enzymes in patients  with  non-insulin  dependant  diabetes  mellitus)  and  they  are  generally  associated  with overweight. According to evidence from three studies liver enzyme increases are most likely related to diabetes  mellitus  non  insulin-dependent/treatment  with  oral  antidiabetic  agents  but  not  to  insulin. Many of the reports involved semisynthetic, - but not genetically engineered insulin. The hypothesis of  an  idiosyncratic  reaction  was  ruled  out  by  the  Company  since  no  other  signs  of  hypersensitivity were observed and no eosinophile granulocytes were found in the biopsies. During the reporting period, two changes have been made in the summary of product characteristics for safety reasons: a more detailed description of the symptoms of hypo- and hyperglycaemia and a more  detailed  description  of  possible  generalised  hypersensitivity  reactions.  Apart  from  these amendments, no regulatory or manufacturer actions have been taken for safety reasons. Based on the review of the safety data from the extensive post marketing experience, no new safety issue to be included in the product information was identified. The most frequent adverse reactions are hypo-or hyperglycaemia. The safety profile of Velosulin is well characterised. Discussion on clinical safety Based on the review of the safety data from the extensive post marketing experience, no new safety issue to be included in the product information was identified. The most frequent adverse reactions are hypo-or hyperglycaemia. The safety profile of Velosulin is well characterised. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined  in  the  SPC.  Physicochemical  and  biological  aspects  relevant  to  the  uniform  clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Viral  Safety  and  Batch  to  batch  consistency  has  been  documented  and  the  relevant  test  will  be performed according to the agreed specifications Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Newer studies support the conclusion from the original ones that insulin human and semi-synthetic human insulin have identical blood sugar lowering effect. Effects seen in the original and newer safety pharmacology studies can all be related to hypoglycaemia. The toxic effects seen in the single dose and repeated dose toxicity studies were attributed to the hypoglycaemic activity.

There was no statistically significant difference between the immunogenicity in rabbits of human and semi-synthetic insulins. These insulins were found to be significantly less immunogenic than 5 times

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

crystallised pork insulin. The potential for human antibody production against insulin human is thus considered to be low.

It is concluded that newer studies conducted do not give reason for new safety concerns. Velosulin is considered to have the same level of safety as insulin human.

## Efficacy

The  treatment  of  diabetes  mellitus  with  fast-acting  insulin  preparations  such  as  Velosulin  has  been established  for  many  decades.  It  is  a  lifesaving  treatment  for  patients  with  type  1  diabetes  and  is required by many patients with type 2 diabetes. The treatment of diabetes with Actrapid has been well established  for  many  years.  No  standard  scheme  of  administration  exists  and  doses  to  obtain  an optimal glycaemic control vary individually. Several large studies have demonstrated that best results not only on glycaemic control but also on long-term microvascular complications are obtained in both type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients with intensified regimens.

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Velosulin was favourable in the treatment of diabetes mellitus, the initial stabilisation of diabetes, during treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and the hyperosmolar non ketotic syndrome, and during stress situations such as severe infections and major surgery in hyperglycaemic patients.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Velosulin is a fast acting insulin formulation, developed for continuous subcutaneous infusion with a pump. Only limited data on the efficacy and safety of Velosulin has been submitted: short-term trials have confirmed that the efficacy of Velosulin is comparable to the semisynthetic product. However as Velosulin is similar to Actrapid and as the differences in the formulations of Velosulin and Actrapid are  small  and  highly  unlikely  to  cause  any  clinically  relevant  differences  in  the  bioavailability  and absorption rates of insulin, clinical data on Actrapid supports the efficacy of Velosulin. The 'proof' of the efficacy of Actrapid is based on previously reported studies comparing Actrapid and  insulin  aspart.  In  essence  these  studies  are  uncontrolled  as  far  as  the  efficacy  of  Actrapid  is concerned. Insulin aspart cannot be considered an adequate comparator as proof of efficacy of insulin aspart rests on comparisons with Actrapid. The lack of controlled trials is considered acceptable as it would be unethical to perform a placebo controlled study, and as insulin, especially fast acting insulin, is  the  mainstay  in  treatment  of  diabetes  one  can  hardly  imagine  what  should  be  chosen  as  active comparator. The 'uncontrolled' data from the insulin aspart studies does however provide evidence of the long-term efficacy of Actrapid. The present studies demonstrate that acceptable glycaemic control can be maintained with Actrapid as mealtime related bolus injections in combination with long-acting insulins. Based on the similarity of Velosulin and Actrapid, the present studies also demonstrate the efficacy of Velosulin. Safety Safety  data  derived  from  clinical  studies  with  Velosulin  are  sparse.  Due  to  the  similarity  between insulin human and Velosulin, the safety data obtained with insulin human in the phase III studies may be regarded as supportive for the safety of Velosulin. The same applies for post marketing data. The safety profile of Velosulin is well characterised and acceptable. Benefit/risk assessment Based  on  the  submitted  documentation  pharmacodynamic  and  clinical  data  as  well  as  the  wellestablished  use  of  fast  acting  human  insulin,  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  Velosulin  is  considered adequately demonstrated. Recommendation