---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:40:43
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/viracept-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: viracept-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 3.4200693
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 17:50:01.723658
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Viracept.  This  scientific discussion has been updated until 1 May 2004. For information on changes after this date, please refer to module 8B.

<!-- image -->

The excipients present are of appropriate pharmacopoeial standard or comply with acceptable in-house specifications. Tablets are packed in high-density polyethylene (HDPE) bottles closed by a heat-seal liner  and  HDPE  cap.  The  powder  is  also  packed  in  HDPE  bottles  closed  by  a  heat-seal  liner  and polypropylene cap. The film-coated tablets are supplied in HDPE plastic bottles fitted with a HDPE child resistant closure with a polyethylene liner. Adequate information was subsequently provided to demonstrate  the  compliance  with  the  requirements  related  to  minimising  the  risk  of  transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via medicinal products.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The new active substance present in Viracept tablets and Viracept oral powder is the mesylate salt of nelfinavir, (3S, 4aS, 8aS)-N-tert-butyl-2[(2R, 3R)-3-(3,2-cresotamido)-2-hydroxy-4-phenylthio) butyl] decahydro-3-isoquinolinecarboxamide monomethanesulphonate. The molecule contains 5 chiral carbons and the drug substance is presented as a single isomer. Viracept tablets are conventional, immediate-release, non-coated tablets containing 250 mg of the new active substance nelfinavir in the form of 292.25 mg of the mesylate salt. In addition, each tablet now contains calcium silicate, crospovidone, magnesium stearate, and indigo carmine (E132). Viracept oral powder is presented in the form of a free flowing, sweetened, flavoured powder. Each  gram  of  the  powder  contains  50  mg  of  the  new  active  substance  nelfinavir  in  the  form  of 58.5  mg  of  the  mesylate  salt.  The  powder  also  contains  microcrystalline  cellulose,  maltodextrin, dibasic potassium phosphate, crospovidone, hydroxypropyl  methylcellulose,  aspartame (E951), sucrose palmitate, and natural and artificial flavour. The proposed dosing device is a 1.25 ml, highimpact polystyrene scoop. This device was considered not to be ideal and the applicant committed to developing an alternative method of dosage delivery for this form. It was subsequently agreed that the most suitable alternative would be to introduce into the pack an additional 5 g scoop in addition to the 1 g scoop to improve the convenience and accuracy of dosing of the powder for adult patients. This larger scoop can deliver 250 mg nelfinavir. In order to enhance the palatability of the Viracept 250mg tablet two modifications were introduced. The  first  was  to  harden  the  tablet  from  12  kp  to  21  kp  to  reduce  disintegration  in  the  mouth.  The second change was the application of an aqueous film coating. The Viracept 250 mg film-coated tablet formulation was approved following the initial authorisation for Viracept. This new pharmaceutical form is based upon the 21 kptablet core and involves the addition of a proprietary aqueous film-coat. The film-coated formulation was developed to improve the swallowing of the tablets by patients. The clear  proprietary  aqueous  film-coat  that  was  selected  is  currently  used  routinely  for  the  coating  of tablets. Active substance The synthesis and control of the drug substance was considered robust and the manufacturing process and purification procedures, together with the stereochemical controls applied to the starting materials, effectively control the stereochemical purity of the drug substance. The analytical methods detailed were considered capable of controlling the drug substance within the specification.  The  applicant  supplied  additional  information  on  drug  substance  and  clarification  of analytical methods and validation. Other ingredients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Product development and finished product

The  formulation  and  manufacture  of  Viracept  250  mg  tablets,  by  a  conventional  wet  granulation process, is adequately controlled and a product of satisfactory and consistent quality is produced. Wet granulation  is  also  used  for  the  oral  powder.  This  wet  granulation  is  discharged  through  a  coarse screen, and dried through a fluid bed drier. The dried granule is sized using a Fitz hammer mill. A minor change in the  manufacture  of  the  tablets  (compression  with  harder  force,  21  kp,  resulting  in harder  and  slightly  less  thick  tablets)  has  been  introduced  during  the  post-authorisation  phase  to facilitate the ability of the patients to swallow the tablets.

Medicinal product no longer authorised With respect to the film-coated tablets, the selection of the film-coat was based on the need minimise any impact on the dissolution profile of the currently approved non-coated tablets. The manufacturing is  the  same  as  for  the  non-coated  tablets,  which are  then sprayed  with the film-coat. The analytical methods detailed were considered capable of controlling the finished products. The applicant supplied additional information on the physical characteristics of the finished product and clarification of analytical methods and validation. Stability Drug substance Data have been supplied on eight lots of active substance as primary stability data and on three lots as supporting stability data. Batches are outside specification after 6 months at 40 °C/75 % RH and some batches are outside specification after 3 months at 40 °C/75% RH. The supporting data provided all showed  a  satisfactory  stability  up  to  6  months  at  25  °C/60%  RH.  Thus  the  retest  date  was conservatively set at 6 months with storage below 30 °C, protected from light and moisture. The retest period has been since extended to 18 months in tightly closed containers with the storage remark 'Do not store above 25° C'. Finished product Tablets: Only 6 month primary stability data was available at the time of filing. The primary data is however  complemented  by  a  large  body  of  supporting  data  up  to  9-months/1  year.  There  is  no significant trend to a decreasing assay or an increase in the oxidation and hydrolysis degradates, or significant change in dissolution after storage for up to 9 months in HDPE bottles at real-time for zone II  in  Europe  (25  °C/60%  RH).  The  proposed  shelf  life  was  24  months  at  15-30°C,  but  the  data provided only support a shelf life of 18 months. Additional stability data were submitted as part of the follow-up measures. These new data supported an extension of the shelf life to 36 months. Oral  powder:  Three  months  stability  data  (real  time  and  accelerated  to  the  ICH  test  conditions  of 25 °C/60% RH, 30°C/60% RH and 40 °C/75% RH) have been provided on three primary stability batches.  Seven-month  stability  data  is  provided  on  a  single  supporting  batch.  This  batch  shows significant degradation after 7 months at 40 °C/75% RH. The stability of the three primary batches seems better. The proposed shelf life was 18 months at 15-30°C, but the data provided only support a shelf life  of  12  months. Additional stability data were submitted as part of the follow-up measures. These new data supported an extension of the shelf life to 24 months. Film-coated tablets: Stability data at 5-± 3°C ambient RH, 25°C/60 % RH and 30°C RH/60 % RH up to  12  months  and  40°C/75  %  RH  up  to  6  months  have  been  provided.  In  summary,  the  uncoated tablets and the film-coated tablets exhibited equivalent stability, supporting a shelf life of 36 months for both preparations. 2. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

The antiviral activity of nelfinavir was evaluated in vitro only, since no validated animal models are available.The studies evaluated the enzyme inhibitory activity, antiviral efficacy and the development of viral resistance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In vitro , nelfinavir was shown to be a selective and potent HIV-1 protease inhibitor with apparent Ki values ranging from 1.2-3.2 nM. The mode of inhibition was competitive. In acute in vitro antiviral studies,  antiviral  efficacy  was  demonstrated  against  a  number  of  different  HIV strains,  ED 50 values ranging from 10-60 nM. For instance, in a cell protection model, nelfinavir was active against HIV-1 RF and HIV-1 IIB strains, with a therapeutic index of 526 to &gt; 900.  In a chronic model of infection, nelfinavir produced a dose-related inhibition of precursor polyprotein p55 (gag) processing to product p24. These data indicated that nelfinavir acts as a protease inhibitor of HIV-1 infected cells.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In an acute HIV-1 infection model, additive to synergistic interactions were observed with nelfinavir in dual or triple combinations with approved reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Studies with nelfinavir and other protease inhibitors were less clear. Resistance to nelfinavir has been studied in HIV-1 variants selected in vitro as well as from patients treated with nelfinavir. The pathway for resistance to nelfinavir is mediated through a substitution of an aspartic acid to an asparagine in HIV protease at residue 30 (D30N). Other mutations have been observed but at lower incidence. The potential for HIV cross-resistance to other protease inhibitors has been  explored  with  nelfinavir.    Six  clinical  isolates  containing  the  D30N  substitution  showed  no change  in  sensitivity  to  saquinavir,  ritonavir,  indinavir  or  141W94 in  vitro .    This  lack  of  crossresistance  was  confirmed  with  an  HIV  recombinant  virus  containing  the  D30N  substitution;  the recombinant virus exhibited a reduced sensitivity to nelfinavir, yet retained full sensitivity to the other protease  inhibitors.    In  addition,  in  patients  previously  treated  with  ritonavir,  indinavir  and/or saquinavir five of fourteen clinical isolates with reduced susceptibility to one or more of these protease inhibitors  were  susceptible  to  nelfinavir.  The in  vivo safety  pharmacology  programme  investigated effects  on  the  central  nervous  system,  gastrointestinal  tract,  and  respiratory  and  cardiovascular systems. In vitro studies were also conducted using various tissues. These studies did not reveal effects that were considered relevant for human safety. Pharmacokinetics Absorption and distribution: Absorption after oral administration was demonstrated in rats, dogs, primates  and  humans.  Administration  of  nelfinavir  in  the  fed  state  improved  absorption.  Oral bioavailability was 40-80% in rats and dogs. The protein binding in serum was high (~98%) in rats and  humans,  over  a  concentration  range  of  0.5-25  µg/ml.  Using 14 C-nelfinavir,  a  wide  tissue distribution was demonstrated in rats, with highest levels in the liver. Brain levels corresponded to ~7x the mean antiviral ED95. In rat foetal tissues, 14 C-nelfinavir levels were about 10% of maternal blood levels and in lactating female rats, levels of radioactivity in milk and plasma were similar. Biotransformation: Nelfinavir  is  extensively  metabolised  and  metabolism  was  the  main  route  of elimination  in  rats,  primates  and  humans.  In  rats  and  humans,  the  major  metabolic  pathways  are qualitatively similar but quantitatively different. In both species, hydroxylation on the benzamide and perhydroisoquinolinyl  rings  was  an  important  metabolic  pathway.  However,  significant  differences were observed for additional pathways, in that humans tended to produce more hydroxyt -butylamide related derivates, whereas in rats, hydroxylation of the thiophenyl ring was predominant. Excretion of drug-related  material  was  almost  complete  by  48  hours  post-dose  and  was  predominantly  via  the faeces in both the animal species and humans. Based on the toxicokinetic data submitted, systemic exposure to nelfinavir in the repeat dose toxicity and  reproductive  toxicity  studies  was  shown  to  decrease  over  time,  and  was  generally  lower  than therapeutic exposure levels in humans. The reason for this finding has not been elucidated, but may be related  to  reduced  absorption  and  enhanced  metabolism. Also when  systemic  exposure  calculations (mean Cmax and AUC values) were corrected for nelfinavir free fraction, the systemic exposure of test animals was generally below therapeutic exposures of humans. This finding raised a query as to the value of the pre-clinical studies. However, in view of the clinical experience with nelfinavir, this was not considered to be an impediment to the granting of a Marketing Authorisation.

Systemic exposure of the test animals to the metabolite M8 (the main metabolite in humans) was not quantified,  but  was  indicated  to  be  in  trace  amounts.  To  facilitate  the  exposure  assessment  in  the toxicity studies, the applicant has further quantified M8 in the plasma of the animal species during the post-authorisation phase. As M8 was shown to be highly protein bound in all species, the systemic M8 exposure was recalculated based on free fraction as for nelfinavir.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Toxicology

Single dose toxicity was evaluated in rodents following oral administration of nelfinavir. There were no  evidence  of  treatment  related  systemic  toxicity.  Minimum  lethal  doses  were  &gt;  500  mg/kg (nelfinavir mesylate) in rats and mice and &gt; 5000 mg/kg (free base) in rats.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Repeat  dose  toxicity  was  studied  in  rats  and  cynomolgus  monkeys  after  oral  administration  of nelfinavir  twice  daily  for  up  to  26  weeks,  using  dose  levels  up  to  800  mg/kg/d  (monkeys)  and 1000 mg/kg/d (rats). In rats, the thyroid was the major target organ with the main histopathological changes being follicular cell hypertrophy. The underlying cause has not been definitively determined. The applicant proposed that it might be related to the moderate degree of drug-related hepatic enzyme induction observed in the rat. Regardless of the underlying cause, the species-specific physiological difference in thyroid function between the rat and humans is such that similar effects would not be expected  in  humans.  In  the  monkey,  in  which  the  physiological  response  to  stimulation  of  the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid  axis  is  similar  to  that  in  humans,  there  was  no  evidence  of  either follicular  cell  hypertrophy  or  increase  in  TSH  levels.  This  rat-specific  finding,  which  was  partially reversible within a short treatment-free recovery period, was therefore not considered to indicate a risk for  adverse  effects  on  the  thyroid  with  nelfinavir  treatment  in  humans.  Furthermore,  there  was  no clinical indication of effects on thyroid function in humans and no clinically significant alterations in thyroid function tests were observed. A  complete  programme  of  reproductive  toxicity  studies  was  conducted.  Toxicokinetics  in  the  rat Segment II study demonstrated very low safety margins. In the rabbit Segment II study drug plasma levels were generally below the level of quantitation. There were no adverse effects reported in these studies; however, in view of the low systemic exposure of the test animals there is a query concerning the value of the results. This was not considered to be an impediment to the granting of a Marketing Authorisation in view of the intended therapeutic indication and the warning included in section 4.6 of the SmPC in which the lack of a safety margin in the rat study is acknowledged. Nelfinavir was shown not to be genotoxic in a full battery of tests. However, a specific consideration was  the  lack  of  evaluation  of  the  genotoxic  potential  of  M8.  The  applicant  is  in  the  process  of conducting in vitro tests for genotoxicity and has committed to supply final reports when available. Carcinogenicity  studies  were  not  completed  at  the time  of  the  initial  authorisation  but  this  was  not considered to be an impediment to the granting of a Marketing Authorisation in view of the proposed therapeutic  indication.  The  final  report  of  the  104-week  rat  carcinogenicity  study,  which  was submitted as part of follow-up measures to be fulfilled post-authorisation, showed an increase in the incidence of  thyroid  follicular  cell  hyperplasia,  adenoma  and  carcinoma  for  male  rats  given  300  or 1000  mg/kg/day  and  female  rats  given  1000  mg/kg/day.  This  mechanism  was  probably  due  to microsomal enzyme induction, and therefore not considered to be relevant to humans. There  were  no  pre-clinical  studies in  vivo which  investigated  the  potential  for  toxic  interactions between nelfinavir and antiretroviral nucleoside analogues. The applicant did not provide justification for  this  omission.  However,  information  on  the  safety  of  combination  regimens  has  been  obtained from the clinical development programme. Good  Laboratory  Practice  (GLP):  All  pivotal  preclinical  studies,  except  the  safety  pharmacology programme, have been performed in compliance with GLP requirements. 3. Clinical aspects Clinical pharmacology Pharmacokinetics

At multiple dosing nelfinavir plasma concentrations indicate dose proportionality. The pharmacokinetics  of  nelfinavir  has  not  been  assessed  in  subjects  with  renal  failure.  This  was considered acceptable given the route of elimination of the product but the lack of data from subjects with hepatic failure makes  it necessary  to  recommend  that  it  should  not be used  in these circumstances.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Co-administration with nucleoside analogues, zidovudine, lamivudine, stavudine and didanosine, did not  affect  the  pharmacokinetics  of  nelfinavir.  Although  co-administration  resulted  in  a  significant change  in  handling  of  zidovudine,  combination  of  the  two  with  lamivudine  produced  favourable clinical results and there is no evidence that the reduced plasma levels of zidovudine led to a clinically significant reduction in antiviral activity in the CNS.

Co-administration with other protease inhibitors demonstrated that saquinavir (as soft gel capsule) had the least effect on nelfinavir pharmacokinetics. However, nelfinavir had a marked effect on saquinavir such that the AUC increased by 392%.

Bioavailability: It was not possible to estimate the absolute bioavailability of nelfinavir due to the lack of an IV formulation. Nelfinavir was significantly more bioavailable when taken with or shortly after food. Study (AG1343-550) assessed the bioequivalence and relative bioavailabilities of the tablet and powder  formulations  in  the  fed,  but  not  fasted,  state  and  showed  that  the  formulations  were bioequivalent.  Since  tablet  and  powder  formulations  will  be  recommended  for  administration  with food, and since it is known that absorption is less in the fasting state, this was considered acceptable.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Additional data provided during the post-marketing phase showed that co-administration of efavirenz with  nelfinavir  increased  nelfinavir  AUC  by  20  %  with  no  change  in  efavirenz  AUC.    No  dose adjustment is needed when these two substances are co-administered. Nelfinavir does not appear to induce CYP3A to a significant extent but does have some capacity to inhibit the enzyme. Nelfinavir slowed the conversion of terfenadine to its carboxy metabolite and it has  been  recommended that  the two  should  not  be  given  concurrently.  In  co-administration  studies with selective inhibitors of CYP3A the applicant considered the effect of ketoconazole on nelfinavir pharmacokinetics  to  be  modest  and  proposed  that  co-administration  with  other  selective  inhibitors would not necessitate dose adjustment of nelfinavir. It was considered that such interaction could not be ruled out and that the data should be reflected in the SPC. The effects of nelfinavir on these other agents have not been described. In co-administration studies with inducers of CYP3A results indicated that nelfinavir should not be given concurrently with rifampin or other potent inducers of CYP3A as co-administration  with  rifampin  resulted  in  extremely  marked  reductions  in  nelfinavir  Cmax  and AUC(0-t).  Rifabutin  had  a  less  marked  effect  on  these  parameters  and  may  be  suitable  for  coadministration  provided  that  the  dose  of  this  rifamycin  is  reduced  by  at  least  50%  and  patients  are monitored very carefully for rifabutin-related toxicities. Oral contraceptives may not provide reliable contraception during nelfinavir therapy since circulating levels of hormones were reduced during concomitant administration. The effect was most likely due to an increase in glucuronidation of oestrogen and progesterone-like substances. Women on nelfinavir should therefore be advised to use a barrier method of contraception. Further to the publication, during the post-marketing phase, of results from a clinical study in healthy volunteers showing a significant reduction of indinavir plasma concentrations when co-administered with  St  John's  wort  ( Hypericum  perforatum ),  the  CPMP  considered  that  this  interaction  was  also applicable to other protease inhibitors and non nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors considering the same metabolism pathway of these substances as indinavir. The interaction seems to involve two different mechanisms: an induction of the metabolism by the cytochrome P450 isoenzyme 3A4 and the P-glycoprotein transporter. Since it may result in the loss of therapeutic effect and development of resistance,  it  was  agreed  to  contraindicate  the  use  of  St  John's  wort  in  patients  taking  protease inhibitors and non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. A  published  study,  which  became  available  during  the  post-authorisation  phase,  demonstrated  that although  concentrations  to  methadone  and  its  metabolites  were  reduced  by  29-47  %  when  it  is co-administered with nelfinavir to healthy volunteers, none of them  experienced withdrawal symptoms. No dose adjustment is therefore recommended. Although no specific interaction studies have been performed, the potential risk of interaction between nelfinavir and sildenafil, tacrolimus, and pimozide have been considered. Appropriate statements have therefore been added to the Summary of Product Characteristics.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical efficacy

In the following studies Plasma HIV RNA was measured by the Chiron bDNA assay, with a cut-off for detection at 500 copies/ml.

## Phase II studies

Monotherapy : Several Phase II trials demonstrated that nelfinavir monotherapy achieved reductions in plasma HIV RNA but, as with other agents of this type, sustained responses for monotherapy were rarely documented.

Treatment  \"switching\"  was  allowed  after  failure,  which  was  defined  as  return  to  baseline  for  HIV RNA or CD4 on two consecutive study visits following at least four weeks of treatment. A Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) was responsible for implementing the protocol-defined policy of treatment switching for failed patients .

Medicinal product no longer authorised Combination  therapy : Study  509 enrolled  twelve  patients  to  receive  nelfinavir  750  mg  t.i.d., zidovudine  200  mg  t.i.d.  and  lamivudine  150  mg  b.i.d.;  interim  results  indicated  that  8/11  patients remaining on study had undetectable plasma HIV RNA at week 6 and all had reached this status by week 12. Whereas all continued with undetectable levels to week 20, HIV RNA was measurable at week 24 in three patients. Study  510 enrolled  patients  to  receive  500,  750,  or  1000  mg  nelfinavir  t.i.d.  in  combination  with stavudine or stavudine alone. At four weeks, decreases in plasma HIV RNA from baseline occurred in all  groups  but  were  greater  and  very  similar  for  the  three  combination  treatments  compared  with stavudine alone. In all four groups mean and median HIV RNA levels did not change notably between days 21 and 56, after which patients on stavudine monotherapy were assigned to one of the nelfinavir doses.  At  month  6  of  combination  treatment,  mean  HIV  RNA  was  less  than  at  baseline  but  had increased from day 56 onwards in the 500 and 750 mg t.i.d. groups. Main clinical studies Monotherapy : One trial  (505)  with  93  patients  treated  employed  an  initial  double-blind  period  of 500 mg or 750 mg nelfinavir t.i.d. or placebo for 4 weeks, after which placebo patients switched to one of the active dose groups. There were significant differences between both nelfinavir treatments and placebo for mean AUCMB (area under the curve of the mean change from baseline curve) plasma HIV RNA and CD4 counts. Numerical superiority for these parameters was seen in the higher dose group (in which HIV RNA showed a mean &gt;1 log10 reduction and 16% of patients had undetectable levels)  compared  with  500  mg  t.i.d.  (mean  &lt;1  log 10 reduction).  There  were  rises  in  means  of  HIV RNA for both groups from week 4 onwards and no patients had undetectable levels at 16 weeks. CD4 counts dropped in both groups from 8 weeks onwards. Combination therapy : The demonstration of efficacy for nelfinavir when administered in combination with antiretroviral nucleoside analogues depended on two pivotal studies. The two pivotal phase III studies were of double blind, randomised, parallel group design. Treatment was given for 24 weeks, with a six month (unblinded) extension period in which nelfinavir was added to the regimens for patients who were previously on antiretroviral analogue therapy only. In  trial 506 ,  nelfinavir  (500  mg  or  750  mg  t.i.d.)  in  combination  with  stavudine  was  compared  to stavudine alone in 308 patients. In trial 511 , nelfinavir (500 mg or 750 mg t.i.d. in combination with zidovudine  and  lamivudine  [ZDV/3TC])  was  compared  to  ZDV/3TC  alone  in  297  patients. Modifications to the dosage regimens were allowed if toxicity occurred. In  both  trials,  patients  with  HIV  RNA  titres  of ≥ 15,000 copies/ml were enrolled; those in trial 506 were naive to stavudine and proteinase inhibitors and had CD4 counts ≥ 50 cells/mm 3   whereas patients in trial 511 were naive to all antiretroviral treatment and there was no lower limit for baseline CD4 counts. The populations included in the two trials were similar in terms of baseline CD4 cell counts and viral load.

Efficacy Variables and Analyses : The primary efficacy variables were log10HIV-1 RNA and CD4 cell  counts.  The  primary  analysis  was  to  be  AUCMB  (area  under  the  curve  of  the  change  from baseline  curve)  over  24  weeks,  assessed  by  analysis  of  variance.  In  the  protocols,  AIDS  defining events, acid dissociated p24 antigen (Ag), CD4%, CD8 count, CD8%, CD4/CD8 and quality of life

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were considered secondary efficacy variables. Plasma HIV RNA was measured by the Chiron bDNA assay, with a cut-off for detection at 500 copies/ml.

The primary analysis population (\"protocol specified\") excluded data obtained after treatment failure. This is not a preferred approach in confirmatory trials, but intention to treat  analyses, including all available data, have also been presented in the dossier.

Results of 16 Week Analyses : In both studies, the analyses of HIV-1 RNA AUCMB identified highly significant  differences  between  either  nelfinavir-containing  regimen  (500  or  750  mg  t.i.d.)  or  the control regimen. For both the \"protocol specified\" and intention to treat populations, the significance levels are quoted as p = &lt;0.0001. There were no significant differences between nelfinavir-containing regimens.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The analyses of AUCMB CD4 counts in trial 506 identified  highly  significant  differences  between nelfinavir containing regimens and stavudine (difference between means of approximately 54 cells/mm 3 ; p = &lt;0.0001 for the \"protocol specified\" and intention to treat populations). Again, there were no significant differences between nelfinavir-containing regimens. In trial 511 , the difference in CD4 cell counts in terms of AUCMB was 22 cells/mm 3 .  The  overall  difference between treatments was non-significant for either analysis population. In  trial 506 mean  CD4%  increased  from  baseline  in  all  treatment  groups  with  significant  greater changes for  either  nelfinavir  group vs the  comparative  regimen.  Counts  of  CD8 cells  increased  but percentages decreased in all groups; significantly greater reductions with nelfinavir occurred at certain timepoints. CD4/CD8 ratios increased from baseline in all groups.. Two-thirds of patients had detectable p24 Ag at baseline. Mean p24 Ag levels decreased from baseline in all three groups (but not at all timepoints in the monotherapy group) with a significant difference between combinations and monotherapy at week 16. Small reductions in Karnofsky scores were seen in all groups but were not thought to be clinically significant. New or recurrent HIV-related events occurred in 2/3 of patients in each group. In  trial 511 CD8  cell  counts  increased  from  baseline  but  percentages  decreased  in  all  groups; CD4/CD8 ratios increased from baseline. Two-thirds of patients had detectable p24 Ag at baseline. Mean p24 Ag levels decreased from baseline in all three groups (but not at all timepoints in the 750 mg nelfinavir group). Small reductions in Karnofsky scores (quality of life) were seen in all groups but were not thought to be  clinically  significant.  New  or  recurrent  HIV-related  events  occurred  in  2/3  of  patients  in  each group. The majority of treatment failure events were caused by return to baseline in CD4 cell counts without accompanying failure according to HIV RNA criteria. In trial 506 , 10% of patients on the 500 mg nelfinavir combination had failed treatment, compared to 13% on the 750 mg nelfinavir combination and 36% on stavudine alone. The analyses of incidence of treatment  failure  and  time  to  failure  identified  highly  significant  differences  between  treatments (p = &lt;0.001). In trial 511 , the failure rates were low and not significantly different among treatment groups: 10% of patients on the 500 mg nelfinavir combination had failed, compared to 12% on the 750 mg dose and 11% on ZDV/3TC. Results of 24-week analyses : In both studies, the 24-week analyses confirmed the 16-week analyses. Results  of  52  weeks  analysis: All  patients  in  506  and  511  were  randomised  to  either  500  mg  or 750 mg t.i.d. nelfinavir after week 24.

52-week results for study 511 showed that there were significantly fewer relapses in the 750 mg t.i.d. group compared with 500 mg t.i.d. and the estimated time for 25% of patients to relapse was much longer at the higher dose. A by-visit assessment from week 24 onwards showed that the 750 mg t.i.d. group  contained  a  significantly  higher  proportion  of  patients  with  undetectable  plasma  HIV  RNA (approximately 80%) compared with the 500 mg t.i.d. regimen (approximately 60%).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Since  Marketing  authorisation,  further  experience  has  been  gained  on  the  use  of  Viracept  in combination  with  other  antiretroviral agents. Hence,  in accordance  with  current  therapeutic recommendations,  the  indication has  been  reviewed  to use Viracept as part  of  combination antiretroviral treatment.

## Virological data derived from clinical isolates

Medicinal product no longer authorised Genotyping  of  clinical  isolates : Plasma  HIV  RNA  was  obtained  from  58  patients  exposed  to 3-52  weeks  of  nelfinavir  therapy  in  studies  503  and  510.  In  keeping  with  studies in  vitro ,  the predominant genotypic mutation was a D30N substitution, which was stable in all 16 patient isolates tested; other mutations were observed at a lower incidence. Ten isolates, which exhibited a reduced susceptibility  to  nelfinavir,  contained  the  D30N  substitution  whereas  ten  isolates,  which  lacked  this mutation, were all fully susceptible. The appearance of this mutation was accompanied by an increase in  the  plasma  viral  load  in  patients.  However,  nelfinavir-resistant  clinical  isolates  with  the  D30N change  were  susceptible to other protease inhibitors, as were  isolates which  had  additional substitutions known to occur during therapy with these other agents. The L90M mutation associated with phenotypic resistance to other protease inhibitors was rarely found in isolates from nelfinavirtreated patients. The  on-therapy  incidence  of  the  D30N  substitution  was  estimated  from  assay  of  16-week  samples from  142  randomly  selected  patients  who  had  received  monotherapy  in  study  505  or  combination therapy in study 511. The substitution was detected in 18/32 monotherapy patients, but in only 2/22 and 1/27 on 500 and 750 mg t.i.d. regimens with zidovudine and lamivudine. Mutations associated with other protease inhibitor treatments were not seen in any of the 142 patients. HIV  isolated  from  patients  exposed  to  other  Protease  Inhibitors : At  the  time  of  the  initial submission, the applicant had obtained 23 HIV isolates from patients thought to have failed on therapy with one of the other Protease Inhibitors. Of these, 15 contained mutations associated with phenotypic resistance  to  the  inhibitor  which  had  been  used  in  therapy  or  they  showed  a  significant  increase  in EC90 .  Although six isolates contained a single mutation and were nelfinavir-susceptible, seven others contained  more  than  one  substitution  and  showed  broad  cross-resistance  despite  the  fact  that  the increments in EC90 to nelfinavir were less than for other inhibitors. The applicant had studied a total of 41 isolates from patients who had failed therapy with regimens containing  one  of  the  other  PIs  and  reported  that  26/41  demonstrated  a  significant  reduction  in susceptibility  to  the  PI  which  had  been  in  use.  Eight  of  these  26  were  susceptible  to  nelfinavir. However, there are no clinical data as yet which document the response of virus known to be resistant to PI(s) other than nelfinavir subsequent to the initiation of nelfinavir therapy. Study 515 has provided evidence that about 1/3 of patients who have failed a regimen containing a PI may show a response when the PI component is switched to nelfinavir but the applicant did not have viral susceptibility data to accompany these findings. Dosage recommendation The dose of 750 mg tid was selected since it was shown to be superior to the 500 mg tid dose in terms of maintenance of the response. However during the post-authorisation phase, it became apparent that there  was  a  need  to  improve  the  compliance.  Therefore  in  addition  to  the  development  of  a  new pharmaceutical  form,  a  film-coated  tablet  250  mg,  to  facilitate  the  swallowing  of  the  tablets,  an alternative dosage regimen (twice daily) was proposed based on the results from study AG1343-542. This multicentre, randomised, open-label phase III study involving 554 HIV positive patients, mostly treatment  naive  patients  aged  13  years  and  older  compared  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  nelfinavir,  in combination with stavudine and lamivudine in a BID dose regimen to a TID regimen. In a subset of patients,  pharmacokinetics  of  nelfinavir  was  similar  during  BID  and  TID  administration.  Trough exposures remained at least twenty fold greater than the mean IC95 throughout the dosing interval for both regimens. The clinical relevance of relating in vitro measures to clinical outcome has however not been established yet.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The efficacy results from study AG1 343-542 are displayed in the table below:

| Proportion of patients with HIV RNA below LOQ (sensitive and ultrasensitive assays) at week 48   | Proportion of patients with HIV RNA below LOQ (sensitive and ultrasensitive assays) at week 48   | Proportion of patients with HIV RNA below LOQ (sensitive and ultrasensitive assays) at week 48   | Proportion of patients with HIV RNA below LOQ (sensitive and ultrasensitive assays) at week 48   | Proportion of patients with HIV RNA below LOQ (sensitive and ultrasensitive assays) at week 48   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Assay                                                                                            | Analysis                                                                                         | Viracept BID (%)                                                                                 | Viracept TID (%)                                                                                 | 95% CI                                                                                           |
| Sensitive                                                                                        | Observed data                                                                                    | 135/164 (82%)                                                                                    | 146/169 (86%)                                                                                    | (-12, +4)                                                                                        |
| Sensitive                                                                                        | LOCF                                                                                             | 145/200 (73%)                                                                                    | 161/206 (78%)                                                                                    | (-14, +3)                                                                                        |
| Sensitive                                                                                        | ITT (NC = F)                                                                                     | 135/200 (68%)                                                                                    | 146/206 (71%)                                                                                    | (-12, +6)                                                                                        |
| Ultrasensitive                                                                                   | Observed data                                                                                    | 114/164 (70%)                                                                                    | 125/169 (74%)                                                                                    | (-14, +5)                                                                                        |
| Ultrasensitive                                                                                   | LOCF                                                                                             | 121/200 (61%)                                                                                    | 136/206 (66%)                                                                                    | (-15, +4)                                                                                        |
| Ultrasensitive                                                                                   | ITT (NC = F)                                                                                     | 114/200 (57%)                                                                                    | 125/206 (61%)                                                                                    | (-13, +6)                                                                                        |

Medicinal product no longer authorised LOCF= Last observation carried forward; ITT = Intention to Treat; NC = F: non-completers = failures The BID regimen produced statistically significantly higher peak nelfinavir plasma levels versus the TID regimen. Small, non-statistically significant differences were observed in other pharmacokinetic parameters with no trend favouring one regimen over the other.  No statistically significant differences between the two regimens in terms of efficacy was observed in a predominantly antiretroviral naïve patient population. No important differences in safety or tolerability were noted between the BID and TID dosing groups. Although  the  differences  in  compliance  demonstrated  in  this  study  were  very  small,  twice-daily dosage regimes are of considerable advantage to many patients of all ages. In addition, the pharmacokinetics of BID and TID VIRACEPT regimens were investigated in an open prospective study including 18 HIV infected children aged 2-14 years. Children weighing less than 25 kg  received  30-37 mg/kg  nelfinavir  TID  or  45-55 mg/kg  nelfinavir  BID.  Children  over  25  kg received 750 mg TID or 1250 mg BID. The Cmin, Cmax and AUC0-24 were all significantly higher with the BID regimen compared with the TID regimen. In addition, in twice-daily administration, 14 out of 18 (78 %) and 11 out of 18 (61 %) reached Cmin values of 1-3 µg/ml and Cmax values of 3-4 µg/ml, whereas in TID administration only 4 out of 18 (22 %) and 7 out of 18 (39 %) reached these values. However, the main body of evidence on efficacy of a BID-dosing regimen comes from the PACTG Study 377: This  study  had  4  arms.  One  arm  included  children  given  Viracept  BID  or  TID,  and  provides comparative data on viral response for these two dosing regimens in children. Only the data from the Viracept containing arm (n=63) are considered relevant to this report. (TID n=52, BID n=11). In  the  arm  receiving  Viracept  with  stavudine  and  lamuvidine,  11  of  the  children  chose  to  receive Viracept as a BID regimen (55 mg/kg BID up to a maximum of 1500 BID) with the remaining 52 receiving Viracept as a TID regimen (30 mg/kg TID up to a maximum of 1250 mg). The median age of those receiving the BID regimen was 6.5 years and for TID was 7.8 years. This difference in age would not be expected to have a major influence on the results as, with the exception of very young children, nelfinavir exposure (with a TID mg/kg regimen) is similar across different age groups. The fact  that  the  selection  process  to  each  arm  was  based  on  choice  rather  than  through  randomisation, may impact the equivalence of the 2 arms. The results show that the Viracept BID regimen provided similar, RNA response to the TID regimen. The percentage of children with RNA response was higher at all time points. At Week 12/16, 55% in the BID group had RNA ≤ 400 copies/ml compared with 44% in the TID group. Corresponding values for HIV RNA suppression (RNA ≤ 400 copies/ml or at least 2 log decrease from baseline) were 64% vs. 58%.  Overall tolerability was similar between the BID and TID regimens, although there was a somewhat higher  frequency  of  at  least  moderate  severity  gastrointestinal  events  and  fever  with  the BID regimen.

PharmacoKinetic evaluation was reported in 25 children (6 on Viracept BID and 19 on Viracept TID). Median nelfinavir AUC (adjusted for 24 hours) was higher in the BID treated patients (92.0 vs. 72.9 mg.hr/l) as was Cmin (1.86 vs. 1.13 mg/l). Univariate analysis of all patients in the study (all arms) with nelfinavir concentration data (n=38) showed an association of very low ( ≤ 0.15 mg/l) nelfinavir levels

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

at week 4 with a lower frequency of undetectable RNA at 8 weeks (13% vs. 62%, P=0.019) and week 12 (13% vs. 73%, P=0.003).

## Dose switching

The MAH developed a 625 mg Viracept tablet to reduce the number of tablets needed to achieve the recommended daily dose of 1250 mg nelfinavir twice daily from 10 x 250 mg tablets to 4 x 625 mg tablets.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised During the development of the 625 mg tablets, the MAH developed two formulations that were tested clinically  -  V11  and  V12.  V12  was  intended  for  the  market.  Both  formulations  contain  the  same amount  of  poloxamer  188  (394.375  mg  per  tablet),  which  is  an  excipient  well  known  to  act  as  a surfactant laxative.  The V12 formulation was assessed for bioequivalence against the 250 mg filmcoated  tablet  in  study BP 16766 and  was  the  formulation  used  in  the  main  clinical  study  in  HIVinfected patients WV 16789 in which gastrointestinal tolerability was assessed. Limited pharmacokinetic data (trough levels were measured) and viral load measurements were presented from WV 16789. BP 16766 This  was  a  four-way  crossover  study  in  52  healthy  male  volunteers  who  received  a  single  dose  of 1250 mg nelfinavir in each dosing period administered as either 250 mg or 625 mg V12 tablets in both fed  (810  kcal  including  45g  fat)  and  fasted  states.  ANOVA  was  used  to  compare  log-transformed nelfinavir AUC0-inf and Cmax values for test versus reference in each of fed and fasted states. Split data sets were used due to the statistically significant difference in within-subject variability between the fed and fasted states (CV% AUC0-inf: fed 24.4%, fasted 67.9%; Cmax: fed 22.2%, fasted 62.6%). In the fed state, the comparisons based on split data sets indicated that the 625 mg V12 tablet and the 250 mg marketed tablet were bioequivalent with respect to nelfinavir. In the fasted state, the AUC0-inf and Cmax ratios for nelfinavir were 73% and 97%, with the respective confidence intervals of [ 59, 90 ] and [ 79.6, 118 ] .    A  formal  analysis  of  bioequivalence  in  study  BP16766  with  respect  to  the  M8 metabolite only just failed to reach the required limits WV16789 HIV-infected  patients  on  a  stable  nelfinavir-containing  regimen  (with  250  mg  tablets)  or  naive  to nelfinavir switched to or commenced ART that included 625 mg V12 tablets at 1250 mg b.i.d. (see further  details  on  the  study  design  below).  Blood  samples  were  to  be  collected  on  Day  14  (switch patients)  and  Day  28  (all  patients)  for  the  determination  of  morning  trough  levels  of  nelfinavir  and M8. While the mean and median loads among switch group patients did not change or decreased slightly up to day 42, the second tableresults shows that the % with &lt; 400 copies/ml dropped slightly over time. In contrast, the data from new nelfinavir patients (who were mainly ART naïve) showed a drop in viral load that correlated with an increasing proportion at &lt; 400 copies/ml.  Based on the cut-off proposed  by  Pellegrin et  al .,  2002,  &gt;80%  of  subjects  in  the  switch  group  in  WV16789  maintained trough nelfinavir levels above the threshold for efficacy against susceptible strains (0.8 mg/l) at day 28 (two weeks after switching to the 625 mg tablets). No provision was made in the WV16789 study protocol for the prospective collection of plasma viral samples for the assessment of resistance to nelfinavir.

<!-- image -->

Despite  the  poloxamer  content  of  the  625  mg  tablet,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  an  adverse  clinical effect on bowel function compared with the 250 mg tablets. In HIV-infected subjects, the data showed no evidence of deterioration in gastro-intestinal tolerance in subjects who switched from 250 mg to 625  mg  nelfinavir  tablets  at  the  same  total  daily  dose.    An  initial  higher  rate  of  diarrhoea,  with  a lessening of effect with time, would be expected in the previously nelfinavir naïve subjects, but trial WV 16789 was not designed to measure this effect.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical safety

At the time of the safety update provided in the initial application 819 patients had received nelfinavir alone  and/or  in  combination,  of  whom  505  had  been  treated  for  at  least  6  months.  Most  patients received at least 1200 mg/day. Data on safety beyond one year were limited to 24 patients. A further 2,300  patients had  received  variable  quantities of  nelfinavir  as  part  of  the  expanded  access programme; serious adverse events in these patients were also included in the safety update.

.

Treatment  with  a  combination  of  at  least  three  antiretroviral  drugs  can  induce  a  characteristic syndrome  termed  lipodystrophy  or  fat  redistribution  syndrome  containing  peripheral  fat  wasting (including  accentuation  of  facial  folds) and  central  adiposity.  Metabolic  disturbances  such  as hyperlipidaemia and insulin resistance also often appear. PIs were originally believed to be the causal agents.  NRTIs  have  also  been  implicated.  In  addition,  lipodystrophy  has  also  been  observed  with protease-inhibitor-sparing  regimens.  The  emerging  picture  is  that  of  a  connection  between  visceral lipomatosis  and  protease  inhibitors  and  lipoatrophy  and  NRTIs  correlating  with  different  possible mechanisms e.g. effects on lipoprotein production and adipocyte differentiation. Non-drug factors are

Medicinal product no longer authorised Adverse  events (AEs): In  patients,  the  commonest  AEs  were  diarrhoea,  asthenia  and  headache. Diarrhoea was almost always considered to be drug-related and usually commenced in the first few weeks on therapy. There may be a dose-relationship for the incidence of diarrhoea (30% at 750 mg t.i.d. and 17% at 500 mg t.i.d in the double-blind trials). Further studies indicate that diarrhoea may be caused by both damage to the epithelial barrier and by secretory changes. Occasional hypersensitivity reactions to nelfinavir occurred during the clinical programme ( eg .  rash with urticaria). Serious  adverse  events  (SAEs): Very  few  of  the  SAEs  reported  were  associated  with  nelfinavir  by investigators; these events do not point to any specific problems with the drug at this stage. Laboratory findings: Seven patients were withdrawn from the extension of study 503 due to AEs; six cases involved elevated Liver Function (LFTs) in patients with active HBV. In several instances there were  clinical  signs  of  hepatitis  (tender  enlarged  liver),  and  in  all  cases  with  follow-up  there  were reductions  and/or  resolutions  of  SGOT,  SGPT  and  other  abnormalities  after  discontinuation  of nelfinavir. One patient was withdrawn from study 504 after 28 days due to 3-4 fold increases in SGOT and SGPT from baseline; levels of both were &lt; 50% of peak at one month after discontinuation. In  addition  to  the  transaminase  abnormalities  noted  above,  two  patients  in  study  505  had  LFT abnormalities  but  showed  some  resolution  without  discontinuation.  There  were  also  seven  and  five patients in Studies 506 and 511 with abnormal transaminase who did not discontinue therapy; most of these had evidence of HBV infection. Based  on  the  post-marketing  surveillance,  the  CPMP  requested  reinforcement  of  the  reference  to hepatitis, abnormal enzymes liver and jaundice in the product information. Other  abnormalities  reported  were  increases  in  glucose  to  grades  1-2  severity.  A  similar  statement with respect  to  observations  of  hyperglycaemia and  diabetes  mellitus,  with  occasional  ketoacidosis, which has been approved for incorporation into the SPCs of the other protease inhibitors, appears in section 4.4 of the SPC for VIRACEPT. The  following  additional  adverse  reactions  have  been  reported  in  the  post-marketing  experience: increased  spontaneous  bleeding  in  patients  with  haemophilia;  new  onset  diabetes  mellitus,  or exacerbation  of  existing  diabetes  mellitus;  abdominal  pain,  abdominal  distension  and  vomiting; hypersensitivity reactions including bronchospasm, fever, pruritis, facial oedema and rash (maculopapular or bullous); pancreatitis/increased amylase. Continuous assessment of Viracept long-term safety profile is performed throughout PSURs and the product information is updated accordingly. Events of special interest Lipodystrophy

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

also of importance e.g. increasing age, duration and severity of HIV infection.

Following  evaluation  of  data  submitted  by  all  MAHs  of  antiretroviral  medicinal  products,  a  class labelling,  which  harmonises  the  information  on  lipodystrophy  for  all  three  classes  of  antiretroviral products, has been agreed and implemented in the product information for all antiretroviral medicinal products. The wording presents as much as possible of the presently available knowledge; it gives a description  of  the  condition  (although  there  is  at  present  no  clear  definition  of  lipodystrophy), information about causality and surveillance measures. The higher risk of developing lipodystrophy with  long-term  therapy  as  well  as  importance  of  factors  such  as  age  and  disease  related  factors  is mentioned.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Muscle-related reactions Increased  CPK,  muscle-related  reactions  (myalgia,  myosis  and  rarely  rhabdomyolysis)  have  been reported with protease inhibitors. Although it was difficult to determine causality of these reactions due to confounding factors and scanty information, it was nevertheless considered necessary to update the relevant information on muscle-related adverse reactions of the Summary of Product Characteristics and to reflect this effect in the Package Leaflet. Liver impairment in HIV positive patients Further to the discussions held by the Ad-hoc Group of Experts on Anti-HIV medicinal products in November 2001, the CPMP agreed that liver impairment was of increasing concern in HIV positive patients  both  in  the  form  of  adverse  hepatic  effects  in  patients  with  normal  liver  function  prior  to antiretroviral treatment (ART) and as regards patients with chronic liver disease treated with ART. In January 2002 the CPMP requested the MAH for all authorised anti-retroviral medicinal products to conduct a retrospective review of clinical trials and post  marketing data relating to the  use of their product(s) in patients with hepatic impairment and/or HBV/HCV co-infection. Following review of the submitted responses and discussions held during the CPMP meeting and the Pharmacovigilance Working Party meeting in October 2002, the CPMP adopted a list of questions (including general, product specific and SPC wording recommendations). The review of the MAHs' responses has essentially confirmed that co-infected patients and patients with underlying liver disorders are at increased risk for adverse events, essentially confined to liver events.  Overall,  there  is  a  disturbing  lack  of  general  and  product  specific  knowledge  (e.g.  relevant pharmacokinetic data in patients with liver impairment), but there are ongoing activities. For  some  of  the  products  still  undergoing  drug  development,  the  MAHs  have  confirmed  that  coinfected  patients  will  not  be  excluded  from  participation  in  the  studies.  The  CPMP  stressed  that whenever  feasible  a  minimum  number  of  co-infected  patients  should  be  included  in  forthcoming studies in order to provide a reasonable basis for a relevant safety (and efficacy) analysis. Following the review of responses submitted by all MAHs of antiretroviral medicinal products, a class labelling  on  'liver  disease'  has  been  agreed  and  implemented  in  the  product  information  for  all antiretroviral medicinal products. The  MAH  is  planning  to  conduct  a  study  of  the  clinical  pharmacology  and  safety  of  Viracept  in patients with varying degrees of hepatic impairment (n=20). This study will aim to determine (i) the effects of hepatic impairment on the pharmacokinetics of nelfinavir and (ii) the correlation between nelfinavir  levels  and  the  incidence  of  liver  enzyme  abnormalities,  among  patients  with  hepatic impairment. Paediatric clinical experience

Results  of  an  interim  analysis  from  Study  524,  an  open  Phase  I  study  in  four  US  centres,  were submitted in the initial  application.  Eligible  patients  were ≤ 13  years  of  age  and  HIV-positive.  The study was designed to have two phases of investigation. The single dose phase was planned to enrol up to 24 patients with at least four in each age group as follows:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| I:   | 7 to       | 7 to   | 13   | years   |
|------|------------|--------|------|---------|
| II:  | 2 to       |        | 7    | years   |
| III: | 3 months   | to     | <    | years   |
| IV:  | < 3 months |        |      |         |

The multiple dose phase was planned to commence after completion of the single dose phase for each group.  Patients  who  had  participated  in  the  single  dose  phase  and  up  to  10  additional  patients  per group were to be enrolled; children continued other antiretroviral therapy while taking nelfinavir at the doses  identified.  The  initial  observation  phase  was  6  weeks,  with  optional  extension  to  6  months. Thus, pharmacokinetic data were to be provided from this ongoing study for both the 50 mg/g powder (taken with milk, formula, pudding or water) and the 250 mg tablets in children of 3 months to 13 years.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Relative bioavailability: Comparison of single doses of powder and tablet formulations at 10 mg/kg (five  patients)  and  20  mg/kg  (one  patient)  in  children  of  &gt;  7  years  demonstrated  similar  plasma concentration-time profiles. Mean tmax following tablets or powder was not significantly longer at 20 mg/kg compared with 10 mg/kg. Dose-adjusted powder to tablet arithmetic mean ± S.D. ratios from these data were 1.04 ± 0.39 for AUC(0-∞ ) and 0.92 ± 0.23 for Cmax. An updated report on study 524 was provided which included some additional pharmacokinetic data. Sixteen were in group I (7-12 years), 22 in group II (2-6 years) and 10 were of less than 2 years but &gt; 3 months of age (group III). However, 37 of the 48 had completed the 6 week multiple dose phase and 22 had reached month 1 of the extension period. Dosing information (tablet/powder and/or mg/kg) was available for 42/48 of these children. Calculations (where possible) of the dose administered in mg/kg indicated that the routine doses were in the range 18-30 mg/kg and that the majority of patients were taking close to 20-mg/kg t.i.d. Efficacy: Post-baseline plasma HIV RNA levels to at least week 6 were available for 15 in group I, 19 in group II and 3 in group III. For children in groups I and II at week 6, mean and median HIV RNA levels were reduced from baseline by 1.0 log10 or more. These parameters were similar to or higher than at baseline for six children in-group III at week 2 and for the three children in this group with results available for week 6. At the time of the data cut-off, there were only nine children for whom data at the second month in extension were available. There was no trend to an increase in HIV RNA from nadir; changes in mean and median CD4 counts from baseline were somewhat erratic whereas the CD4 % showed a trend to rises from baseline. Safety : The MAH provided a safety update on 32 patients enrolled into study 524. Adverse events were as expected from adult data and from this age group. No child had discontinued due to an AE and drug-related events were rare. No new laboratory abnormalities were known as of the cut-off date. A second updated safety report on study 524 included information on two patients enrolled into the single dose phase and another 26 who entered the multiple dose phase (totals 21 and 48, respectively). Safety data were available for 39 children from an expanded access programme. Diarrhoea had been reported  in  1/3  of  recipients  and  one  child  had  been  withdrawn  due  to  the  problem.  Other  new information did not change the conclusions drawn previously. At the time of the first annual re-assessment the MAH submitted an analysis of 48-week data for a phase I/II open label multicentre study of the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of the nelfinavir oral powder formulation in children.  However, because of limited data it was considered not possible to  define  the  pharmacokinetic  profile  in  children  of  less  than  3  years.  The  CPMP,  who  initially recommended  the  use  in  children  aged  from  2  to  13  years,  agreed  that  the  age  range  should  be reviewed and therefore nelfinavir is indicated in children of 3 to 13 years of age.

## 4. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment

## Patients greater than 13 years

The demonstration of efficacy in adults was  based on the additional reductions in plasma HIV RNA and, to a lesser extent, on increases in CD4   counts that resulted from addition of nelfinavir to regimens of one or two antiretroviral nucleoside analogues.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Data  demonstrated  that  continuation  of  nelfinavir  in  combination  with  zidovudine  and  lamivudine results in maintenance of responses (as measured by these parameters) after 52 weeks on treatment. From  24  to  52  weeks,  it  became  apparent  that  the  750  mg  t.i.d.  dose  was  superior  to  the 500  mg  t.i.d.  dose  of  nelfinavir.    Subsequently,  study  542  formed  the  basis  for  BID  dosage recommendation.

The  overall  efficacy  profile  of  newly  developed  625  mg  tablet  appears  comparable  to  the  250  mg tablets.The  tolerability  profile  for  nelfinavir,  as  currently  demonstrated  in  the  clinical  programme suggests  that  its  use  is  uncommonly  accompanied  by  severe  or  serious  adverse  events.    Again,  the overall safety profile of the 625 mg tablet appears comparable to the 250 mg tablets.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised In-vitro data demonstrate that the antiviral activity of nelfinavir is associated with a favourable pattern of drug resistance. Studies with isolates resistant to one or more of the other protease inhibitors have shown  that  susceptibility  to  nelfinavir  is  often  retained.  Nelfinavir-resistant  isolates  do  not  always demonstrate cross-resistance to other protease inhibitors. Patients less than 13 years Data  regarding  clinical  efficacy  of  nelfinavir  in  patients  less  than  13  years  are  limited.  Marketing authorisation for use of the tablets or powder in such patients is therefore dependent on the safety and efficacy  data  that  are  available  for  the  tablet  formulation  in  adults  and  on  the  demonstration  of bioequivalence between tablets and oral powder. The application provided limited data on the safety and pharmacokinetics related to administration of the powder to children of 2 to 13 years, and of tablets to children of 7 to 13 years.  However, because of limited data it was considered not possible to define the pharmacokinetic profile in children of less than  3  years.  The  CPMP,  who  initially  recommended the  use  in  children  aged  from  2  to  13  years, agreed that the age range should be reviewed and therefore nelfinavir is indicated in children of 3 to 13 years of age.  Additional data became available to allow BID dosing in this patient group. There is no suggestion at present that the safety profile in children is  significantly different from that in adults. Overall benefit/risk assessment Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus  that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Viracept  remains  favourable  as  antiretroviral  combination treatment  of  human  immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) infected  adults, adolescents and children  of 3 years of age and older.

<!-- image -->