---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:18:20
document_pages: 20
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/viraferonpeg-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: viraferonpeg-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 10.4199228
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 04:59:34.470527
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures which have been finalised before 7 May 2002. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B. 1. Introduction The active  substance  is  a  polyethylene  glycol-modified  (\"pegylated\")  derivative  of  IntronA  (human recombinant  interferon  alfa-2b).  The  modification  was  developed  in  order  to  decrease  the  systemic clearance of the active moiety. In addition, an improved benefit risk relationship was aimed for, based on the hypothesis that Cmax governs side effects, while efficacy may relate better to AUC. This is the first  PEG-conjugate of a therapeutic protein for which an assessment in the centralised procedure is made. Therapeutic indication . ViraferonPeg was initially indicated in monotherapy in case of intolerance or contraindication  to  ribavirin,  for  the  treatment  of  adult  patients  with  histologically  proven  chronic hepatitis  C  who  have  serum  markers  for  virus  C  replication,  e.g.  those  who  have  elevated transaminases without liver decompensation and who are positive for serum HCV-RNA or anti-HCV. The indication was extended following the first authorisation of ViraferonPeg further to the availability of preclinical and clinical data on the use of peginterferon alfa-2b in combination with ribavirin. The indication currently approved is therefore the following: ViraferonPeg  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  adult  patients  with  histologically  proven  chronic hepatitis C who have elevated transaminases without liver decompensation and who are positive for serum HCV-RNA or anti-HCV. The best way to use ViraferonPeg in this indication is in combination with ribavirin. This combination is indicated in naïve patients as well as in patients who have previously responded (with normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha monotherapy but who have subsequently relapsed. Interferon  monotherapy,  including  ViraferonPeg,  is  indicated  mainly  in  case  of  intolerance  or contraindication to ribavirin. Proposed posology . Treatment  should  be  initiated  and  monitored  only  by  a  physician  experienced  in  the  management  of patients with hepatitis C. ViraferonPeg should be administered as a once weekly subcutaneous injection. The dose administered depends on whether it is used in combination with ribavirin or as monotherapy. Combination therapy ViraferonPeg 1.5 micrograms/kg/week in combination with ribavirin capsules. The dose of ribavirin to be used in combination with ViraferonPeg is based on patient body weight ( Table 1 ). Ribavirin capsules are to be administered orally each day in two divided doses with food (morning and evening). edicinal product no longer authori

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Table 1 Ribavirin dose based on body weight   | Table 1 Ribavirin dose based on body weight   | Table 1 Ribavirin dose based on body weight   |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Patient weight (kg)                           | Daily ribavirin dose                          | Number of 200 mg capsules                     |
| < 65                                          | 800 mg                                        | 4 a                                           |
| 65 - 85                                       | 1,000 mg                                      | 5 b                                           |
| > 85                                          | 1,200 mg                                      | 6 c                                           |

| Table 2a Dose modification guidelines for ViraferonPeg monotherapy   | Table 2a Dose modification guidelines for ViraferonPeg monotherapy   | Table 2a Dose modification guidelines for ViraferonPeg monotherapy   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Laboratory values Reduce ViraferonPeg to one-half dose if:           | Laboratory values Reduce ViraferonPeg to one-half dose if:           | Discontinue ViraferonPeg if:                                         |
| < 0.75 x 10 9 /l                                                     | < 0.5 x 10 9 /l                                                      | Neutrophils                                                          |
| < 50 x 10 9 /l                                                       | < 25 x 10 9 /l                                                       | Platelets                                                            |

| Table 2b                                                          | Dose modification guidelines for combination therapy (with ribavirin)   | Dose modification guidelines for combination therapy (with ribavirin)                                  | Dose modification guidelines for combination therapy (with ribavirin)   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Laboratory values                                                 | Laboratory values                                                       | Reduce only ribavirin dose to 600 mg/day * if: Reduce only ViraferonPeg dose to one-half dose          | Discontinue combination therapy if:                                     |
| Haemoglobin                                                       | Haemoglobin                                                             | < 10 g/dl -                                                                                            | < 8.5 g/dl                                                              |
| Haemoglobin in: Patients with history of stable cardiac disease ≥ | Haemoglobin in: Patients with history of stable cardiac disease ≥       | 2 g/dl decrease in haemoglobin during any four week period during treatment (permanent dose reduction) | < 12 g/dl after four weeks of dose reduction                            |

a:  2 morning, 2 evening b:  2 morning, 3 evening c:  3 morning, 3 evening Duration of treatment: Based on the results of clinical trials, it is recommended that patients be treated for at least six months. During those clinical trials in which patients were treated for one year, patients who failed to show a virologic response after six months of treatment (HCV-RNA below lower limit of detection) were unlikely to become sustained virologic responders (HCV-RNA below lower limit of detection six months after withdrawal of treatment). · Genotype 1 :  Treatment should be continued for another six-month period (i.e., a total of one year) in patients who exhibit negative HCV-RNA after six months of treatment. · Genotypes Non-1 : The decision to extend therapy to one year in patients with negative HCVRNA  after  six  months  of  treatment  should  be  based  on  other  prognostic  factors  (e.g.,  age &gt; 40 years, male gender, bridging fibrosis). ViraferonPeg monotherapy As monotherapy the ViraferonPeg regimen is 0.5 or 1.0 microgram/kg/week. Duration of treatment: It is recommended that patients be treated initially for six months. In patients showing loss of HCV-RNA at six months, treatment is to be continued for an additional six months, i.e., one year of treatment. Dose modification for all patients If  severe  adverse  reactions  or  laboratory  abnormalities  develop  during  treatment  with  ViraferonPeg monotherapy  or  ViraferonPeg  in  combination  with  ribavirin,  modify  the dosages  of  each  product  if appropriate,  until  the  adverse  reactions  abate.  Guidelines  were  developed  in  clinical  trials  for  dose modification (see Dosage modification guidelines, Table 2a for ViraferonPeg monotherapy and Table 2b for ViraferonPeg combination therapy with ribavirin). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| White blood cells    | -         | < 1.5 x 10 9 /l   | < 1.0 x 10 9 /l                |
|----------------------|-----------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| Neutrophils          | -         | < 0.75 x 10 9 /l  | < 0.5 x 10 9 /l                |
| Platelets            | -         | < 50 x 10 9 /l    | < 25 x 10 9 /l                 |
| Bilirubin - direct   | -         | -                 | 2.5 x ULN **                   |
| Bilirubin - indirect | > 5 mg/dl | -                 | > 4 mg/dl (for > 4 weeks)      |
| Creatinine           | -         | -                 | > 2.0 mg/dl                    |
| ALT/AST              | -         | -                 | 2 x baseline and > 10 x ULN ** |

1. * Patients whose dose of ribavirin is reduced to 600 mg daily receive one 200 mg capsule in the morning and two 200 mg capsules in the evening. 2. ** Upper limit of normal 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition ViraferonPeg  is  supplied  in  five  dosage  strengths:  (50 µ g,  80 µ g,  100 µ g,  120 µ g,  150 µ g)  as  a lyophilized  powder  to  be  reconstituted  in  0.7  ml  water  for  injections  before  use.  The  label  dose  is contained in 0.5 ml of the reconstituted solution. The composition of the excipient matrix is the same for  all  dosage  strengths;  only  the  amount  of  the  active  ingredient  varies.  Excipients  are:  Sodium Phosphate DibasicAnhydrous, Sodium Phosphate Monobasic Dihydrate, Sucrose, and Polysorbate 80. The strength is defined by weight in contrast to most Interferon medicinal products, the strengths of which are defined by bioactivity. Although the proposed definition does not allow for a conclusive direct  comparison of in  vitro activity with other products of the kind, it is preferred from a clinical point  of  view,  taking  into  account  the  kinetics  which  distinguish  this  product  from  non-pegylated Interferon  alfa-2b.  Although  not  part  of  the  labelled  strength,  the  bioactivity  of  ViraferonPeg  is controlled as part of the product specifications. The container is a 2 ml Type I flint glass vial with a butyl rubber stopper and flip-off aluminium seal. Active substance The active substance used to manufacture ViraferonPeg is a conjugate of the same active substance as used for IntronA, i.e. recombinant human interferon alfa-2b produced in E. coli . Peginterferonalfa-2b is  prepared  by  reacting  interferon  alfa-2b  with  activated  methoxypoly(ethylene  glycol)  (PEG).  The reaction  involves  the  formation  of  a  covalent  bond  between  the  mPEG  and  amino  groups  on  the interferon alfa-2b molecule. Appropriate  molecular  size  characterization  techniques  (Mass  spectroscopy,  SDS-PAGE  and  size exclusion  chromatography)  were  used  to  confirm  that  peginterferon  alfa-2b  is  predominantly composed of monopegylated species with small amounts of dipegylated species and free interferon. In  the  thorough  characterisation  of  the  active  substance,  involving  high-resolution  ion  exchange chromatography,  the  monopegylated  species  were  found  to  consist  of  a  population  of  positional isomers  of  varying  biological  activities.  This  substance  heterogeneity  results  from  a  purification process that  removes  the  coupling  and  quenching  reagents and  to  some  extent  di-peginterferon  and free interferon, but does not resolve the monopegylated positional isomers. Isomer distribution data of 13 clinical batches have been submitted. The substance heterogeneity has been shown to be essentially consistent, thereby assuring a consistency of activity across the totality of the finished product. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Development pharmaceutics

A lyophilised formulation of sodium phosphate, sucrose and polysorbate 80 was developed to avoid a certain degree of depegylation that occurred with the soluble formulation used during pre-clinical and Phase I clinical studies.

The  sections  dealing  with  the  conjugation  chemistry,  the  structural  elucidation  and  the  degradation pathways  are  considered  to  represent  the  current  state  of  art.  Also,  in  general  the  relevant  EU guidelines are met. The resolution of the separation process does not allow for base-line separation, and  therefore  fraction  selection  relies  on  in-process  control.  This  was  a  matter  of  points  for clarifications, which are now solved. Line extension: ViraferonPeg powder and solvent for solution for injection in pre-filled pen On 6 February 2002 a Marketing Authorisation was granted for ViraferonPeg powder and solvent for solution for injection in pre-filled pen as a line extension to the existing marketing authorisation for ViraferonPeg. This is a new presentation for pre-filled pens with the active substance, peginterferon alfa-2b, remaining the same as that used for the vials. The product is intended for use in the same way and  on  the  same  indications  as  ViraferonPeg  vials.  The  formulations  are  identical  but  these  new products  are  presented  in  two-chamber  cartridges  and  supplied  in  pre-assembled  single  dose  pen devices. The front chamber contains the lyophilised cake including the active ingredient and the rear chamber contains the solvent, 0.5 ml of water for injections. ViraferonPeg powder and solvent for solution for injection in pre-filled pen is presented as 50, 80, 100, 120 and 150 microgram strengths. The pen delivers 50, 80, 100, 120 and 150 microgram / 0.5 ml in doses between 0.3 and 0.5 ml and is adjustable in increments of 0.05 ml. The composition has been adequately described. The active ingredient, together with excipients is in the lyophilised powder. The excipients  are  Disodium  phosphate,  anhydrous,  Sodium  dihydrogen  phosphate  dihydrate,  sucrose  and polysorbate  80.  The  solvent,  water  for  injections,  is  provided  in  the  second  chamber  of  the  twochamber pre-filled pen. The  ViraferonPeg  pre-filled  pen  is  packaged  in  a  two-chamber  Type  I  borosilicate  glass  cartridge. The two chambers are separated by a gray bromobutyl rubber (Helvoet FM 457/0 Gray) plunger. The filled cartridge is permanently fitted into a plastic pen assembly. The reconstitution process is carried out when the user pushes the upper subassembly and lower body together which push the plungers so that the solvent is transferred from the rear chamber to the front bypassing the centre rubber plunger by the way of the bypass channel. The formulation of the lyophilised powder and also the solution after reconstitution are the same as for the  ViraferonPeg  vial.  The  development  pharmaceutics  refers  mostly  to  studies  done  for  the  vial product. However, some additional development activities for the pre-filled pen such as determination of fill volume, choice of packaging components and lyophilisation cycle development is satisfactorily described. Integrity of the container/closure system has satisfactorily been performed by microbial challenge and pressure challenge leak test according to ISO 11608-3:1997. The needle supplied is CE-marked and the sterilisation method is by irradiation. The applicant has conducted stability studies on the finished product. The proposed shelf life of 1 year is acceptable. The polysorbate 80, used as an excipient, can be either of bovine or vegetable origin. The applicant has  provided  a  TSE  certificate  of suitability for  the  material  of  bovine  origin,  and  thereby demonstrated compliance with Directive 1999/82/EC (i.e shown compliance with the joint CPMP/CVMP TSE guideline). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects

The binding of interferon to specific cell surface receptor molecules signals the cell to produce a series of antiviral proteins. Most of this act to inhibit the translation of viral proteins, but other steps in viral replication is also affected. However, no cell or animal models of chronic hepatitis C infection exist. Furthermore,  the  assessment  is  restricted  by  the  fact  that  human  interferon  alfa-2b  is  inactive  in rodents, and the activity is comparatively low in primates available for preclinical studies.

Toxicology

Pharmacodynamics The comparisons of in vitro antiviral and immune system related effects between pegylated and nonpegylated interferon alfa-2b have been described. The innate biological activities of both compounds are similar. Safety pharmacology. Cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, CNS and renal effects were studied in rats (six) and cynomolgus monkeys (three). In monkeys a significant sustained increase (doubling) of the heart rate was recorded in animals treated with a high dose, with a concomitant rise in body temperature. No other  significant  effects  were  found  on  electrocardiographic  parameters.  Additional  information provided shows  that the increased heart rate in injected monkeys  found  during the safety pharmacology studies is not specific for ViraferonPeg but is also caused by IntronA. Since  there  are  no  animal  or  cell  culture  models  for  HCV  infection,  no  preclinical  studies  were performed to demonstrate the antiviral pharmacodynamic activity by the combination of ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b on hepatitis C virus. Pharmacokinetics The bioavailability after subcutaneous injections was 60-90 % in monkeys. The plasma half-life was 13-25  hours,  as  compared  to  about  4  h  for  IntronA.  Distribution  studies  in  rats  indicated  no localization to any specific organ or tissue, elimination (as low molecular weight radioactivity) was primarily through the kidneys. Two mechanisms may contribute to the pharmacokinetic profile of interferon activity in plasma after the subcutaneous administration of ViraferonPeg to rats and monkeys. The  mechanism,  which  appears  to  have  a  greater  role,  is  a  prolonged  terminal  phase  half-life, indicating slower elimination of the molecule. The terminal phase half-life of interferon activity after administration of ViraferonPeg was approximately 17-25 hours in rats and 24-35 hours in monkeys, compared to approximately 4 hours after administration of IntronA. Another  mechanism,  which  may  contribute  to  the  Pk  profile  of  IFN  activity  in  plasma,  is  slower absorption after subcutaneous administration. In man, the half-life for absorption of ViraferonPeg is 4.6 hours and for IntronA is 2.3 hours. The pharmacokinetics of ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b administered concomitantly is available from two preclinical studies conducted in monkeys. Serum Neutralizing Factors are elicited by interferon alfa-2b, and dosing was therefore limited to one-month duration. Single dose toxicity studies in mice, rats and monkeys using up to several hundred times the intended clinical dose of ViraferonPeg, indicated a low order of toxicity in these animals. Repeated  dose  toxicity studies  were  performed  in  cynomolgus  monkeys  treated  with  subcutaneous doses of ViraferonPeg every other day for one month. Medicinal product no longer authorise

Important findings included dose-related decreases in all types of blood cells, serum proteins, calcium phosphorus  and  potassium.  The  findings  observed  in  ViraferonPeg-dosed  monkeys  were  similar  in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

nature to those produced by IntronA. There was thus no unique toxicity due to the pegylation. Greater incidence and/or severity of the findings were noted in the high-dosed monkeys compared to IntronA dosed monkeys, which is in accordance with the prolonged exposure and higher AUC values.

Reversal of the findings were observed after several weeks of dosing, possibly due to the appearance of neutralising activity to interferon alfa in monkeys.

Mutagenicity. mPEG up to 5000 µg/plate ±S9 was not mutagenic in the standard battery of Salmonella and Escherichia strains.

In  order  to  assess  the  effects  of  the  combination  peginterferon  alfa-2b  plus  ribavirin,  one-month repeated  toxicity  studies  in  cynomolgus  monkeys  were  performed.  The  duration  of  the  studies  was limited  to  one  month  due  to  occurrence  of  neutralising  antibodies  directed  to  interferon.  The combination did not reveal unexpected new target organs but the effects were more marked with the combination compared to each individual component. Overall, there were changes in haematological parameters  (reduced  numbers  of  erythrocytes,  platelets,  neutrophils  and  lymphocytes),  lymphoid organs (atrophy) and skin (inflammation, erosion and ulcers). One important aspect to consider is the reduction in neutrophil numbers that is linked to peginterferon alfa-2b treatment. This reduction could alter the host resistance to infections and may explain the few cases of mortalities reported. Neutrophil function was, however, not affected. Reproduction  studies were  not  performed.  Interferon  alfa-2b  has  been  shown  to  be  abortifacient  in primates. ViraferonPeg can be assumed to also have this effect, as expressed adequately in the SPC. Genotoxicity was studied using a standard battery of tests. All findings were negative. The dosing was limited to 175 µg/plate in the Ames test, and 35 µg/ml in the chromosome aberration study, which, although below the guideline recommendations, is considered acceptable due to the (protein) nature of the test article. Carcinogenicity studies were not performed, which is acceptable since human interferon alfa has no apparent  effect  in  rodents,  and  since  antibodies  are  rapidly  formed  after  administration  of  the pegylated product. Local  tolerance. Subcutaneous  injection  of  ViraferonPeg  and  placebo  to  rats,  both  produced  mild irritation, as did intramuscular injection of ViraferonPeg to rabbits. Free methoxypoly (ethylene glycol) (mPEG) The relative non-toxicity of mPEG has been convincingly shown in the following studies: Single  dose  toxicity.  mPEG  given  i.v.  or  subcutaneously  at  6480  µg/m 2 to  mice  and  rats  was  nontoxic. 13-week study in rats. mPEG was given subcutaneously twice weekly in doses up to 2276 µg/m 2 /week (15  animals  per  sex  per  group).  No  mPEG-related  findings  were  observed  at  macroscopic  or microscopic examinations. 13-week + 4-week recovery study in cynomolgus monkeys. mPEG was given subcutaneously twice weekly in  doses  up  to  2276 µg/m 2 /week  (5  animals  per  sex  per  group).  No  mPEG-related  findings were observed at macroscopic or microscopic examinations. Embryo-foetal development study in rats. mPEG was given daily in doses up to 800 µg/m 2 per day on day  6  through  17  after  mating  (25  animals  per  group).  No  signs  of  toxicity,  maternal  or  in  utero effects, were noted. Embryo-foetal development study in rabbits. mPEG was given daily in doses up to 800 µg/m 2 per day on day 7 through 19 after mating (20 animals per group). No signs of toxicity, maternal or in utero effects, were noted. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Chromosomal aberration test. mPEG up to 5000 µg/ml of for 4 and 19 h without S9 and 4 h with S9 had no effect in a human lymphocyte chromosome aberration test.

Mouse micronucleus study. mPEG at a dose of 2 mg/kg intraperitoneally had no effect in a mouse micronucleus assay

4. Clinical aspects Clinical Pharmacology Pharmacodynamics. Interferon pharmacodynamics was assessed by examining changes in concentrations of effector proteins such as serum neopterin and 2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2'5'OAS).  Serum  neopterin  levels,  measured  as  both  Cmax  and  AUC,  increased  with  dose  until  the maximum effect was reached at the 1.5 µ g/kg dose. For 2'5'-OAS the maximal effect was attained already at 0.25 - 0.50 µ g/kg. Pharmacokinetics. The single- and multiple dose pharmacokinetics of ViraferonPeg were evaluated in two  studies,  of  which  the  multiple-dose  study  (0.5-2.0  µg/kg  q.w.)  was  conducted  in  the  target population.  ViraferonPeg  was  quantified  using  immuno-  (mainly)  and  bioassays,  the  latter  being  a measure of the antiviral activity. ViraferonPeg  is  slowly  absorbed  following  subcutaneous  administration  with  the  maximal  serum concentrations  attained  within  15-44  h,  which  are  sustained  for  up  to  48  to  72  h  post-dose.  CL/F ranged from 11 to 33 ml/h/kg, which is about one-tenth of the CL/F of Intron A. ViraferonPeg Cmax and AUC measurements increase in a dose-related manner. Mean apparent volume of distribution is about 1 l/kg, which is slightly less than for Intron A. Upon multiple dosing, there is an accumulation of immunoreactive interferons. As measured by the bioassay, accumulation is less pronounced, fully in-line with available safety data. Mean ViraferonPeg elimination half-life is approximately 30.7 hours (range 27-33 hours), with apparent clearance of 22.0 ml/hr·kg. The mechanisms involved in clearance of interferons in man have not yet been fully  elucidated.  However,  renal  elimination  may  account  for  a  minority  (approximately  30 %)  of ViraferonPeg apparent clearance. A single-dose interaction study was conducted to assess the influence of ViraferonPeg on the  most important P-450 enzymes. Results of this study demonstrated no effect on the activity of cytochrome (CY) P1A2, CYP2C8/9, CYP2D6, and hepatic CYP3A4 or N-acetyl transferase. Caution should be advised in the interpretation of these results as the use of other forms of interferon alpha result in a 50%  reduction  in  the  clearance  and  thus  a  doubling  of  plasma  concentrations  of  theophylline,  a substrate of CYP1A2. In  a  dose  ranging,  pharmacokinetic  study  (study  I96-403),  it  was  demonstrated  that  there  is  no pharmacokinetic interaction when peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin are co-administered. There was a peginterferon alfa-2b dose-related effect on viral clearance, and this effect was further enhanced by the addition  of  ribavirin.  Peginterferon  alfa-2b  at  the  dose  of  1.4  micrograms/kg/week  combined  with ribavirin (800 mg or 1000-1200 mg/day) had the best efficacy for clearing HCV-RNA from the serum, at weeks 1, 12 and 24, with an acceptable tolerance. Clinical studies in special populations. Patients with decompensated liver function were not eligible in the  clinical  studies,  therefore  the  pharmacokinetics  of  ViraferonPeg  have  not  been  evaluated  in patients with severe hepatic dysfunction. Medicinal product no longer authorise

In patients with renal impairment the exposure, as determined by the immunoassay, was doubled in the patients with the poorest renal function. Renal elimination only contributed to about 30 % of the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

overall  elimination  of  ViraferonPeg.  No  further  suggestions  are  given  on  additional  mechanism  of elimination.

There were no significant pharmacokinetic changes in elderly.

Clinical efficacy The  clinical  efficacy  data  on  which  the  initial  application  was  based  included  two  studies,  which demonstrated the clinical effectiveness of ViraferonPeg: a small dose exploration study and a large pivotal  study.  Each  compared  various  dose-regimens  of  ViraferonPeg  with  the  approved  dose  of IntronA in patients not previously treated with an interferon. Dose Finding Study. The dose exploration study was an open-label, active control study in which 64 patients  naïve  to  interferon  were  randomized  to  receive  treatment  for  6  months  with  dosages  of ViraferonPeg varying from 0.25 µ g/kg s.c. once weekly to 2.0 µ g/kg s.c. once weekly. IntronA at the dose  licensed  for  the  treatment  of  CHC  was  chosen  as  comparator.  Numerically  favorable  activity compared with IntronA was observed for ViraferonPeg dosages between 0.5 and 2.0 µ g/kg.  Serum neopterin concentration increased in a dose-related manner. Neutrophil and white cell count reductions at the end of Week 4 also correlated with dose. One pivotal confirmatory clinical study has been submitted as part of a variation application to support the extension of the use of ribavirin in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b (study C/I98-580) in patients with chronic HCV not previously treated with interferon (n = 1580). Main Clinical Studies The  main  confirmatory  study  on  which  the  initial  application  was  based  is  a  double  blind,  active control,  randomized  study  conducted  in  the  US,  Europe,  and  Australia.  The  target  population comprised  treatment-naive,  adult  subjects  with  CHC  confirmed  by  positive  HCV-RNA/qPCR (National Genetics Institute), a liver biopsy within the previous year compatible with chronic hepatitis and abnormal ALT levels. Compensated liver disease and essentially normal bone marrow function was required. The study was randomised, four-armed, and double blind with regard to ViraferonPeg dose. The licensed dose of IntronA for the treatment of CHC (3 MIU s.c. thrice weekly) was compared with  ViraferonPeg  0.5,  1.0,  and  1.5 µ g/kg  s.c.  once  a  week  for  48  weeks.  For  the  assessment  of sustained response, a 6 months follow-up after the end of therapy was conducted. The  characteristics  of  the  patients  and  Baseline  disease  parameters  were  comparable  across  all treatment  groups  even  though  it  was  conducted  in  multiple  geographic  locations  (Table  1).  These characteristics  are  representative  of  the  typical  profile  of  a  treatment-naïve  patient  with  chronic hepatitis C. Altogether 1224 patients were randomized and 1219 were treated. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1. Baseline characteristics (Study C/I97-010)

|                                                               | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg (n=315)   | ViraferonPeg 1.0 µ g/kg (n=297)   | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µ g/kg (n=304)   | IntronA 3 MIU (n=303)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Age (mean)                                                    | 43                                | 44                                | 43                                | 43                      |
| Female/male (%)                                               | 41/59                             | 37/63                             | 38/62                             | 32/68                   |
| Caucasian (%)                                                 | 90                                | 91                                | 94                                | 89                      |
| HCV genotype(%) 1                                             | 67 11                             | 67 4                              | 74 11 14 1 1                      | 72 9 18 1 <1            |
| 2                                                             |                                   | 10                                |                                   |                         |
| 3                                                             | 17                                | 18                                |                                   |                         |
| 4                                                             | 3                                 |                                   |                                   |                         |
| Other                                                         | 3                                 | 1                                 |                                   |                         |
| HCV/qPCR (copies/ml) mean (x10 6 ) ≤ 2 x10 6 (%) >2 x10 6 (%) | 3.405 26 73                       | 3.276 24 76                       | 3.041 27 72                       | 3.682 25 75 authorise   |
|                                                               | <1                                | 0                                 | <1                                | <1                      |
| ALT(xULN) median                                              | 2.3                               | 2.2                               | 2.3                               | 2.3                     |
| missing Source Transfusion (%)                                | 22                                | 26                                | 17 53 longer                      | 20                      |
| Parenteral (%) Sporadic/Other (%)                             | 48                                | 42                                | 30                                | 49                      |
|                                                               | 30                                | 32                                |                                   | 30                      |
| Yrs since exp. (mean)                                         | 18                                | 20                                | 19                                | 18                      |

The study was designed with a single measure of efficacy, but with assessments at two time-points. To allow for this approach and to protect against Type 1 error, the α was split equally between the two time points ( α = 0.025 x 2). The primary efficacy measure was a composite of viral response, HCV RNA &lt;100 copies/ml (qPCR) and normalised ALT. Non-completers were classified as failures. In  long-term  follow-up  studies,  virologic  response  as  measured  by  sensitive  quantitative  PCR techniques  has  been  shown  to  have  a  strong  correlation  with  eradication  of  HCV-RNA  and  halt  of disease progression. The HCV-RNA assay employed in this study is a commercially available service and is a highly sensitive validated assay. Undetectable serum HCV-RNA is highly indicative of viral clearance  and  predictive  for  the  cure  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  disease.  Moreover,  it  has  been demonstrated that virologic response corresponds highly with histologic improvement in the liver. ViraferonPeg was superior to IntronA at both time points assessed in the study, as measured by loss of serum  HCV-RNA  during  treatment  and  sustained  virologic  response  six  months  post  treatment. Significantly more patients were negative for serum HCV-RNA with all three ViraferonPeg regimens compared  with  IntronA  (Table  2).  There  was  a  dose  response  for  the  ViraferonPeg  groups  during treatment, however, for sustained response the 1.0 and 1.5 µ g/kg groups were similar. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Table 2. Virologic Response. Study C/I97-010   | Table 2. Virologic Response. Study C/I97-010   | Table 2. Virologic Response. Study C/I97-010   | Table 2. Virologic Response. Study C/I97-010   | Table 2. Virologic Response. Study C/I97-010   |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
|                                                | ViraferonPe g 0.5 µg/kg QW (N=315)             | ViraferonP eg 1.0 µg/kg QW (N=297)             | ViraferonP eg 1.5 µg/kg QW (N=304)             | IntronA 3 MIU TIW (N=303)                      |
| At 6 months of treatment                       | At 6 months of treatment                       | At 6 months of treatment                       | At 6 months of treatment                       | At 6 months of treatment                       |
| Virologic Responders                           | 104 (33%)                                      | 119 (40%)                                      | 139 (46%)                                      | 74 (24%)                                       |
| p value a                                      | 0.018                                          | <0.001                                         | <0.001                                         |                                                |
| At 6 months after the end of treatment         | At 6 months after the end of treatment         | At 6 months after the end of treatment         | At 6 months after the end of treatment         | At 6 months after the end of treatment         |
| Virologic Responders                           | 57 (18%)                                       | 73 (25%)                                       | 71 (23%)                                       | 37 (12%)                                       |
| p value a                                      | 0.042                                          | <0.001                                         | <0.001                                         |                                                |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| Table 3. Combined Virologic (< 100 copies/ml) and ALT Response at the End of Follow-up Study C/I97-010   | Table 3. Combined Virologic (< 100 copies/ml) and ALT Response at the End of Follow-up Study C/I97-010   | Table 3. Combined Virologic (< 100 copies/ml) and ALT Response at the End of Follow-up Study C/I97-010   | Table 3. Combined Virologic (< 100 copies/ml) and ALT Response at the End of Follow-up Study C/I97-010   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                          | Number (%) of Subjects HCV Negative                                                                      | Number (%) of Subjects HCV Negative                                                                      | Number (%) of Subjects HCV Negative                                                                      |
| ALT                                                                                                      | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µg/kgQW (N=315) ViraferonPeg 1.0 µg/kgQW (N=297) product                                | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µg/kgQW (N=304)                                                                         | IntronA 3 MIU TIW (N=303)                                                                                |
| ALT Normal                                                                                               | 52/57 (91) a 70/73 (96)                                                                                  | 69/71 (97)                                                                                               | 37/37 (100)                                                                                              |
| a:                                                                                                       | Subjects with normal ALT and negative HCV-RNA at FU/subjects who are PCR negative at FU.                 | Subjects with normal ALT and negative HCV-RNA at FU/subjects who are PCR negative at FU.                 | Subjects with normal ALT and negative HCV-RNA at FU/subjects who are PCR negative at FU.                 |

<!-- image -->

|            | Number (%) of Patients   | Number (%) of Patients   | Number (%) of Patients   | Number (%) of Patients   |
|------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|            | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µg/kg   | ViraferonPeg 1.0 µg      | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µg/kg   | Interferon alfa-2b 3 MIU |
| ALT Normal | 52/77 (68) a             | 70/87 (80)               | 69/84 (82)               | 37/55 (67)               |

a: Chi-Square test. Each pairwise comparison was performed with the interferon alfa-2b treatment group. The primary endpoint of the study was a combination of loss of serum HCV-RNA plus normalization of ALT. However, sustained virologic response is the gold standard for assessing long-term response to therapy and is therefore the focus of the assessment of efficacy in this application. As shown in Table 3 ,  nearly  all  patients  with  a  sustained  virologic  response  also  normalized ALT; only 10/238 (4%) had ALT levels above the upper limit or normal. a: Subjects with normal ALT and negative HCV-RNA at FU/subjects who are PCR negative at FU. When used as a surrogate for response, sustained normalization of ALT was a relatively poor predictor of sustained loss of serum HCV-RNA. Only 67 to 82% of patients, who had normal ALT at the end of Follow-up, had sustained loss of serum HCV-RNA ( Table 4 ). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Therefore, virologic response is the optimal way to assess the efficacy of ViraferonPeg in this study, as normalization of ALT is a less sensitive measure of outcome.

HCV  genotype  and  pretreatment  viral  load  have  been  shown  to  be  predictors  of  response  to interferons. When considered by the subgroups of HCV genotype and viral load, the response rate for all  dose-regimens  of  ViraferonPeg  remains  superior  to  that  with  IntronA  ( Table  5 ).  As  has  been shown in other studies, patients with HCV genotypes 2/3 have a much higher response rate than those with  genotype  1.  Patients  with  a  low  ( ≤ 2  x  10 6 copies/ml)  pretreatment  HCV  level  have  a  higher response rate than their counterparts regardless of genotype.

<!-- image -->

| Table 5.        | Sustained Virologic Response by HCV Virus Level (copies/ml) and Genotype   | Sustained Virologic Response by HCV Virus Level (copies/ml) and Genotype   | Sustained Virologic Response by HCV Virus Level (copies/ml) and Genotype   | Sustained Virologic Response by HCV Virus Level (copies/ml) and Genotype   |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                 | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µg/kg                                                     | ViraferonPeg 1.0 µg/kg                                                     | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µg/kg                                                     | IntronA 3 MIU                                                              |
| Genotype 1      |                                                                            |                                                                            |                                                                            |                                                                            |
| ≤ 2 million     | 14/52 (27)                                                                 | 16/42 (38)                                                                 | 19/56 (34)                                                                 | 10/48 (21)                                                                 |
| >2 million      | 8/159 (5)                                                                  | 12/157 (8)                                                                 | 12/167 (7)                                                                 | 4/169 (2)                                                                  |
| Genotypes 2/3   |                                                                            |                                                                            |                                                                            |                                                                            |
| ≤ 2 million     | 14/24 (58)                                                                 | 13/21 (62)                                                                 | 15/22 (68)                                                                 | 9/25 (36)                                                                  |
| >2 million      | 17/64 (27)                                                                 | 26/62 (42)                                                                 | 21/51 (41)                                                                 | 14/56 (25)                                                                 |
| Genotypes 4/5/6 |                                                                            |                                                                            | longer                                                                     |                                                                            |
| ≤ 2 x 10 6      | 2/6 (33%)                                                                  | 4/8 (50%)                                                                  | 3/4 (75%)                                                                  | 0/2                                                                        |
| > 2 x 10 6      | 0/4                                                                        | 0/5                                                                        | 0/1                                                                        | 0/2                                                                        |

•

•

Patients were instructed to take Rebetol with food.

Table 5.  Sustained Virologic Response by HCV Virus Level (copies/ml) and Genotype Altogether,  it  is  concluded  that  non-inferiority  of  ViraferonPeg  in  terms  of  efficacy  has  been demonstrated for the  0.5 µ g/kg dose (17% sustained combined response) in relation to the licensed dose  of  IntronA  (12%),  as  the  97.5%  confidence  interval  for  difference  between  ViraferonPeg  0.5 µ g/kg and IntronA was (-2%; +11%) (primary endpoint). In terms of the presently preferred virology endpoint the p-value 'in favour of' ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg was 0.042. With respect to higher doses of ViraferonPeg, sustained viral response appears similar comparing PEG 1.0 and 1,5 µ g/kg, 25 and 23%, respectively. It therefore seems reasonable to focus on a comparison between the 0.5 and 1.0 µ g/kg regimens. In this comparison the 95% CI for difference in sustained viral response rate is about -0.2% to +13% in favour of the 1.0 µ g/kg dose. Combination peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin Relating to the proposed indication, there is a synergistic effect, whose mechanism is unknown, of the combination  of  ribavirin  and  interferon  alfa-2b  on  the  virologic  sustained  response  and  on  the histologic response in both relapse and naïve patients. The efficacy and the safety of the combination was evaluated in study (C/I98-580), a large (n = 1580 randomised, 1530 treated), randomised (stratified: genotype 1 versus non-1, cirrhosis +/), multicentre, open label and active control study, where patients received one of the following treatment: I/R :  Interferon  alfa-2b  3MIU  three  times  weekly  +  ribavirin  1000/1200  mg  (authorised posology) PEG1.5/R : Peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5 microgram/kg once weekly in combination with ribavirin 800 mg daily for 48 weeks. The dose of ribavirin was lower than that originally approved due to safety concerns · PEG0.5/R :  Peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5 microgram/kg once weekly for 4 weeks, dropping to 0.5 microgram/kg/week for a further 44 weeks in combination with ribavirin 1000/1200 mg daily Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The primary efficacy variable was the loss of detectable serum HCV-RNA/PCR (&lt; 100 copies/ml). Efficacy  was  evaluated  at  24  weeks  and  also  at  follow-up  (24  weeks  after  the  end  of  treatment). Sustained response was determined by the proportion of subjects that were HCV-RNA negative 24 weeks after the end of treatment. Secondary endpoints were the normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment and at 24 weeks of follow-up, loss of HCV-RNA at the end of treatment, and improvement and change from baseline in biopsy scores.

<!-- image -->

| Table 1 Virologic Response                                                                                     |                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                | A PEG 1.5/R (n=511)                                                                                            | B PEG 0.5/R (n=514)                                                                                            | C I/R (n=505)                                                                                                  | A vs. C a                                                                                                      | B vs. C                                                                                                        |
| End of Treatment                                                                                               | 65%                                                                                                            | 56%                                                                                                            | 54%                                                                                                            | p<0.001 b                                                                                                      | p=0.3707                                                                                                       |
| End of 6 months Follow-Up                                                                                      | 54%                                                                                                            | 47%                                                                                                            | 47%                                                                                                            | p=0.0121 c                                                                                                     | p=0.7261                                                                                                       |
| a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product | a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product | a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product | a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product | a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product | a: Logistic regression b :95 %confidence interval (1.33-2.29) c :95 %confidence interval (1.08 - 1.84) product |

| Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype   | Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype   | Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype   | Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype   | Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype   |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| HCV Genotype                                 | PEG 1.5/R                                    | PEG 0.5/R                                    | I/R                                          | 1 vs. non-1                                  |
| 1                                            | 42%                                          | 34%                                          | 33%                                          | p ≤ 0.03 a                                   |
| 2/3                                          | 82%                                          | 80%                                          | 79%                                          |                                              |
| 4/5/6                                        | 50%                                          | 33%                                          | 38%                                          |                                              |
| a:                                           | Logistic regression                          | Logistic regression                          | Logistic regression                          | Logistic regression                          |

Population All  patients  recruited  were  naive  and  had  histological  evidence  of  chronic  hepatitis,  with  proof  of infection  with  hepatitis  C  virus  (presence  of  serum  HCV-RNA)  and  abnormal  ALT.  The  patients enrolled were predominantly Caucasian, middle aged males (mean age 44 years). As it is typical with European/American population, the majority were infected with genotype 1 (~ 70%) and had a high viral  load  pre-study  (&gt;  2  million  copies/ml).  Baseline  demographic and  disease characteristics were consistent  across  all  patients  groups.  Approximately  10  %  had  cirrhosis  as  determined  by  local pathologist assessment. Of the 1580 patients randomised, 1530 were treated (50 patients were not treated mainly due to patient preference). Overall 80 % (1230/1530) of patients completed 48 weeks of treatment. Discontinuation of treatment was mainly due to adverse events (14 %, 13 % and 13 % respectively for PEG 1.5/R, PEG 0.5/R and I/R). All patients treated with at least one dose of study medication defined the ITT population. Virological response Final results of the study showed that for both the end of treatment and sustained virologic response 6 months  after  treatment,  PEG  1.5/R  is  statistically  and  clinically  superior  to  the  control  arm  of interferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin;  by  contrast  I/R  and  PEG  0.5/R  produced  similar  sustained  virologic response rates (47 %) (Table 1). Table 1 Virologic Response Effect of genotype on sustained response HCV genotype is a very important predictor of response for interferon-based therapies and it had a major impact on treatment outcome in this study  (Table 2).  In HCV genotype 1 disease, PEG 1.5/R was significantly  more effective  than  I/R  (p ≤ 0.03).    Response  rates  in  genotype  2/3  diseases  were approximately twice that for genotype 1 and similar across treatments. Table 2 Virologic Response by HCV Genotype Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Secondary endpoint (ALT normalisation)

With  respect  to  the  secondary  endpoint  of  normalisation  of  ALT,  almost  all  subjects  who  became sustained  responders  also  normalised  their  ALT  after  completion  of  therapy.  Among  those  few sustained  responders  who  failed  to  normalise  their  ALT  during  follow-up,  the  ALT  was  only minimally elevated (&lt;1.5 ULN) in the majority of the peginterferon alfa-2b treated patients.

The optimal duration of the combined treatment has not yet been fully established in subjects with non type 1 genotype infections or type 1 genotype infections with low baseline viral load. The information provided on the overall population at present indicate that the treatment should be continued at least for 24 weeks and thereafter the patients shall be re-evaluated in order to extend the treatment up to one year. It was considered that a number of prognostic factors would be involved in the clinical decision of  continuing  the  treatment  beyond  24  weeks,  including  the  level  of  bridging  fibrosis,  the  level  of response in terms of viral load, age, gender, tolerability to the treatment of individual patients. The Marketing Authorisation Holder has agreed to provide the CPMP with additional information on the clinical benefit of the optimised dosing regimen of the combined treatment for specific subgroups of hepatitis C patients.

Doses recommendation In this study, it was shown that dosing both peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin by patient weight optimises sustained virologic response rates to treatment. A  logistic  regression  analysis  of  the  weight  effect  demonstrated  that  weight-adjusted  dosing  for ribavirin maximises the sustained virologic response rate (61 %) compared to 47 % with standard I/R therapy. The sustained response rate with this regimen was improved to 48 % in the difficult to treat HCV genotype 1 patients and to 88% in patients infected with HCV genotypes 2 &amp; 3; relapse rates were reduced in these sub-populations 17 % and 7 %, respectively. The analysis confirmed that the optimal dose of peginterferon alfa-2b is 1.5 micrograms/kg and demonstrated that the optimal dose of ribavirin,  balancing  for  efficacy  and  safety,  for  use  in  combination  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  1.5 micrograms/kg is 13 ± 2  mg/kg for all patients; this is particularly effective for those infected with HCV genotype 1. On  the  basis  of  the  data,  the  following  dose  recommendation  for  ribavirin,  in  combination  with peginterferon alfa-2b (1.5 micrograms/kg per week) was defined: · Patients with body weight &lt; 65 kg, 800 mg/day · Patients with body weight 65 - 85 kg, 1000 mg/day · Patients with body weight &gt; 85 kg, 1200 mg/day Duration of treatment The efficacy of the combination of peginterferon alfa-2b + ribavirin has been demonstrated in a large clinical  study.    The  sustained  response  rate  with  PEG  1.5/R  6  months  after  the  end  of  1  year  of treatment  was  significantly  higher  than  that  with  I/R  (54%  versus  47%;  p  =  0.0121).    It  was demonstrated that the response rate was optimised when both peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin are dosed according to body weight. The sustained response rate increased up to 61% with PEG 1.5/R with the optimised ribavirin dose (&gt; 10.6 mg/kg). In the subgroup of patients infected with genotype 1 the response rate was 48% (versus 33% with the regimen I/R) and for genotype2/3 patients was 88% (versus 79% with the regimen I/R) when the ribavirin dose was optimised. The rationale for selecting a fixed treatment period of 1 year in this study was the type of patients anticipated to be enrolled (~ 70 % genotype 1/high viral load). The risk of over-treating some patients and inducing undue adverse events could not be excluded. In genotype 1 patients with a high viral load at baseline, it was shown that a treatment for 48 weeks was necessary to establish high-sustained response rate. Therefore a 6 months treatment period was agreed, with the automatic extension of this treatment period to another 6 months in genotype 1 patients with high baseline viral load who exhibit negative  HCV  RNA  after  the  first  6  months.  For  the  other  patients,  the  possibility  to  extend  the treatment period for another 6 months can be considered. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical studies in special populations

Use in hepatic impairment: The safety and efficacy of ViraferonPeg therapy has not been evaluated in patients with severe hepatic dysfunction, therefore ViraferonPeg must not be used for these patients.

Patients  with  decompensated  liver  function  were  not  eligible  in  the  clinical  studies,  however  the CPMP requested clarifications whether there were pharmacokinetic data available from patients with histologically proven cirrhosis at baseline. The analysis of pharmacokinetics data in cirrhotic patients (Metavir IV) from a population PK substudy of the pivotal clinical trial (C/I97-010) was made. Due to the  small  number  of  patients  with  Metavir  scores  of  4,  an  adequate  comparison  of  their  trough concentration data with those of patients with lower scores was not possible. Use  in  renal  impairment :  The  clearance  of  ViraferonPeg  is  reduced  in  patients  with  significant  renal impairment  (creatinine  clearance ≤ 50 ml/minute)  (see 5.2 ).  It  is  recommended  that  these  patients  be closely monitored and that their weekly dose of ViraferonPeg be reduced if medically appropriate. Use in the elderly ( ≥ 65 years of age): There are no apparent age-related effects on the pharmacokinetics of  ViraferonPeg.  Data  from  elderly  patients  treated  with  a  single  dose  of  ViraferonPeg  suggest  no alteration in ViraferonPeg dose is necessary based on age (see 5.2 ). Use  in  patients  under  the  age  of 18 years: ViraferonPeg  is  not  recommended  for  use  in  children  or adolescents under the age of 18, as there is no experience in this group. Clinical safety Patient exposure The safety assessment in this application is based primarily on data from the pivotal study in which most of the 1,219 patients completed the one-year treatment period and were followed for 6 months. Given the small number of patients (36) treated in the supportive dose exploration study, this study was of minor importance for the assessment of safety. Altogether 940 patients in the pivotal study were exposed to ViraferonPeg, of whom 754 received 0.5 to 1.5 microgram/kg for a year. All patients were followed for an additional 6 months post-treatment. The most commonly reported AEs were those typically associated with interferon use, headache and myalgia, which were reported by a majority of patients (both ViraferonPeg and IntronA). The  side  effect  profile  observed  for  ViraferonPeg  was  qualitatively  similar  to  that  of  IntronA.  The incidence and severity of adverse events reported for the lowest dose of ViraferonPeg appeared similar to IntronA 3 MIU, while flu-like symptoms, weight loss, anorexia, dizziness and alopecia tended to be more frequently observed with higher dosages of ViraferonPeg. The  incidences  of  the  most  common  adverse  events  observed  in  monotherapy  treatment  are summarized in Table 6. In general, the severity of the adverse events in all treatment groups was mild to moderate and manageable by appropriate additional therapy and adjustment of the dose of the study drug. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Table 6. Adverse events reported very commonly in clinical trials ( ≥ 10 %of patients)   | Table 6. Adverse events reported very commonly in clinical trials ( ≥ 10 %of patients)   | Table 6. Adverse events reported very commonly in clinical trials ( ≥ 10 %of patients)   | Table 6. Adverse events reported very commonly in clinical trials ( ≥ 10 %of patients)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 0.5                                                                                      | ViraferonPeg microgram/kg once weekly N=315                                              | ViraferonPeg 1.0 microgram/kg once weekly N=297                                          | IntronA 3 MIU three times a week N=303                                                   |
| Application Site Disorders                                                               |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |
| Inflammation                                                                             | 44%                                                                                      | 42%                                                                                      | 16%                                                                                      |
| Reaction                                                                                 | 7%                                                                                       | 10%                                                                                      | 5%                                                                                       |
| General Body Discomfort                                                                  |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |
| Asthenia                                                                                 | 12%                                                                                      | 12%                                                                                      | 11%                                                                                      |
| Dizziness                                                                                | 8%                                                                                       | 12%                                                                                      | 10%                                                                                      |
| Fatigue                                                                                  | 43%                                                                                      | 51%                                                                                      | 50%                                                                                      |
| Fever                                                                                    | 31%                                                                                      | 45%                                                                                      | 30%                                                                                      |
| Headache                                                                                 | 61%                                                                                      | 64%                                                                                      | 58%                                                                                      |
| Flu-like Symptoms                                                                        | 18%                                                                                      | 22%                                                                                      | 19%                                                                                      |
| Rigors                                                                                   | 34%                                                                                      | 40%                                                                                      | 33%                                                                                      |
| Weight Decrease                                                                          | 10%                                                                                      | 11%                                                                                      | 13%                                                                                      |
| Gastro-intestinal                                                                        |                                                                                          | longer                                                                                   |                                                                                          |
| Anorexia                                                                                 | 10%                                                                                      | 20%                                                                                      | 17%                                                                                      |
| Nausea                                                                                   | 21%                                                                                      | 26%                                                                                      | 20%                                                                                      |
| Diarrhoea                                                                                | 16%                                                                                      | 18%                                                                                      | 16%                                                                                      |
| Abdominal Pain                                                                           | 14%                                                                                      | 15%                                                                                      | 11%                                                                                      |
| Musculoskeletal                                                                          | no                                                                                       |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |
| Pain                                                                                     | 19%                                                                                      | 28%                                                                                      | 22%                                                                                      |
| Myalgia                                                                                  | 48%                                                                                      | 54%                                                                                      | 53%                                                                                      |
| Arthralgia                                                                               | 26%                                                                                      | 25%                                                                                      | 27%                                                                                      |
| Psychiatric                                                                              |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |                                                                                          |
| Depression                                                                               | 27%                                                                                      | 29%                                                                                      | 25%                                                                                      |
| Anxiety                                                                                  | 10%                                                                                      | 9%                                                                                       | 10%                                                                                      |
| Concentration Impaired                                                                   | 10%                                                                                      | 10%                                                                                      | 8%                                                                                       |
| Insomnia product                                                                         | 17%                                                                                      | 23%                                                                                      | 23%                                                                                      |
| Irritability                                                                             | 19%                                                                                      | 18%                                                                                      | 24%                                                                                      |
| Alopecia                                                                                 | 20%                                                                                      | 22%                                                                                      | 22%                                                                                      |
| Pharyngitis                                                                              | 12%                                                                                      | 10%                                                                                      | 7%                                                                                       |

Commonly reported undesirable effects ( ≥ 2 % of patients) were pruritus, skin dry, malaise, sweating increased,  right  upper  quadrant  pain,  neutropaenia,  rash,  vomiting,  mouth  dry,  emotional  lability, nervousness, dyspnoea, viral infection, somnolence, thyroid disorders, chest pain, dyspepsia, flushing, paresthaesia,  coughing,  agitation,  sinusitis,  hypertonia,  hyperesthaesia,  vision  blurred,  confusion, flatulence,  libido  decreased,  erythema,  eye  pain,  apathy,  hypoesthaesia,  loose  stool,  conjunctivitis, nasal congestion, constipation, vertigo, menorrhagia, menstrual disorder. Rarely  reported  events  include  suicidal  ideation  and  attempted  suicide,  hearing  and  retinal  disorders, diabetes, hepatopathy and arrhythmia. Granulocytopaenia (&lt; 0.75 x 10 9 /l) occurred in 4 and 7 % and thrombocytopaenia (&lt; 70 x 10 9 /l) in 1 and 3 % respectively of patients receiving 0.5 or 1.0 microgram/kg of ViraferonPeg. Medicinal product no longer authorise

There  was  no  consistent  pattern  with  respect  to  discontinuation  among  treatment  groups,  but  dose reduction increased with increasing ViraferonPeg dose (Table 7).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7.  Proportion of Patients Dose-reducing or Discontinuing due to AEs

|                 | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg   | ViraferonPeg 1.0 µ g/kg   | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µ g/kg   | IntronA 3 MIU   |
|-----------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------|
| Dose Reduction  | 9%                        | 14%                       | 19%                       | 6%              |
| Discontinuation | 9%                        | 11%                       | 9%                        | 6%              |

<!-- image -->

|                         | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg   | ViraferonP eg 1.0 µ g/kg no   | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µ g/kg   | IntronA 3MIU   |
|-------------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------|----------------|
| Neutrophils (x 10 9 /L) | N = 315                   | N = 297                       | N = 300                   | N = 299        |
| 1.0 - < 1.5             | 110 (35)                  | 127 (43)                      | 116 (39)                  | 96 (32)        |
| 0.75 . < 1.0            | 26 (8)                    | 55 (19)                       | 54 (18)                   | 18 (6)         |
| 0.5 - <0.75             | 10 (3)                    | 17 (6)                        | 27 (9)                    | 5 (2)          |
| < 0.5                   | 3 (1)                     | 3 (1)                         | 1 (0.3)                   | 1 (0.3)        |
| Platelets (x 10 9 /L)   | product                   |                               |                           |                |
| 70 - < 100              | 34 (11)                   | 58 (20)                       | 54 (18)                   | 27 (9)         |
| 50 - < 70               | 3 (1)                     | 8 (3)                         | 12 (4)                    | 2 (0.7)        |
| 25 - < 50               | 0                         | 1 (0.3)                       | 0                         | 1 (0.3)        |

<!-- image -->

|              | ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg   | ViraferonPeg 1.0 µ g/kg   | ViraferonPeg 1.5 µ g/kg   | IntronA 3 MIU   |
|--------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------|
| 2 x Baseline | 4 (1%)                    | 5 (2%)                    | 5 (2%)                    | 3 (1%)          |
| 2.1 - 5 x    | 21 (7%)                   | 24 (8%)                   | 20 (7%)                   | 20 (7%)         |
| 5.1 - 10 x   | 2 (0.6%)                  | 1 (0.3%)                  | 0                         | 2 (0.7%)        |
| >10 x        | 0                         | 0                         | 0                         | 0               |

Neutropenia  and  thrombocytopenia  were  the  two  most  common  reasons  for  dose  reduction.  Dose interruption was more common with IntronA (9%) than with ViraferonPeg (4-6%). A relatively small proportion of subjects in each group discontinued (2-5%) or dose reduced (1-3%) due to psychiatric AEs.  Depression  was  the  most  common  reason  for  discontinuation  or  dose  reduction  due  a psychiatric AE. Application site disorders have been reported with the use of all alpha interferons. The incidence of injection site inflammation (erythema and/or swelling) with ViraferonPeg at all doses was greater than that seen with IntronA (44-47% vs 21%), but was not dose related. The majority were mild in severity. No  patient  experienced  local  skin  necrosis.  Less  common  were  pain  or  reactions  (i.e.  bruising, itchiness, and irritation). Laboratory findings As for IntronA, reduced neutrophil and platelet counts developed within a few weeks of therapy and changes thereafter were minor (Table 8). Table 8.  Haematological Abnormalities [Number (%) of subjects] Fluctuation of ALT values is characteristic of chronic hepatitis C infection. This variation is also seen during treatment with interferons. Looking at individual patients, there were 97 patients with a duringtreatment ALT value greater than 2x baseline (Table 9). The majority of these ALT elevations were single occurrences or short-lived episodes during the course of treatment and was self-limiting. Table 9.  Mean serum ALT x Baseline during treatment Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There was no specific pattern as to when the elevations of ALT occurred. With the exception of one patient,  whose  maximum  total  bilirubin  was  33 µ mol/l  (predominantly  indirect  bilirubin),  the  ALT elevations were not associated with simultaneous increase in bilirubin or clinical signs of hepatoxicity. Forty-four  ViraferonPeg-treated  patients  had  an  elevated  bilirubin  value,  none  sufficient  to  cause clinical jaundice. These elevations were equally distributed across the ViraferonPeg groups. Of these one had a concomitant elevated ALT value.

Serious psychiatric adverse events are uncommon, but are recognised problem with interferon alpha treatment.  During  the  48-week  treatment  period,  adverse  events  broadly  classified  as  'psychiatric' were reported by approximately 75-77% of patients across all groups. The majority of these were mild or  moderate and not significantly psychiatric, such  as insomnia  (40-41%) and irritability (34-35%). Depression was reported by 29-34% of patients, this compares with ≈ 28% reported in previous trials

The prevalence of post-treatment binding antibody in the main clinical study was 9.1-10.2% among all ViraferonPeg  dose  groups  and  was  lower  than  that  detected  for  IntronA  in  the  same  trial  (15.2%). Serum neutralising antibody was also detected in small but similar proportions of subjects receiving IntronA or ViraferonPeg (0.8-1.9%). In general, only high titres of antibodies are supposed to influence the kinetics of proteins, and a high titre  of  binding  antibodies  normally  correlates  with  neutralising  activity.  The  low  incidence  of neutralising antibodies is therefore reassuring. Health-Related Quality of Life (HQL) data was collected using the SF36 module as described in the clinical protocol for C/I97-010. The SF36 assesses eight domains of health; physical functioning, role physical,  bodily  pain,  general  health  perceptions,  vitality,  social  functioning,  role  emotional,  and general mental health. Data were collected at baseline, at 12, 24, 36 and 48 weeks during treatment (treatment  period),  and  at  12  and  24  weeks  after  treatment  discontinuation  (follow-up  period).  The HQL analyses were based on all randomised patients who received study drug. In general, patients from all treatment groups showed reductions in scores for all HQL domains tested during treatment followed by a return back to baseline during follow-up. Secondary analyses showed that patients receiving ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg experienced the least decrease in the following domain scores compared to IntronA and the higher doses of ViraferonPeg: role-physical, bodily pain, vitality, and  social  functioning.  At  the  end  of  follow-up,  sustained  responders  in  all  ViraferonPeg  groups showed increased scores from baseline across all domains compared to non-responders who showed reductions in mean scores. Combination peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin: The safety profile of peginterferon alfa-2b in combination with ribavirin was assessed based on data from study (C/I98-580), which became available following the initial marketing authorisation. Adverse events Overall, the adverse events reported with the combination were as expected with interferon alfa-2b and/or  ribavirin.  The  combination  of  peginterferon  alfa-2b  with  ribavirin  had  a  safety  profile comparable to the combination of interferon alfa-2b + ribavirin. The  most  common  adverse  events  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  +  ribavirin  (fatigue,  fever,  headache, injection site reaction, rigors, myalgia, insomnia) were also those most frequently reported with I/R. The increase in the incidence of some flu-like symptoms with peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5 micrograms/kg was  not  unexpected  given  the  higher  dose  of  interferon  alfa-2b  being  administered. The incidence of psychiatric adverse events was similar among groups. Few adverse events, such as injection  site  reaction  (58%  vs.  36%),  fever  (46%  vs.  33%)  and  nausea  (43%  vs.  33%)  were  more common with PEG 1.5/R than with I/R ( ≥ 10% difference between groups).  However, most of these events were mild to moderate in severity and did not limit treatment. Comparing peginterferon alfa-2b 1.5/R  to  I/R,  the  optimised  dose  of  ribavirin  was  associated  with  a  higher  incidence  of  5  adverse events  for  which  the  incidence  between  treatments  was ≥ 10  %:  injection  site  reaction,  weight decrease, nausea, asthenia and alopecia. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  monotherapy  and  I/R.  The  incidence  of  depression  was  similar  in  all  3 groups and remained relatively constant during the study period (66-68% in the second 24 weeks vs. 71-73%  in  the  first  24  weeks),  demonstrating  there  is  no  increased  risk  of  depression  with  longer treatment duration. There was no difference in the incidence of psychiatric adverse events between the per protocol PEG 1.5/R group and the optimised ribavirin dose group.

Grade  1-2  thrombocytopenia  was  significantly  higher  with  PEG1.5/R  than  with  I/R,  however,  no significant clinical consequences were observed during the study.

Severe and life-threatening adverse events The incidence of severe AEs in every body system organ class category was similar with PEG 1.5/R and I/R, with the exception of 'body as a whole' and 'white cell and RES', where severe fatigue and neutropenia were more frequently reported with PEG 1.5/R than with I/R. The frequency of life threatening AEs reported in this study was low (1 %) and was similar between the treatment groups. All were successfully managed with treatment discontinuation. There were 13 cases of neutropenia classified as WHO grade 4(life-threatening), none of which was associated with infection. For the PEG 1.5/R group there is no pattern to suggest that the optimised dose of ribavirin resulted  in  more  life-threatening  events.  The  incidence  of  suicidal  attempts  and  suicidal  ideation during treatment with the combination ribavirin/peginterferon alfa-2b was low ( ≤ 1.2 %) and similar in all groups. Specific reference to these life-threatening psychiatric events observed during treatment in this clinical study has been added in the SPC. 6.6% of the relapse patients and 11% of naïve experienced severe and life-threatening events pooled from  four  Phase  III  trials.  The  most  common  are  psychiatric,  the  category  which  occurred  more frequently comparing I/R (2%) and I/P (1%). There were 6 deaths, 5 in the naïve patients and 1 in the relapse patient trials: two myocardial infarctions, two cases of illicit drug overdose, and an intracranial haemorrhage. Of the 6  patients  who  died,  3  were  randomized  to  combination  therapy  and  2  of  the deaths occurred during the follow up period (16-20 weeks after dosing completion). Laboratory values and relationship to infection There was a clear dose-relationship in the frequency of neutropenia with peginterferon alfa-2b.  There was also a dose-effect in the proportion of patients who had a dose modification due to neutropenia (18 % with PEG 1.5/R compared with 10 and 8 % for PEG 0.5/R and I/R).  However, the incidence of discontinuation  for  neutropenia  was  low  in  all  groups  (0.2  -1  %).  In  this  study,  only  5  PEG  1.5/R subjects and 2 I/R subjects discontinued because of neutropenia suggesting that the dose-modification schedule  included  in  the  protocol  provided  adequate  protection.  There  was  a  higher  frequency  of Grade  3/4  neutropenia  when  peginterferon  alfa-2b  was  combined  with  the  optimised  of  ribavirin; however,  this  was  also  seen  with  interferon  alfa-2b.  Among  the  subjects  who  had  a  Grade  3  or  4 neutropenia, the incidence of infections was similar: 47 % PEG 1.5/R, 39 % PEG 0.5/R; 55 % I/R. A mention on the risk of grade 3/4 neutropenia associated with peginterferon alfa-2b/ ribavirin has been added to the SPC. Nine  subjects  reported  serious  infections.    These  serious  infections  were  neither  associated  with neutropenia  nor  life  threatening.    The  optimised  dose  of  ribavirin  did  not  influence  the  pattern  of infections. Anaemia is a well-recognised effect of ribavirin and the pattern previously observed with ribavirin in combination with interferon alfa-2b is seen in this study. A decrease in haemoglobin to less than 10 g/dl, which mandates dose modification, occurred in approximately 10% of patients; discontinuation was rare (0.2 - 0.8 %).  Guidelines for dose reduction for anaemia are included in the Rebetol SPC. As would be expected, the higher (optimised) dose of ribavirin resulted in a greater number of patients having  a  decrease  in  haemoglobin  to  less  than  10  g/dl,  with  the  need  for  dose  modification.  This occurred in approximately 12-14% of patients receiving the &gt;10.6 mg/kg dose of ribavirin. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discontinuation and dose modification

Discontinuation due to adverse events was similar among all treatment groups (13-14 %). The most frequent  reasons  for  discontinuations  in  all  treatment  groups  were  flu-like  symptoms  (2-3  %)  and psychiatric adverse events (5%).

Peginterferon alfa-2b:

The optimal dose recommendations have been reconsidered and agreed upon. As far as the treatment duration  is  concerned,  the  CPMP  agreed  that  it  should  last  for  at  least  six  months.  In  genotype  1 patients with high baseline viral load, treatment should be continued for another six-month period in

The most common reasons for dose modification due to adverse events were anaemia and neutropenia. Dose modification for psychiatric adverse events was low in all groups (4-5 %). 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment From a chemical-pharmaceutical and toxicological point of view, satisfactory responses to the points for clarification have been submitted. Taking into account both the preclinical data and the clinical exposure to peginterferon alfa-2b, it is concluded that the benefit/risk for the use in the treatment of patients with Chronic Hepatitis C (CHC) is positive. The CPMP have previously agreed that the optimum treatment for CHC is the combination of  interferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin.  For  this  reason  ViraferonPeg,  and  all  interferon  monotherapies, should be used primarily in patients intolerant of ribavirin. From an efficacy point of view, ViraferonPeg 0.5 µ g/kg has been demonstrated to be non-inferior and the  1.0 µ g/kg  to  be  superior  compared  with  the  licensed  dose  of  IntronA.  The  1.0 µ g/kg  dose, however,  appears  to  be  less  well  tolerated  and  dose  reduction  and  discontinuation  of  therapy  were more  commonly  encountered.  It  should  be  noted  that  these  differences  in  safety  do  not  relate  to irreversible adverse events. Dosing can be individualized taking into account expected viral response and tolerability. When  reviewing  the  clinical  data  of  peginterferon  alfa-2b  in  combination  with  ribavirin  in  naive patients, which became available after the initial granting of the marketing authorisation, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of ViraferonPeg  was still favourable. Indeed, it was demonstrated that use in combination of peginterferon alfa-2b/ribavirin offers greater efficacy than the current standard of care interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin without the introduction of any new adverse events, although the frequency of a few of the interferon-related events was affected. All the AEs appeared to resolve with dose-modification or discontinuation, without clinical sequelae. Further  refinement  of  the  data  analyses  demonstrated  also  that  weight  adjusted  dosing  for  both peginterferon alfa-2b and ribavirin maximises the sustained virological response rate. It was concluded that the PEG 1.5/R regimens is adopted for all patients, but with the ribavirin dose modified to take account of the impact of body weight. The peginterferon alfa-2b regimen is already weight adjusted. The ribavirin dose of 13 ± 2 mg/kg/day is the optimal dose for use in combination with peginterferon alfa-2b  1.5 µ g/kg/week without  compromising  safety.    This  combination  will  provide  an  increased sustained response rate for all patients, particularly those infected with  genotype 1. In addition, the optimisation  of  ribavirin  dose  had  an  effect  on  the  frequency  of  only  a  few  of  the  ribavirin-related events. Hence, the CPMP agreed on the following dosing recommendations: 1.5 µ g/kg/week Ribavirin 13 ± 2 mg/kg/day as: 800 mg/day for patients weighing &lt; 65 kg 1,000 mg/day for patients weighing 65 to 85 kg 1,200 mg/day for patients weighing &gt; 85 kg Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients who exhibit negative HCV-RNA after the first six months treatment. For the other patients, the  possibility to extend the treatment period for another 6 months can be considered on individual basis.  The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  has  agreed  to  provide  the  CPMP  with  additional information  on  the  clinical  benefit  of  the  optimised  dosing  regimen  of  the  combined  treatment  for specific subgroups of hepatitis C patients.

<!-- image -->

Based on the available data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered that the benefit/risk profile of peginterferon alfa-2b in combination with  ribavirin for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C was  favourable,  and  recommended  the  granting  of  a  marketing  authorisation  for  the  following indication: ViraferonPeg  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  adult  patients  with  histologically  proven  chronic hepatitis C who have elevated transaminases without liver decompensation and who are positive for serum HCV-RNA or anti-HCV. The best way to use ViraferonPeg in this indication is in combination with ribavirin. This combination is indicated in naïve patients as well as in patients who have previously responded (with normalisation of ALT at the end of treatment) to interferon alpha monotherapy but who have subsequently relapsed. Interferon  monotherapy,  including  ViraferonPeg,  is  indicated  mainly  in  case  of  intolerance  or contraindication to ribavirin. Medicinal product no longer authorise