---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:16:54
document_pages: 11
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/vistide-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: vistide-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.1802081
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-18 09:18:05.377396
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  and  scientific  discussion  on  procedures  which have been finalised before 30 July 2005. For scientific information on procedures after this date please refer to module 8B

## 1. Introduction

Cidofovir  is  a  monophosphate  analogue  of  deoxycitidine  with in  vitro and in  vivo activity  against human cytomegalovirus (CMV). Cidofovir, unlike other nucleoside analogues such as acyclovir and ganciclovir, is phosphorylated in order to bypass the initial viral dependent phosphorylation. After in vivo conversion into the diphosphate and triphosphate analogues, cidofovir acts as a specific inhibitor of viral DNA polymerases in a broad spectrum of herpes virus including CMV.

The good chemical stability of cidofovir allows the product to be terminally sterilised and supports an extended shelf-life. A validated moist heat based terminal sterilisation method was adopted.

CMV retinitis is the most common ocular complication in HIV infection, usually occurring late in the disease in up to a fifth of patients. Untreated, the condition is rapidly progressive causing blindness within  weeks  or  months.  Since  anticytomegalovirus  drugs,  including  Vistide,  are  only  virustatic, treatment aims to halt disease progression rather than achieve a cure. Lifelong treatment is therefore required. Currently licensed drugs for the treatment of this disease are ganciclovir and foscarnet. Viral resistance or drug toxicity may require a change in the antiviral agent used in the treatment of CMV retinitis. Vistide has been evaluated for the treatment of CMV retinitis in AIDS patients. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Cidofovir  is  an  optically  active  substance  with  a  single  chiral  centre  and  used  as  a  single  (S)enantiomer. Vistide is supplied as a sterile, clear solution in a 5 ml sterile borosilicate type I flint glass vial which contains  375  mg  of  cidofovir  in  5  ml  of  water  at  a  concentration  of  75  mg/ml.  Formulation  and preparation methods were identical for all 75 mg/ml batches used in clinical trials. Vistide  is  intended  for  intravenous  infusion  following  dilution  into  an  intravenous  infusion  bag containing saline. The  final  formulation  for  Vistide  was  selected  based  on  the  clinical  dosing  requirements  and  the physicochemical properties of cidofovir. Due to the infrequent dosing schedule, Vistide is formulated as a non-preserved, single use product. The medicinal product strength was based on estimated clinical dosing requirements. One vial of Vistide can be used for patients with a bodyweight of up to 76 kg at the 5 mg/kg dose. Development pharmaceutics The  different  parts  of  the  dossier  substantiate  the  development  of  a  concentrate  for  solution  for infusion of acceptable chemical and pharmaceutical quality. Preformulation studies were carried out in order to identify the solubility and stability characteristics of cidofovir. The stability of cidofovir in water is highest at pH between 8.5 and 10.5 but delamination of glass vials occurs at this high pH. A pH of 7.4 was selected as a compromise between maximum chemical  stability,  aqueous  solubility,  buffering  capacity  of  cidofovir  and  container  compatibility. Therefore apart from sodium hydroxide or hydrochloric acid necessary to adjust pH to 7.4, no other excipients are present in the formulation to be marketed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A program of drug substance stress testing under conditions of extremes of heat, light, acid/base and oxidative  conditions  has  been  performed.  Deamination  to  the  corresponding  uracil  analog-HPMPU appears to be the only route of degradation. HPMPU is formed up to 6% levels cumulatively during the terminal sterilisation and during shelf-life. A proposed 1% overage is incorporated into the product to compensate for part of this loss. Toxicological relevance of the expected HPMPU level of exposure in  routine  clinical  use  has  been  considered  not  significant  based  on  dosing  considerations  and  the results from specific pre-clinical studies conducted to assess HPMPU toxicity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Method of preparation

The manufacturing process is well controlled and in-process testing is adequate to ensure consistent quality in the product.

The two following minor points of clarification have been addressed. The maximal holding time prior to  filtration  had  initially  been  considered  too  long  and  has  been  reduced  to  72  hours.  Overkilling conditions during the terminal steam sterilisation are used to provide a sterility assurance level (SAL) of 10 -6 . The impact on HPMPU formation is minor, from 0.4% to 0.6%.

Levels of residual solvents are below those of toxicological relevance based on historical batch data. However since the applicant  is  intending  to  test  10  more  productions  batches  these  data  should  be provided on an ongoing basis for further reassurance.

Control of starting materials Cidofovir is manufactured as a single isomer by controlling the chiral purity of the synthetic starting materials. The enantiomeric purities of all batches of drug substance produced to date are above 97% (S)-enantiomer. Extensive studies on cidofovir solutions over a wide  range  conditions have demonstrated that racemisation does not occur. Furthermore, no decreases in enantiomeric purity were seen in drug product stability studies for 27 months. Batch analysis covering the period 1990 to 1995 for use in clinical, preclinical and formulation/stability studies have been provided. The impurities are all related to cidofovir and have all  been  present  in  lots  of  drugs  substances  used  in  toxicology  and  clinical  studies.  None  of  the impurities  are  metabolites.  Levels  of  impurities  present  in  the  drug  substance  manufactured  at  full scale are low, total related substances appear to be less than 2.6 % and enantiomeric purity is greater than  99.4  %.  Limits  of  impurities  and  degradants  in  drug  substance  have  been  narrowed  to  levels which comply with both stability data and ICH guidelines, except for HPMPU. Control of finished product The finished product consists of an aqueous solution (75 mg/ml) adjusted to a target pH value of 7.4. A rationale for the routine tests selected and specifications is presented. The excipients used in the manufacture  of  Vistide  are  water  for  injection,  sodium  hydroxide,  hydrochloric  acid  and  nitrogen which are of the appropriate compendial quality. For immediate packaging material, studies have been performed for the selection of the appropriate vials  resistant  to  the  high  pH  of  Vistide.  Satisfactory  specifications  for  the  container  and  closure components have been provided. The packaging materials have been subjected to rigorous integrity testing and have been found to be satisfactory. Particular emphasis has been placed on the sourcing of glass vials. Particulates found in early stability studies  were  identified  as  glass,  resulting  from  delamination  of  the  vials.  This  has  been  considered critical.  However  an  acceptable  quality  level  for  the  presence  of  glass  particles  detected  by  visual inspection has been provided, on the basis of a protocol for stress testing all new lots of glass vials prior to use in the manufacture of Vistide. Each batch of vials used is required to be qualified using satisfactory  methodology.  So  far  only  two  lots  have  been  tested  and  further  results  have  to  be submitted on an ongoing basis. Limits of impurities and degradants in drug product have been narrowed to levels which comply with both stability data and ICH guidelines, except for HPMPU. Stability tests on starting materials Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  drug  substance  is  stable  and  there  is  no  evident  degradation  to  the  uracil  analog  of  other degradants. In the long term, the accelerated and the light stability tests show that neither degradation nor significant changes in the chemical and physical characteristics have been observed in cidofovir when stored under the recommended storage conditions and placed into tightly closed high density polyethylene containers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Stability of the finished product

The  stability  tests  on  the  finished  product  on  Vistide  were  performed  on  3  registration  batches manufactured by Ben Venue Laboratories which is the intended site for commercial manufacturing. The finished product has been stored under a variety of storage conditions which includes 30 ° C for up to 27 months and 40 ° C for 6 months. Freeze thaw cycling studies (at 5 ° C/40 ° C and -20 ° C/30 ° C) have been performed with untoward effect.

The  most  relevant  results  from  the  stability  evaluation  are  the  variations  in  potency  and  HPMPU assays. A slight increase of total impurity levels is observed upon preparation of the sterile aqueous injectable, ranging from 0.9 % to 2.1 % in the batches prepared to date. This is mainly due to HPMPU whose levels further increase to 5.1 % after 27 months stability testing at 30 ° C. The HPMPU has been observed upon extended storage as well. Based on analyses of either the loss of cidofovir potency or the  formation  of  HPMPU, a shelf-life of 36 months at controlled room temperature (15 ° C-30 ° C) is justified.

Compatibility  studies  indicated  that  cidofovir  is  stable  for  24  hours  in  intravenous  admixtures  and containers (0.9% sodium chloride, 5 % dextrose). Clarification has been provided with regard to the manufacturer supplying the bag and tubing used in the compatibility studies of the infusions solutions with often used intravenous administration tubing. In addition a precautionary statement under section 6.2 of the SPC has been included. Aside from a few minor remarks, two major concerns in the chemical and pharmaceutical part of the documentation  were  raised.  The  first  one  was  the  formation  of  the  HPMPU  upon  sterilisation  and storage. An overage of 1.0 % was proposed to compensate for losses of cidofovir during the terminal sterilisation  cycle  and  storage.  This  was  considered  as  acceptable  since  the  concern  regarding  the toxicity  risk  from  this  degradant  has  been  properly  addressed.  The  second  one  regarded  the compatibility of glass vials with the high pH necessary for cidofovir stability. This has been resolved by careful selection of supplies of glass vials and by stress testing of all new lots of glass vials prior to the manufacture of Vistide. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Pharmacodynamics Cidofovir is an acyclic phosphonate analogue of deoxycitidine monophosphate. In cells it is converted to the active form, cidofovir diphosphate, by cellular enzymes. Unlike regular nucleosides, cidofovir contains  a  phosphate-carbon  bond  which  is  not  susceptible  to  degradation  by  hydralases  like  the phosphate-oxygen-carbon linkage. Cidofovir is not dependent on viral infection for its phosphorylation and can therefore prime cells to an antiviral state prior to infection. Intracellular  metabolism  of  cidofovir  progresses  via  the  monophosphate,  diphosphate  and  choline phosphate compounds. Data from cell cultures indicate extended half-lives of 17 and &gt;48 hours for cidofovir diphosphate and cidofovir-choline phosphate respectively. These compounds were suggested to act as a possible intracellular cidofovir reservoir. Animal  studies  suggested  that  uptake  of  cidofovir  into  cells  was  slow  using  an  endocytosis mechanism. Cidofovir  diphosphate  is  the  intracellularly  active  molecule  that  inhibits  DNA  polymerase.  The incorporation  of  a  single  molecule  of  cidofovir  causes  DNA  synthesis  to  slow  down.  Selectivity  is achieved  because  cidofovir  diphosphate  has  a  higher  affinity  for  viral  DNA  polymerase  than  for mammalian polymerases. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Cidofovir has shown activity in a broad spectrum of herpes viruses including CMV. In several animal models of viral infections, i n  vivo efficacy was shown following infrequent dosing post-inoculation and  following  prophylactic  doses  administered  several  days  pre-inoculation.  However  studies  of inhibition  of  human  CMV  replication  are  limited.  Some  data  have  been  obtained  in in  vivo experiments and in animal models using human and non human viruses.

Cidofovir inhibited human CMV DNA synthesis in cell culture in a concentration-dependent manner within the concentration range of 0.04 to 4 µg/ml. At 4 µg/ml viral DNA synthesis was completely

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

inhibited. Cidofovir affected cell proliferation only at a concentration that was 100- to 500 fold higher than  effective  antiviral  concentrations.  Since  these  data  are  very  concise  they  can  only  be  used  to support the treatment of human CMV infections.

Combination of cidofovir with ganciclovir, foscarnet or acyclovir produced synergistic inhibition of human CMV replication.

Very limited data are presented on the selection of cidofovir resistant human CMV strains either in vitro or in vivo . In vitro cross resistance to cidofovir occurred with ganciclovir selected mutations in DNA  polymerase  gene  but  not  with  mutations  in  the  gene  involved  in  the  phosphorylation  of ganciclovir  (UL97  gene).  No  cross  resistance  between  foscarnet  and  cidofovir  was  seen  with foscarnet-selected mutants. In vitro resistance induction experiments demonstrated the selection of a human CMV harboring a mutation in the polymerase gene. This virus was 20-fold less susceptible to cidofovir  than  the  wild  type  isolate  and  expressed  8-fold  reduced  susceptibility  to  ganciclovir,  but unchanged sensitivity to foscarnet.

Coadministration of probenecid may reduce nephrotoxicity by reducing the accumulation of cidofovir in  kidney  tissue  by  blocking  the  anion  transport  system  responsible  for  active  tubular  secretion. Results of two monkey and two rabbit studies were not conclusive as to whether or not probenecid influences cidofovir disposition.

Cidofovir  did  not  interact  with  several  antiviral  agents  commonly  used  to  treat  AIDS  patients. Combination of zidovudine inhibited bone marrow cell growth in a dose dependent manner. In  clinical  isolates,  ganciclovir  resistant  human  CMV  remained  sensitive  to  inhibition  by  cidofovir. Cidofovir selected mutants were cross resistant to ganciclovir but remained susceptible to foscarnet. The reporting of the secondary pharmacology studies was generally inadequate to allow assessment. In the one adequately reported study a single dose of cidofovir 5 mg/kg administered intravenously to the rat had no effect on blood pressure and heart rate. Therefore reassurance concerning this aspect of the safety of cidofovir must be gained from the clinical data. Pharmacokinetics In vitro protein binding of cidofovir in plasma and serum in rat and human was very low, &lt;0.5% and &lt;10% respectively. Volume of distribution of cidofovir in various species was generally above 0.5l/kg suggesting distribution in total body water. After administration of radiolabelled cidofovir to rabbits a wide  distribution  of  drug-related  compound  was  observed.  The  highest  levels  were  seen  in  kidney tissue.  Passage  of  the  blood  brain  barrier  was  observed  but  levels  were  much  lower  than  those observed in  kidney  tissue.  In  rabbits  the  ocular  levels  reached  in  were  lower  than  those  in  plasma. Passage of radiolabelled cidofovir across the placenta barrier was observed in pregnant rats. Excretion into milk was not examined in lactating animals. After  a  single  intravenous  cidofovir  dose  the  terminal  half-lives  ranged  from  1-9  hours  in  animals. Using  radiolabelled  material,  a  longer  terminal  half-life  of  33  hours  was  observed  in  monkeys attributed to the long intracellular half-life of the phosphorylated metabolites of cidofovir. In  all  species  cidofovir  is  predominantly  eliminated  unchanged  via  the  kidney.  Phosphorylated metabolites were not observed in plasma or urine and limited data on rats suggest that metabolism is negligible.  The  renal  clearance  of  cidofovir  was  stated  to  exceed  the  corresponding  published glomerular filtration rates indicating an active tubular secretion of cidofovir. Toxicokinetic data indicated that cidofovir exposure increased proportionally with increasing dose. In the  repeated  dose  studies,  the  exposure  increased  over  time  and  at  the  higher  doses  which  likely occurred as a result of the renal toxicity. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Dose extrapolation

Interspecies  scaling  of  cidofovir  exposure  was  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the  area  under  the  plasma concentration curve (AUC) for the various species. To obtain similar exposure of animals as that of humans, 1.5 (monkey), 2 (rabbit) or 5 (rat) times higher doses were estimated to be required.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Toxicology

The  single  dose  toxicity  after  intravenous  administration  was  evaluated  in  rodents,  rabbits  and  in cynomolgus monkeys. The maximum non-lethal intravenous dose was &gt;800 mg/kg in rodents, &gt;100 mg/kg  in  rabbits  and  40  mg/kg  in  monkeys  (corresponding  to  a  human  dose  of  about  27  mg/kg). Nephrotoxicity  was  the  primary  systemic  toxicity  in  all  species,  occurring  at  50  mg/kg  in  rabbits (corresponding to a human dose of 9 mg/kg) and 150 mg/kg in monkeys.

The main repeat dose toxicity studies with intravenous administration of cidofovir were conducted in rats (up to 26 weeks) and cynomolgus monkeys (up to 13 weeks). In both species, nephrotoxicity was the  dose  limiting  toxicity.  Coadministration  of  probenecid  resulted  sometimes  in  amelioration  of nephrotoxicity.  No  conclusion  can  be  drawn  whether  the  probenicid  regimens  used  in  toxicology studies were optimally protective. Consequently, relevance of the probenicid treatment regimens used in the toxicology studies for the human patient situation is unknown.

Genotoxicity studies showed that cidofovir was not mutagenic in the Ames test. However, it showed a dose  dependent  clastogenic  effect  in  human  peripheral  lymphocytes  and  it  was  clastogenic  at  high toxic/lethal doses in the in vivo mouse micronucleus assay.

Decreased red and white blood cell parameters, bone marrow (erythroid and/or myeloid) depletion, hypospermia,  testicular  degeneration,  lymphoid  depletion  of  thymus  and  lymph  nodes  were  also observed. In addition, rats showed uterine glandular epithelial hyperplasia and monkeys hepatocellular hypertrophy.  Comparisons  of  AUC  values  showed  that  all  toxicological  findings  occurred  at subtherapeutic exposure levels. There was one 52 week study where monkeys received weekly bolus injections of cidofovir with or without  coadministration  of  probenecid.  This  study  indicated  that  probenecid  resulted  in  some  less nephrotoxicity  but  was  without  effect  on  testicular  toxicity.  However,  due  to  lack  of  data  it  is  not possible to evaluate the relevance of probenecid treatment for the human situation. The toxicity of the uracil analogue degradation product was studied in a single study and a repeat dose study in rats. The minimum lethal single intravenous dose was &gt;100 mg/kg. There were no changes in rats  administered  intravenous  HPMPU  once  a  week  for  4  consecutive  weeks  at  doses  up  to  120 mg/kg/week. In acute and subchronic safety studies, HPMPU has been shown to be safe and well tolerated at doses greater than 200 times the potential human exposure. Although  the  enantiomeric  purity  of  the  drug  substance  has  been  established,  the  applicant  has undertaken toxicology studies of the (S/R)-isomer mix or the (R)-isomer in both rats and monkeys. No deaths were observed. In one monkey study there were signs of toxicity in a single animal: increased body  weight  and  creatinine  clearance.  Since  the  enantiomeric  purity  of  cidofovir  is  carefully controlled  at  the  drug  substance  level  and  no  racemisation  has  been  observed  under  any  storage condition, no clinical or safety issues regarding the (R)-enantiomeric are expected. The reproductive toxicity of cidofovir was evaluated in rats (segment I-III) and rabbits (segment II). The doses used were low. In the rat and rabbit reproductive toxicity studies, cidofovir was embryotoxic and embryo-lethal at maternotoxic dose levels. In the segment III study the rationale for the subcutaneous route of administration and the dose levels employed were not stated. There were no adverse treatment related effects, but the value of this study is uncertain. Local injection site lesions recorded in a rat 13 week intravenous repeat dose study were considered to be related to the administration technique and concentration of the compound. They did not occur in a subsequent 26 weeks study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Carcinogenicity  studies  were  not  conducted.  In  the  repeat  dose  toxicity  studies  there  were  also findings  of  tumours.  Mammary  adenocarcinomas  were  observed  in  female  rats  after  26  weeks intravenous administration (50% of the rats) and 19 weeks subcutaneous administration (a dose related increase  in  mammary  adenocarcinomas  in  female  rats  was  noticed  with  subcutaneous  administered cidofovir at doses up to 15 mg/kg/week). Both studies reported carcinomas in the Zymbal's gland of the  external  auditory  ear  canal,  with  the  highest  incidence  after  intravenous  administration  (13%  of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

males and 7% of females from the high dose 15 mg/kg/week equivalent in humans based on AUC to 2.8 mg/kg/week). It was suggested, that a genotoxic mechanism may be behind the observed tumours since cidofovir was found to be clastogenic both in vitro and in vivo . No neoplastic or pre-neoplastic lesions were observed in monkeys exposed to cidofovir for 52 weeks.

The  findings  of  tumours  in  rats  are  a  cause  of  concern  since  they  appeared  after  short  periods  of exposure. Furthermore, safety margins can not be established since, based on AUC values, tumours were observed at systemic exposure in rats lower than that observed in clinical use. These tumors are unlikely to have any clinical relevance because the duration of treatment in the patient population is relatively  short.  Therefore  use  of  cidofovir  should  be  acceptable  in  AIDS  patients  with  short  life expectation.

Binding  of  cidofovir  to  plasma  proteins  was  evaluated  in  preclinical  studies  over  the  concentration range of 0.25 µgr/ml to 25 µg/ml using 14 C labeled cidofovir in pooled rat plasma or serum and was found to be negligible (&lt; 0.5%) over the entire concentration range.

The applicant has provided a brief discussion of the possible risk to the environment. Based on the low yearly volume predicted for use and the fact that the product will undergo considerable dilution in the sewerage  system  upon  disposal,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  clinical  use  of  cidofovir  will  result  in  any untoward environmental concerns. 4. Clinical aspects Clinical pharmacology Studies GS-92-101, GS-92-102 and GS-92-103 were  phase  I/II  studies  conducted  on  HIV  infected patients  with  (GS-92-101  and  GS-92-103)  or  without  (GS-92-102)  asymptomatic  CMV  infection. Patients received doses ranging from 0.5 to 10 mg/kg/week via different routes of administration and following various dosage schedules. Dose dependent nephrotoxicity was the major limiting toxicity and the main dose defining criterion both for induction and maintenance treatments. The applied dose regimens were based on the non toxic effect levels of the drug without considering antiviral activity. In  order  to  prevent  toxicity,  probenecid  and  intravenous  hydration  was  administered.  However,  no explanations of the chosen administration regimens were provided. Due to lack of antiviral activity data, the efficacy of cidofovir can not be evaluated in these studies. With respect to safety, nephrotoxicity was the main dose limiting toxicity. There were also signs of bone marrow toxicity as well as probenecid related allergic reactions. Pharmacokinetic studies The  human  pharmacokinetics  of  single  and  repeated  doses  of  cidofovir  have  been  investigated  in 48  patients  in  studies  GS-92-101,  GS-92-102,  GS-92-103  and  in  one  clinical  study,  GS-93-107. Pharmacokinetics of cidofovir at the 5 mg/kg intravenous dose with concomitant oral probenecid and previous saline hydration has only been studied in 6 patients (3 from study 103 and 3 from study 107). The mean oral bioavailability of cidofovir at a 10 mg/kg dose was less than 3%. All intravenous infusion administrations were given as a 1 hour infusion after dilution in 100 ml of 0.9% saline. The mean serum levels after a single intravenous infusion of 3 mg/kg without intravenous hydration  and  without  probenecid  or  5  mg/kg  was  7±2  µg/ml  or  20±7µg/ml,  respectively.  In  both cases,  terminal  half  life  was  2±1  hour,  systemic  clearance  was  150  ml/hr/kg  and  the  steady  state volume  of  distribution  was  0.5±0.2 l/kg. Intravenous single doses of 1-10 mg/kg  cidofovir demonstrated  dose  independent  kinetics.  The  presented  pharmacokinetic  data  are  not  enough  to demonstrate  a  consistent  effect  of  probenecid  and/or  hydration  on  the  volume  of  distribution  of cidofovir. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The major route of elimination is by renal excretion of unchanged drug via glomerular filtration and tubular  secretion.  In  patients  with  normal  renal  function,  over  90%  of  the  intravenous  dose  was recovered unchanged in the urine over 24 hours.

Kinetics in patients with renal or hepatic impairment have not been investigated. No data are available concerning  the  pharmacokinetics  of  cidofovir  in  elderly  and  children.  A  meaningful  comparative analysis  of  the  efficacy  and  safety  profiles  of  intravenous  cidofovir  between  genders  could  not  be conducted due to the small number of females who have been treated with the drug.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Interactions  with  probenecid  are  complex  and  not  fully  understood.  Studies  included  multiple combinations of hydration and dosing with probenecid. Protocol GS-92-101 reported that administration of probenecid as a 4 g course, together with prehydration with a litre of normal saline had no significant effect on the kinetics of 3 mg/kg cidofovir. In protocol GS-92-103 a 2 g course of probenecid in conjunction with prehydration did not affect kinetics of 5 mg/kg cidofovir, while a 4 g course with the same hydration resulted in an approximate doubling of the end of infusion cidofovir concentration (from 12 to 26 µg/ml), doubling of the AUC, and reduction of the clearance and volume of distribution values to roughly half those seen with hydration alone.

Kinetics of zidovudine alone and in conjunction with several dose levels of cidofovir were evaluated in a small numbers of patients in protocol GS-92-102. Results showed considerable variability and no consistent effect on the kinetics of either drug was demonstrated.

Study GS-93-106 was a multicenter, randomised and controlled study of the safety and efficacy of intravenous  cidofovir  for  the  treatment  of  peripheral  CMV  retinitis  in  AIDS  patients  previously untreated for retinitis.

Clinical experience Efficacy As  the  demonstration  of  a  prolonged  intracellular  effect  on  the  inhibition  of  CMV  replication  by cidofovir  or  any  of  its  known  metabolites  was  not  done,  efficacy  analysis  relied  solely  on  the demonstration of a positive effect of the drug on the clinical progression of retinitis. The  diagnosis  of  CMV  retinitis  was  made  by  indirect  opthalmoscopy  and  supported  by  culture  of CMV from urine, blood throat, or other sites. A negative CMV culture did not rule out CMV retinitis. Efficacy analysis was based mainly on study GS-93-106 with some additional information from study GS-93-107.  Both  trials  presented  data  on  time  to  progression  of  retinal  lesions  as  the  primary endpoint. Study GS-93-105 was a multicenter, randomised controlled phase II/III trial designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of intravenous cidofovir in the treatment of previously untreated peripheral CMV retinitis. Sixty four patients were randomised to one of three groups: deferred treatment (no treatment until  CMV  retinitis  progression);  or  immediate  treatment  with  cidofovir  injection  5  mg/kg  once weekly for  2  weeks  (induction)  followed  by  intravenous  maintenance  at  3  mg/kg  once  every  other week; or immediate treatment with cidofovir injection 5 mg/kg once weekly for 2 weeks (induction) followed by intravenous maintenance at 5 mg/kg once every other week. Time to progression of  CMV retinitis  was  assessed  at  regular  time-points  by  direct  opthalmoscopy (retinal  photographs).  Patients  were  to  be  treated  until  clinical  evidence  of  progression,  extraocular CMV disease , treatment limiting toxicity or death. The median time to progression of retinitis was 64 days for the 3 mg/kg maintenance group compared to 21 days in the deferred treatment group (log-rank p=0.052). The median time to progression was not reached for the 5 mg/kg maintenance group (log-rank p=0.004 for the comparison with deferred treatment). The median time of taking cidofovir was 8 months. Rates  of  increase  of  retinal  area  affected  by  CMV  over  time  were  significantly  smaller  in  both cidofovir  treated  groups  when  compared  to  the  deferred  patients,  with  the  5  mg/kg  dose  showing better results than the 3 mg/kg dose (0.34%/month and 0.8%/month increases of retinal area affected by CMV, respectively). The effect of both treatment regimens on CMV viraemia or viruria was not statistically significant and was not considered relevant for efficacy analysis. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Eligibility criteria included diagnosis of HIV infection according to CDC (Center of Disease Control) criteria,  previously  untreated  CMV  retinitis,  age  between  13  to  60,  preserved  renal,  hepatic  and hematological functions. Exclusion criteria included evidence of retinitis considered as non peripheral, previous  or  ongoing  therapy  with  ganciclovir,  foscarnet,  CMV  hyperimmune  immunoglobulin, acyclovir  or  any  other  anti  CMV  investigational  drugs  (although  previous  prophylaxis  with  either agent  could  be  considered),  clinically  significant  cardiac  disease  or  concomitant  treatment  with

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

potentially nephrotoxic agents.

Forty-eight  patients  were  randomised  to  receive  either  deferred  (n=23,  no  treatment  until  CMV retinitis progression) or immediate treatment with cidofovir at the dose of 5 mg/kg once weekly for 2 weeks  (induction)  followed  by  5  mg/kg  every  2  weeks  (n=25  maintenance).  All  patients  received prehydration with 1 l saline and a 4 g course of oral probenecid ( 2g 3 hours prior to infusion, and 1g 2 and 8 hours after). Sixteen of the 23 patients in the deferred group crossed over and received cidofovir treatment  following  CMV  progression.  Forty  six  patients  (96%)  were  male.  The  mean  age  was  38 years.  The  median  CD4  cell  counts  were  6/mm 3 and  9/mm 3 for  immediate  and  deferred  groups respectively,  revealing  advanced  immunosuppression.  A  third  of  patients  received  AZT  during  the study. The protocol required dose reduction to 3 mg/kg if proteinuria occurred, and this was done in  5 immediate treatment patients and 7 crossover patients.

This study randomised up to 150 patients. Of these patients, only the first 100 were assessed by retinal photographs and included in the primary efficacy analysis. The patients, predominantly male, had a mean  age  of  40  years.  Median  CD4  cell  counts  were  of  5-7/mm 3 .  12%  of  the  patients  received zidovudine during the study.

The  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  median  time  to  progression  of  retinitis  or  death.  Retinitis  was assessed using retinal photographs evaluated by staff blinded to treatment allocation. Median  time  to  retinitis  progression  in  the  treatment  group  (n=25)  was  120  days  (95%  CI  40-134 days).  In  the  deferred  treatment  group  (n=23)  the  median  time  was  22  days  (95%  CI  10-27  days p&lt;0.001;log rank test). CMV retinitis progression occurred in 10 of 25 immediate treatment patients and  in  18  of  the  deferred  patients.  At  the  time  of  data  cut-off,  only  one  patient  was  still  receiving cidofovir and was still at risk of CMV retinitis progression. Nineteen of 25 patients (76%) in the immediate treatment group showed decreased or absent lesions, compared to 4 out of 21 (19%) in the deferred group. Additional evidence of a cidofovir treatment effect was obtained by comparing retinal photographs documenting  time  to  first  progression  for  deferred  patients  to  time  to  second  progression  (first  on cidofovir treatment) for patients receiving crossover cidofovir. The median time to first CMV retinitis progression for evaluable deferred patients was 21 days (95% CI 13 to 23 days) before the start of the crossover. In contrast the probability of progression in the crossover period never rose above 20 % as only 3 patients had documented CMV retinitis progression while on therapy. The difference in time to progression was statistically significant. Thirty-one out of 48 patients were taken out of the study before an endpoint was reached. Twelve of these  were  withdrawn  due  to  adverse  experiences  related  to  one  of  the  study  drugs  of  which  10 presented with signs of nephrotoxicity. Mortality rates were similar between the immediate group (n=12) and the deferred group (n=17). The median survival time based on the Kaplan Meier analysis were 410 and 319 days. Secondary endpoints were planned to consider changes in visual acuity and CMV shedding in blood and urine/semen cultures. Virology assessments were conducted on a small minority of patients at      3 out  of  8  centres,  using  different  methodologies.  Excretion  of  CMV  in  the  urine  has  not  been demonstrated  to  be  predictive  of  CMV  disease  in  humans.  Likewise  viraemia  does  not  necessarily precede nor is associated with the development of CMV disease in humans. Consequently the value of these measures to monitor the virologic effect of therapy is questionable and does not contribute to any significant evidence of efficacy. Study GS-93-107 was an open label, randomised multicenter study designed to compare the efficacy and safety of two maintenance treatment regimens of cidofovir (5 mg/kg versus 3 mg/kg every other week)  in  AIDS  patients  with  CMV  retinitis  progression  despite  treatment  with  ganciclovir  and/or foscarnet, or with intolerance to these drugs. Medicinal product no longer authorised

All patients received the standard induction dose of 5 mg/kg/week for 2 weeks. All cidofovir infusions were given after prehydration with 1l saline and with probenecid (4 g course). All patients received a second litre of saline infusion over 1-3 hours either during or after cidofovir infusion.

Median time to retinitis progression was 115 days for the 5 mg/kg/week (95% CI 70 days-upper limit

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

not reached) and 49 days for 3 mg/kg/week groups (95% CI 35-52 days). The difference in time to progression was statistically significant (p=0.0017; log rank test). Decreased or absent lesions were reported  in  33  of  44  (75%)  patients  in  the  high  dose  group  and  19  of  42  (45%)  in  the  lower  dose group. These differences were statistically significant. There was no evidence for an effect on visual acuity outcome.

## Safety

Nephrotoxicity was the major toxic effect observed in patients receiving cidofovir. Evidence of renal dysfunction  was  manifested  by  proteinuria  ( ≥ 2+, ≥ 100  mg/dl)  in  36%  of  the  patients  and  plasma creatinine  increase  in  16%.  The  renal  injury  may  be  irreversible  in  as  much  as  half  of  the  affected patients. Proteinuria ( ≥ 3+) and creatinine increase ( ≥ 2.0 mg/dl, ≥ 177 µmol/ml) considered as serious adverse experiences were present in 14% and 8% of the patients, respectively.

The  nephrotoxic  potential  of  cidofovir  is  a  matter  of  concern.  Nephrotoxicity  was  the  cause  for treatment discontinuation in 10% of the patients included in the pilot studies, 24% of patients included in pivotal study 106 (n=40) and 15% of the patients in study 107 (N=98). Patients receiving weekly intravenous cidofovir at a dose of 0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg, without concomitant probenecid,  with  or  without  intravenous  saline  prehydration,  did  not  show  evidence  of  significant drug-related nephrotoxicity (as defined by serum creatinine = 177 µmol/l (= 2.0 mg/dl), while patients treated  at  3.0,  5.0  or  10.0  mg/kg  without  concomitant  probenecid  developed  evidence  of  proximal tubular cell injury, including glycosuria, and decreases in serum phosphate, uric acid and bicarbonate, and elevations in serum creatinine. The  recommended  cidofovir  dose-reduction  from  5  mg/kg  to  3  mg/kg,  once  some  sign  of  renal dysfunction developed, in study 107 did not seem to decrease in a significant way the nephrotoxic effects of the drug. Care must be taken in order to ensure that the clinical use of cidofovir will not increase  the  already  important  morbidity  of  this  group  of  patients.  In  particular,  it  is  important  to monitor renal function (including proteinuria) carefully both pre- and on-treatment in order to avoid treatment  of  patients  with  pre-existing  renal  dysfunction  and  to  suspend  treatment  as  soon  as biological signs of nephrotoxicity develop. To  minimise  the  potential  for  nephrotoxicity,  patients  should  receive  a  course  of  probenecid, administered orally with each cidofovir dose. In addition, to probenecid, patients must receive a total of  one  litre  of  0.9%  (normal)  saline  solution  intravenously  immediately  prior  to  each  infusion  of cidofovir. Suspected reactions to probenecid (fever, rash, headache, and/or nausea) were reported in at least  half  the  treated  patients,  although  these  were  mostly  transient  and  required  discontinuation  in only 3-7% of patients. Concomitant administration of cidofovir and other potentially nephrotoxic agents is contraindicated. The  safety  of  cidofovir  has  not  been  evaluated  in  patients  receiving  other  known  potentially nephrotoxic agents. It is recommended to discontinue potentially nephrotoxic agents at least 7 days before starting cidofovir. Haematological toxicity was also evident in most of the studies. Both the red and white cell lines seem to  have  been  affected,  although  neutropenia  was  more  frequently  observed.  Both  early  and  pivotal trials indicated that cidofovir might cause neutropenia which was reversible. Ocular  hypotony  was  observed  in  four  patients  (3  from  study  107  and  one  from  study  103).  Its potential consequences on eye function were unclear. The condition seems to be reversible at cessation of treatment. Following these reports ocular pressure measurements were added to the protocol. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the first periodic safety update (PSUR, 23 April 1997 to 22 October 1997) the CPMP attention was drawn  to  28  cases  of  iritis/uveitis  among  cidofovir  treated  patients.  As  reported  by  the  Marketing Authorisation Holder, acute iritis developed in 11/43 patients occurring at a mean of 4.9 days after infusion  of  cidofovir.  Hypotony  of  the  ocular  globe,  defined  as  a  50%  reduction  in  intraocular pressure,  occurred  in  4  patients  with  iritis  and  in  no  patients  without  iritis.  Five  of  six  eyes  with hypotony had clinically significant ophtalmological problems associated with it (choroidal detachment,  retinal  detachment,  macular  fold  or  a  significant  reduction  of  visual  acuity).  This information has been included in the relevant parts of the product information.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Following  the  3 rd and  4 th periodic  safety  updates  with  the  occurrence  of  hearing  disturbances, pancreatitis  and  ocular  hypotony  and  including  updated  information  on  nephrotoxicity  (fatalities reported in patients with cidofovir-related renal failure), the relevant parts of the product information (section 4.8 of the SPC and PL) were updated.

Mortality rates were similar in both immediate and deferred treatment groups in protocol 106 and in both  dosage  groups  of  protocol  107.  All  patients  were  considered  to  have  died  from  medical complications of AIDS, except for one suicide. Analysis of deaths in study 105, 106, 107 indicates that  mortality  following  initiation  of  intravenous  cidofovir  has  not  been  drug  related  and  survival appears comparable to patients receiving standard therapies for CMV retinitis.

Non-AIDS-related malignancies were not reported during or after cidofovir treatment. However, the follow-up period for most patients is relatively short. Recent advances in prophylaxis for AIDS related infections,  general  improvement  in  care  and  the  development  of  new  anti  HIV  drugs  may  help  in prolonging  the  life  expectancy  for  these  patients,  therefore  increasing  the  risk  for  occurrence  of cidofovir related malignancies. Overall up to about a third of patients discontinued cidofovir because of adverse effects. Nephrotoxicity  is  the  major  side  effect  observed  in  patients  treated  with  Vistide.  Evidence  of  renal dysfunction  is  manifested  by  proteinuria  and  plasma  creatinine  increase.  In  order  to  minimise  the potential for damage to the kidneys, intravenous fluids and probenecid tablets are administered with each  dose  of  Vistide.  Neutropenia,  nausea  without  vomiting,  alopecia,  asthenia  and  fever  expected frequencies are also  very  common.  Other  adverse  events  expected  to  occur  commonly  are: iritis/uveitis, decreased intraocular pressure, dyspnoea, pneumonia and nausea with vomiting. Ocular hypotony, hearing disturbances and pancreatitis were reported through the post-marketing spontaneous reporting system.Very common undesirable effects in controlled clinical trials possibly or probably related to probenecid include: gastrointestinal disorders (nausea with and without vomiting), skin disorders (rash), general disorders (fever). Undesirable  effects  reported  through  the  postmarketing  spontaneous  reporting  system  include: eye disorders (uncommon:  uveitis/iritis; rare: ocular hypotony), ear disorders (very rare: hearing disturbances); gastrointestinal disorders (rare: pancreatitis); Renal and urinary disorders (uncommon: renal failure). 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment Vistide is an intravenous formulation of cidofovir, a cytidine nucleotide analogue inhibitor of human CMV replication intended for induction and maintenance treatment of CMV retinitis in AIDS patients. Major potential benefits for cidofovir include its efficacy, demonstrated in clinical studies, in slowing the  progression  of  CMV  retinitis  in  AIDS  patients  and  a  more  favourable  regimen  of  drug administration over the other two currently available drugs (ganciclovir and foscarnet) both in terms of the need for intravenous catheter placement and reduction in hospitalisation. Efficacy  of  cidofovir  with  concomitant  probenecid  in  delaying  the  progression  of  CMV  retinitis  in AIDS patients was demonstrated based on two controlled studies GS-93-105 and GS-93-106. Additionally, data from study GS-93-107 supports the efficacy of the maintenance treatment regimen of 5 mg/kg. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Major risk factors associated with cidofovir treatment include significant nephrotoxicity and potential carcinogenicity.  On  the  basis  of  preclinical  and  clinical  studies,  a  safety  margin  for  the  use  of cidofovir in patients could not be calculated. With regard to treatment dosage regimens, the induction and maintenance dosages were calculated mainly on the basis of the toxicity profile of the drug.

Although the potential for nephrotoxicity of cidofovir, even with concomitant probenecid, is a major point  of  concern,  avoidance  of  treatment  in  patients  with  pre-existing  renal  dysfunction,  careful monitoring  of  renal  function  and  discontinuation  of  therapy  once  signs  of  renal  dysfunction  are observed  may  permit  an  overall  incidence  of  serious  nephrotoxicity  similar  to  that  reported  for alternative products.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Cidofovir is indicated for the treatment of CMV retinitis in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and without renal dysfunction. Until further experience is gained, cidofovir should be used only when other agents are considered unsuitable.

<!-- image -->