---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:17:26
document_pages: 36
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/xigris-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: xigris-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 8.7298737
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 07:43:58.367649
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This  module  reflects  the  initial  scientific  discussion  for  the  approval  of  Xigris.  This  scientific discussion has been updated  until 1 October  2004. For information on changes after 1 October 2004 please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction

Medicinal product no longer authorised Sepsis is an infection-induced syndrome defined as the presence of two or more features of systemic inflammation (such as fever or hypothermia, leukocytosis or leukopenia, tachycardia, tachypnoea or supranormal minute ventilation). Severe sepsis is defined as being sepsis associated with acute organ dysfunction and it results from a generalised inflammatory and procoagulant response to an infection. Current  treatment  of  sepsis  is  largely  based  on  administration  of  antibiotics,  source  control  and supportive treatment (fluids, inotropes, vasopressors, replacement of failing organs). The death rates in some subgroups of patients with sepsis-induced organ failure have decreased; this may be due to the better detection and treatment of the underlying infection or improved supportive care. Nevertheless, it is estimated that the rate of death from severe sepsis ranges from 30 to 50 percent despite advances in critical care. In general and especially during a severe sepsis, the inflammatory and procoagulant host responses to infection are closely related. Inflammatory cytokines, including tumour necrosis factor α , interleukin1 β and  interleukin-6  are  capable  of  activating  coagulation,  whereas  the  procoagulant  thrombin  is capable  of  stimulating  multiple  inflammatory  pathways.  This  may  result  in  diffuse  endovascular injury, microvascular thrombosis, organ ischaemia, multiorgan dysfunction and lead to death. Activated protein C is an important modulator of the coagulation and inflammation associated with severe  sepsis.  Activated  protein  C  is  converted  from  its  inactive  precursor,  protein  C,  by  thrombin coupled  to  thrombomodulin.  Activated  Protein  C  modulates  the  systemic  response  to  infection  via three different mechanisms. Firstly, it exerts an antithrombotic effect by inactivating factors Va and VIIIa consequently  limiting  the  generation of  thrombin.  Secondly,  it indirectly increases the fibrinolytic  response  by  inhibiting  the  plasminogen-activator  inhibitor  1  (PAI-1).  PAI-1  is  a  potent inhibitor of tissue plasminogen activator, the endogenous pathway for lysing a fibrin clot. Finally, as a result  of  decreased  thrombin  levels  induced  by  rhAPC,  the  inflammatory  response  induced  by thrombin is reduced. The conversion of protein C to activated protein C may be impaired during sepsis as  a  result  of  the  down-regulation  of  thrombomodulin  by  inflammatory  cytokines.  Thus,  reduced levels  of  protein  C  are  found  in  the  majority  of  patients  with  sepsis  and  are  associated  with  an increased risk of death. Drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  is  a  recombinant  human  Activated  Protein  C  (rhAPC)  which  has  an identical primary sequence to the endogenous human plasma-derived Activated Protein C. rhAPC has similar properties to those of endogenous human activated protein C. It is an active substance, which has been developed for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care (i.e. severe sepsis). 2. Part II: Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition

Xigris  is  supplied  as  a  powder  for  solution  for  intravenous  infusion.  It  is  formulated  in  5  mg  and 20 mg presentation. The active substance contains a recombinant form of human Activated C Protein (rhAPC).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The detailed composition of both presentations is given in the table below

| Ingredient                            | Quantity per Vial   | Quantity per Vial   | Function                                 |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Active Ingredient                     | Active Ingredient   | Active Ingredient   | Active Ingredient                        |
| recombinant human Activated Protein C | 20 mg               | 5 mg                | Active Ingredient                        |
| Other Ingredients                     | Other Ingredients   | Other Ingredients   | Other Ingredients                        |
| Sodium Chloride                       | 152 mg              | 38                  | Bulking Agent/ Solution-State Stabiliser |
| Citrate 1                             | 30.2 mg             | 7.56 mg             | Buffering Agent                          |
| Sucrose                               | 120 mg              | 30 mg               | Bulking Agent/ solid-state Stabiliser    |

## Specifications

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1 The source of citrate (citrate ion) is a buffer system composed of Citric Acid, Ph.Eur., USP, Sodium Citrate, Ph.Eur., USP, hydrochloric acid, and sodium hydroxide. The source of Citric Acid, Ph.Eur., USP is the rhAPC Drug Substance. The 5 mg and 20 mg presentations are prepared using the same drug product manufacturing solution and thus contain the same excipients at the same relative ratios. The two strengths are prepared by varying  the  amount  of  filling  solution  for  lyophilisation  to  yield  5  mg  and  20  mg  rhAPC. After  reconstitution  the  solution  exhibits  the  same  strength  with  respect  to  all  ingredients  of  the medicinal product. In  order  to  assure  the  nominal  dose  delivery,  a  vial  of  the  proposed  commercial  product,  5mg  will typically  contain  a  6  %  excess  (5.30mg  rhAPC/vial) and  a  vial  of  the  proposed  commercial  20  mg presentation will typically contain an overfill of 4.05% (20.81 mg rhAPC/vial). Reconstitution studies have been performed with regard to dissolution, stability, microbial quality and compatibility with different dispensing material. Container The container is the same for both presentations:  an ammonium sulfate treated type I glass vial of 5  ml  (5  mg  rhAPC)  and  20  ml  (20  mg  rhAPC)  closed  with  butyl  rubber  stoppers  and  sealed  with aluminium seals with flip caps. The container closure systems are adequately described and meet the Ph. Eur. Standards for use with parenteral products. Clinical trial formulae The used clinical trial formulae are well described. Production and control of starting materials

Tests  and  specifications  for  rhAPC  drug  substance  have  been  established  in  accordance  with  the nomenclature  and  principles  described  in  the  ICH  (Q6B)  guidance  document  'Specifications, Test Procedures, and Acceptance Criteria for Biotechnology and Biological Products.' The  specification  limits  for  rhAPC  Drug  Substance  were  established  based  on  experience  with  the manufacture of this product by Eli Lilly and Company and Lonza Biologics Inc. In particular, they were established based on extensive characterization of the rhAPC reference standard, routine testing and additional characterization of clinical trial lots and full-scale consistency lots, stability studies, and analytical methods validation

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  proposed  release  specifications  are  considered  adequate  to  ensure  the  quality  of  the  produced active substance batches.

## Development genetics

## Gene isolations strategy and rationale

The  cDNA  used  for  the  generation  of  the  production  cell  line  for  Lilly  rhAPC  [drotrecogin  alfa (activated)] was derived from the liver of a healthy male donor organ. Since the liver is the primary biosynthetic source of circulating plasma Protein C, it was expected to be the best source for mRNA. Part of the nucleotide sequence of the plasmid includes the coding for a preproprotein of 461 amino acids,  which  corresponds to the complete coding sequence of the human Protein C gene with short flanking sequences.

In  general,  the  manufacturer  has  achieved  a  clear  description  of  the  whole  genetic  development, including plasmids constructions and cell lines isolation, that allows understanding of the way for the final isolation of the producing cell line.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Description of the host cell line The  human  cell  line,  HEK293,  into  which  the  Protein  C  expression  vectors  were  introduced,  was purchased from American Tissue Culture Collection (ATCC). HEK293 from ATCC was  transformed with adenovirus 5 DNA. The Ad5 DNA originally used to transform the cell line is classified as a nononcogenic (Group C) adenovirus. The rationale for the use of the cell line for the production of recombinant human Protein C is based on the ability of this cell to correctly perform a series of complex post-translational modifications that are required for functional activity (see below). Preparation of the production cell line Construction of the expression vector The construction of the final expression vectors with all intermediary steps is extensively described. The transcription of the human Protein C has been described adequately. A restriction/function map of the plasmid pGTC is shown in the dossier and the details of origin and sites of the exact fragments contained in the vector have also been presented. Selection and cloning of production cell line The  generation  of  the  production  line  was  accomplished  by  first  isolating  an  initial  Protein  Cproducing  line  in  order  to  produce  a  clone,  capable  of  higher  production  of  human  recombinant Protein C.  This clone was subcloned to obtain a single cell isolate which was further used to generate the initial certified Master Cell Bank (MCB).  The Manufacturer Working Cell Bank (WCB) was then generated from the MCB. Description of the cell line The initial cell line was extensively tested and found to be negative for the presence of human and nonhuman adventitious agents. Preparation and testing of cells at the limit of in-vitro age for production A number of tests were achieved in order to demonstrate the stability of the expression construct for rhPC.  The evaluation of the stability of the expression construct is based on comparisons of the tests results from the MCB, the WCB and the cells at or beyond the limit of in-vitro age of production.

## Cell Bank System

The whole cell bank system is adequately described.  Characterization testing  of all  cell  banks  has been performed in accordance with ICH Guideline Q5D and study reports are included. The testing protocol for new WCB is fully documented and considered to be adequate.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Production

The  applicant  has  provided  a  flow  chart  with  a  general  overview  of  the  rhAPC  active  substance production.

## Fermentation and harvesting

Cell culture production of the recombinant human protein C (rhPC) zymogen (non-active precursor of rhAPC) is carried out in a bioreactor.

The applicant has provided flow charts illustrating the steps of the process, as well as Critical Control Parameters and Criteria for Forward Processing.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  overall  production  process,  batch  description  and  raw  materials  (culture  media)  are  well documented.  In-process tests and criteria for forward processing are adequate. Process streams which fail to meet forward processing criteria will not be reprocessed. Purification The viral  inactivated  rhPC  raw  material  is  concentrated  and  purified  using  a  pseudo-affinity  anionexchange  capture  chromatography  step.    This  step results in a high degree of purification. Capture  mainstreams  are  combined  to  provide  an  appropriate  quantity  of  rhPC  for  downstream purification.    The zymogen is then converted to rhAPC by batch activation with bovine thrombin. During the assessment, concerns on the bovine origin of thrombin and its purity with regards Factor V and Va were raised to the applicant. Reassuring information on the quality of drug substance ass well as on the bovine thrombin raw material was provided. The activated material is subjected to removal of any potential contaminating viruses. Additional  purification  is  performed.  Updated  information  on  the  final  freezing  step  before  storage and shipping has been adequately documented. Characterization of the drug substance Recombinant  human  Activated  Protein  C  (rhAPC)  is  a  2-chain  glycoprotein  containing  four N-glycosylation sites and 12 disulfide bonds.  The heavy chain contains 250 amino acids, in which seven  residues  are  cysteine  and  three  N-linked  glycosylation  sites  (Asn-248,  -313,  and  -329). The seven cysteine residues form three disulfide bonds within the heavy chain and one disulfide bond between  the  chains.        The  light  chain  contains  one  N-linked  glycosylation  site  (Asn-97)  and 17 cysteine residues, which form eight disulfide bonds within the light chain and one disulfide bond between  the  chains.    The  first  nine  glutamic  acids  on  the  light  chain  are γ -carboxylated  (Gla)  and aspartic acid 71 is β -hydroxylated.  rhAPC has an identical amino acid sequence as human plasmaderived Activated Protein C, but differs from the latter in its glycosylation pattern. The  rhAPC  active  substance  is  a  frozen  aqueous  solution  of  rhAPC  as  well  as  citrate  buffer  and sodium chloride. Full characterization of the active drug substance has been performed on a primary in house reference standard  (RS0289),  which  was  derived  from  rhAPC  produced  using  the  commercial  cell  bank  and manufacturing process. The structure of rhAPC has been established through various physicochemical techniques. The  structures  of  six  rhAPC  full-scale  consistency  lots  were  characterized  and  compared  to  the standard. Physico-chemical characteristics, amino acid/carbohydrate primary structure, secondary and tertiary structure of rhAPC are adequately documented.

The  experimental  data  submitted  for  the  full  scale  lots  provide  a  good  indication  of  a  consistent production with regard to the structural integrity of the rhAPC drug substance.

## Analytical development

rhAPC specific methods were developed at Eli Lilly and transferred to Lonza Biologics. Validation  of  all  product  specific  analytical  methods  is  described  in  detail,  the  reference  standards used are fully documented.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Process validation

Validation  data  are  provided  for  validation  of  the  criteria  for  Forward  Processing  and  the  Critical Process  Parameters  for  each  step  of  the  production  process.  Several  full  scale  commercial  batches were  included  in  the  validation  studies.    Additionally,  specification  testing  has  been  performed  on 10 full scale commercial batches. The data provided demonstrate a good consistency of production.

## Comparison of pilot-scale and commercial processes

During the clinical development program several process modifications were implemented. Preclinical as well as Phase 1 and 2 clinical trial lots were manufactured using the first development process.  Subsequent  optimization  studies  led  to  the  development  of  the  initial  commercial  process which was used to manufacture lots for Phase 3 clinical trials.  The latter process provided improved stability for the drug substance manufacturing solution.  In changing from one to the other process a step  was  added  to  provide  a  greater  level  of  viral  safety  assurance  and  certain  animal-source  raw materials  were  removed.    Finally  and  during  Phase  3  a  slightly  modified  commercial  process  was introduced.    This  later  one  used  a  new  master  and  working  cell  bank  (cloned  from  the  existing working  cell  bank)  and  the  form  of  the  drug  substance  was  changed.    In  addition,  the  citrate concentration in the final elution step was reduced from 20mM to 10mM.

All used packaging material is fully described, and complies with the standards of the Ph. Eur. Container  and  closure  systems  integrity  have  been  thoroughly  investigated,  especially  with regard to drug substance adsorption/absorption, and material leakage.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A summary of the range of assay values obtained for pilot-scale lots produced by the three mentioned manufacturing  processes  have  been  provided  by  the  applicant.    Although,  variability  for  some parameters tended to be considerably greater for the first process, in general, the assay values observed for the first processed material were comparable to those observed using the later processes. The applicant has performed extensive comparability studies between lots produced by the different processes used throughout the development of the drug substance production.  The data provided show that  the  full-scale  drug  substance  lots  meet  the  proposed  specifications,  and  they  give  a  good indication  of  comparability  between  full-scale  and  pilot-scale  lots.    In  addition  to  the  specification assays,  a  diverse  battery  of  additional  characterization  assays  were  performed  to  assess  structural integrity and purity.  It is also important to note that commercial scale lots were used in late phase clinical trials. Impurities The data presented by the applicant demonstrate the capacity of the purification process to effectively remove product as well as process related impurities. Batch results Six full scale batches of rhAPC active substance were tested.  In general, the data provided show a good consistency of production with regard to potency, integrity and purity. Excipients All excipients used are described in either the Ph. Eur or the USP, and the rationale for the choices of the used monograph are justified. Packaging material

## Finished Product

## Development Pharmaceutics

The development pharmaceutics (choice of excipients, freeze drying process, final container, overfill) for  the  rhAPC  final  product  are  adequately  described,  and  provide  a  sound  basis  for  a  good  final product quality.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Method of preparation

The  active ingredient, rhAPC  drug  substance  frozen  solution , produced  at Lonza  Biologics, New Hampshire, US, is transferred  to  the  Final  Product  manufacturing  site  where  formulation  and filling  of  the  dosage  forms  is  done.    Packaging  and  labelling  for  the  EU  will  be  conducted  at  Lilly Pharma, Germany.  EU Release testing will be performed at Eli Lilly, France.

## Manufacturing process

A flowchart of the whole final product manufacturing process (from formulation to packaging) as well as the list of performed in-process controls have been provided.

In general, the manufacturing process and the used equipment is well described.

<!-- image -->

Upon use, the reconstituted drug product is further diluted with sterile 0.9% NaCl solution prior to continuous I.V administration.

Medicinal product no longer authorised During the assessment, a product related inspection was requested by the  CPMP  for  two manufacturing sites, the active ingredient and the manufacturer of the finished product. A re-inspection was requested in order to verify that the implementation of the action plan proposed by  the  manufacturer  (i.e.  resolution  of  GMP  related  deficiencies,  the  evaluation  of  results  of  the PQ-batches, the completion of the shipment validation). The inspection took place in March 2002 and the outcome from the inspection report was favourable and in compliance with the Community Good Manufacturing Practice requirements. Validation of final product manufacturing process The applicant has provided validation data of the active substance for three full-scale lots of each drug product presentation produced at the commercial manufacturing facility.  Product quality for the fullscale lots was comparable to that of the clinical lots produced at pilot-scale. The data presented give a good indication that the final product manufacturing process is reproducible and adequately controlled.  Validation studies data demonstrate a good consistency with regard to the quality of the rhAPC active substance, as well as within different production batches. Specifications and routine tests The  release  specification  limits  were  established  based  on  experience  with  the  manufacture  of  this product. Stability Active substance The company has provided updated drug substance stability data for three pilot-scale and seven full scale batches when stored frozen for up to 24 months. The data provided indicate a good stability of the drug substance. Based on the available data, the shelf life proposed can be granted. Final Product Based  on  the  stability  data  provided  in  the  dossier,  the  proposed  24  months  shelf  life  at  2-8°C  is accepted. Reconstituted Final Product The data submitted by the company support the proposed holding time of 3 hours for the reconstituted Final Product. RhAPC Intravenous Solution

Studies  have  been  conducted  to  assess  the  in-use  stability  of  I.V.  solutions  of  diluted  rhAPC  Drug Product with readily available and commonly used European infusion sets.

The SPC has been adapted accordingly, with a  statement  on  the  types  of  materials  for  NaCl  0.9% solutions  and  infusion  sets,  more  specifically  concerning  the  materials  (PVC,  PE,  PP),  which  have been proved to be compatible with the drug product.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Virological documentation

The producing human cell line has been adequately controlled for contamination with human viruses. Fermentation of the cell line requires several additives of bovine origin and activation of rhPC during the manufacture is achieved by the use of bovine thrombin. Therefore, each lot of additives as well as the  producing  cell  culture  at  the  end  of  each  fermentation  run  is  tested  for  adventitious  viruses. Polyoma  virus  is  not  included  in  routine  testing.  However,  the  production  of  the  bovine-derived substances include steps which might have some capacity to remove or inactivate viruses. A complete validation of these steps on their capacity to inactivate/remove polyoma viruses has been announced. The manufacturing and purification steps of the active substance contribute to the viral safety although complete validation with regard to clearance of bovine polyoma virus is still on-going.

3.

Medicinal product no longer authorised TSE documentation Fetal calf serum used at the MCB and WCB level as well as bovine derived substances which are used during the fermentation process and the bovine thrombin used for activation of rhPC are covered by EDQM  certificates and do not raise concerns. Recombinant  human-insulin used during the fermentation process of rhPC is derived using a WCB free of ruminant materials. TSE safety has been demonstrated sufficiently. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Xigris  is  supplied  as  powder  for  solution  for  infusion  in  two  presentations  :  20  mg  and  5  mg. The  active  substance,  recombinant  human  Activated  Protein  C  (rhAPC),  is  obtained  by  DNA recombinant  technology.    An  inactive  zymogen  (rhPC),  produced  by  a  well  characterised  primary human cell  line  (HEK293),  is  subsequently  activated  by  addition  of  bovine  thrombin,  followed  by several purification steps before storage or formulation of the drug product. Issues  that  remained  unsolved  at  the  time  of  the  December  2001  CPMP  meeting  have  all  been addressed properly in the last responses of the applicant: An appropriate potency (APTT) assay has been developed and validated in accordance with Ph. Eur requirements; All available drug substance and drug product batches have been retested with this new assay, and the submitted results provide assurance on product quality and production consistency, also with regard to the  filling  strategy  proposed  by  the  company.    The  former  has  been  further  confirmed  by  preauthorisation sample testing; In use stability has been checked for commonly available commercial EU sources of infusion sets, and those compatible with the product are mentioned in the SPC. Additional measures have been taken to ensure the absence of residual bovine thrombin impurities. The  requested information regarding product identity specifications, including justification of specification limits (RP-HPLC, Peptide mapping), has been provided. In summary, as the application stands now, the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological documentation is of  an acceptable  quality,  and  provides  a  sound  basis  for  the  production  of  a  well controlled, consistent product, provided the applicant agrees to the list of commitments issued by the CPMP. Part III: Toxico-pharmacological aspects

## Pharmacodynamics

Drotrecogin alfa (activated) is a recombinant human Activated Protein C. The activated protein C is a protease belonging to the serine proteases family. Protein C (and activated protein C) plays a major role in the regulation of coagulation. This activity is enhanced by the non-enzymatic protein cofactor, Protein  S.  The  basis  for  the  antithrombotic  function  of  activated  protein  C  is  its  ability  to  inhibit thrombin  function.  In  addition,  activated  protein  C  is  an  important  modulator  of  inflammation associated with severe sepsis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Part  of  the  pre-clinical  studies  (single-dose,  repeat-dose,  vascular  irritation,  fertility,  and  teratology studies) were conducted with TCC-222, a recombinant activated Protein C product similar to rhAPC in  carbohydrate  structure,  primary  protein  structure,  and  biological  activity.    However,  different processes are used to produce and purify these two recombinant proteins, and the final drug products are formulated in different buffer systems.  Physiochemical differences have been observed between TCC-222 and rhAPC, but it is not known if these differences are clinically relevant.  No comparability studies have been performed on TCC-222 and rhAPC.

## -Antithrombotic activity

Medicinal product no longer authorised Activated  protein  C  inhibits  the  formation  of  thrombin.  Protein C  activation  occurs in  vivo on  the surface  of  intact  endothelial  cells  by  the  catalytic  complex  of  thrombin  and  thrombomodulin,  an integral  membrane  protein.  Activated  protein  C  specifically  acts  as  an  antithrombotic  agent  by hydrolysing  factors  Va  and  VIIIa.  Like  most  of  the  other  factors  regulating  haemostasis,  activated protein  C  functions  as  part  of  a  large  multi-protein  complex  on  the  endothelial  membrane  surface. The  activity  of  activated  protein  C  is  inhibited  by  endogenous  serine  protease  inhibitors  (serpins). These include protein C inhibitor, α 1 -antitrypsin, α 2 -macroglobulin, α 2 -antiplasmin, and plasminogen  activator  inhibitor.  Endogenous  serine  protease  inhibitors  are  natural  inhibitors  for activated protein C, resulting in activated protein C having a very short circulatory activity half-life (less than 30 minutes) in vivo . Antithrombotic and anticoagulant activity of rhAPC was investigated in a guinea pig arteriovenous shunt thrombosis model. Concentration dependent increments in activated partial thromboplastin time were observed in vitro in human and guinea pig blood. RhAPC did not cause a depletion of FV or FVIII. The Css reached in clinical therapeutic conditions is about  50  ng/ml  (well  below  2 µ g/ml).  In  the  animal  models  tested,  rhAPC  exerted  antithrombotic properties at doses that did not increase the bleeding times. -Profibrinolytic property The activated protein C exerts its fibrinolytic activity indirectly via enhanced endogenous fibrinolytic enzyme activities  of  tissue  plasminogen  activator  and  urokinase.  Activated  protein  C  enhances  this activity  by  inhibiting  plasminogen  activator  inhibitor-1  (PAI-1)  and  preventing  the  activation  of thrombin  activatable  fibrinolysis  inhibitor  (TAFI).  The  dose-dependent  inhibition  of  plasminogen activator  inhibitor-1  activity  by  rhAPC  is  observed  at  concentration  of  1-30 µ g  /ml,  well  above therapeutic level. The results indicate that rhAPC inhibited plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 activity in  a  concentration  dependant  manner,  similar  inhibition  caused  by  argatroban  and  Heparin  was  not observed. It was concluded that rhAPC has profibrinolytic activity that is mediated by plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 inactivation. -Antiinflammatory properties While in vitro studies suggest a direct anti-inflammatory role for activated protein C, in vivo responses in anti-ischaemic and anti-inflammatory animal models have not been consistent. In the rat, the antiinflammatory properties of rhAPC are observed at doses ranging from 1 to 20 mg/kg (single injection IV),  well  above  therapeutic  level.  The  clinical  relevance  of  the  direct  anti-inflammatory  activity reported for activated protein C therefore remains unclear.

## -Activity in animal models of sepsis

The effect of rhAPC on Baboon Response to LD100 Escherichia coli was evaluated. This study was performed  to  determine  whether  rhAPC  co-infused  with  LD100 Escherichia  coli would  inhibit  the disseminated  intravascular  coagulation  (DIC)  and  lethal  inflammatory  responses.  Eleven  baboons receiving LD100 Escherichia coli were treated with (plasma derived) activated protein C. Five animals received  40-60mg  total  activated  protein C  prophylactically  and  six  received  the  same  amount  of activated  protein C  therapeutically;  two  baboons  were  used  to  investigate  the  dose  dependent

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

anticoagulant effects of activated protein C. The findings showed that the consumption of fibrinogen (DIC) was inhibited in 10 of 11 animals. Four of these 11 baboons were protected from lethal effects of E.coli.. While some of the 11 animals survived, the data suggested that rhAPC may be effective in this baboon model of gram-negative bacteremia.  However, because of the small sample size, with a single type of gram-negative bacteria used, and with different dosing regimens used, it is difficult to predict whether rhAPC may be beneficial in human patients with severe sepsis.

## -Safety pharmacology

Medicinal product no longer authorised Since activated  protein C  is  a  potent  antithrombotic,  bleeding  might  be  a  potential  pharmacological toxicity. This was confirmed by the literature and the pharmacology and toxicology studies performed. Beyond this, no direct vasoactive effects of rhAPC were demonstrated. In several studies, bleeding was generally limited to surgical sites and was not considered to be substantive. -Pharmacodynamic interactions In  vitro  studies  performed  to  evaluate  the  potential  interaction  between  rhAPC  and  unfractionated heparin  and  low  molecular  weight  heparin  indicated  possible  effects  on  the  pharmacokinetic  and pharmacodynamic  properties  of  rhAPC.  The  effects  of  unfractionated  heparin  and  low  molecular weight  heparin  on  the  activity  half-life  of  rhAPC  were  also  evaluated in  vitro in  plasma,  utilising therapeutic  concentrations  of  unfractionated  heparin  and  low  molecular  weight  heparin  (below 1 U/ml)  and  rhAPC.  No  significant  shortening  or  effect  on  the  activity  half-life  of  rhAPC  was observed; neither with unfractionated heparin nor low molecular weight heparin. There was however an  additive  effect  of  unfractionated  heparin  and  activated  protein  C  on  the  prolongation  of in  vitro activated partial thromboplastin clotting time. This observation was reproduced in vitro with rhAPC. The  additive  effect  of  unfractionated  heparin  and  APC  on  the  prolongation  of  in  vitro  APTT  was shown by the applicant to be almost entirely mediated by antithrombin III. The conclusion of that in vitro assay suggests that increased APTT as a result of heparin/rhAPC synergy might be a concern even at reduced AT-III (up to 25% of normal) levels well below the 59% of normal median baseline level  of  antithrombin  III  found  in  severe  sepsis  patients.  It  would  be  very  difficult  to  adequately address  the  question  of  potential  additive  effects  of  heparin  and  APC  in  animal  models  of  sepsis. This is therefore discussed further in the clinical part of this report. Unlike  unfractionated  heparin,  low  molecular  weight  heparin  at  therapeutic  concentrations  did  not show any synergistic effect on the prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin clotting time by rhAPC. In order to evaluate the potential of rhAPC to interact with aspirin, rhAPC was studied in a guinea pig thrombotic model with or without aspirin and other antiplatelet compounds. RhAPC was found to be synergistic  with  aspirin  in  antithrombotic  activity  without  producing  any  significant  increase  in template bleeding time or any observed increase in bleeding. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic  properties  of  drotrecogin  alfa  activated  were  investigated  in cynomolgus, rhesus monkeys and rodents. -Pharmacokinetic after a single dose administration

RhAPC was given to  male cynomolgus monkeys  as  a  single  intravenous  bolus  dose  of  0.1  mg/kg. The  average  peak  plasma  concentration  was  observed  5  minutes  after  the  administration  and  was 956 ng/mL. Plasma concentrations declined rapidly below 10 ng/mL between 1.5 and 3 hours after the administration. The terminal phase half-life was estimated to be approximately equal to 20 minutes.

A study evaluated the distribution of rhAPC following a single administration in mice. Tissue distribution of radiolabelled rhAPC was investigated in mice after a single dose of 0,2 mg/kg. The highest concentration  was  seen  in  the  liver  5  minutes  after  the  injection.  Further,  radioactivity levels increased at 24 and 168 hours after administration suggesting that metabolites containing 125 I would  be  incorporated  into  macromolecules  in  the  animal  model  investigated.  In  addition,  several

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

published  reports  have  examined  the  tissue  distribution,  metabolism  and  elimination  of  plasmaderived activated Protein C in the mouse, guinea pig, and rabbit proteases. Overall, the data from these studies are consistent with the clearance of activated Protein C from the circulation being mediated by a combination of at least three processes including the inhibition of the enzymatic activity of activated protein  C  by  endogenous  protease  inhibitors,  the  clearance  of  activated  protein  C  and/or  activated protein C-serine protease inhibitor complexes by organs such as liver and kidney, and the degradation of activated protein C and/or activated protein C-serine protease inhibitor complexes by circulating or tissue proteases.

- -Pharmacokinetics after administration of repeated doses

The  potential  toxicity  of  rhAPC  was  investigated  in cynomolgus monkeys  following  a  single intravenous  administration  at  doses  of  25  mg/kg  and  100  mg/kg.  One  control  group  received  Tris acetic  acid  buffer  through  the  intravenous  route.  All  animals  in  the  treatment  groups  exhibited decreased  movement,  subcutaneous  haemorrhage  and  swelling  of  the  inner  site  of  the  thigh. These  signs  were  seen  immediately  or  within  60  minutes  after  administration.  Subsequently,  death occurred in both animals in the 25 mg/kg group and in one animal in the 100 mg/kg group at six hours after delivery. The remaining animal in the high dose group died the following day. Haematological investigations after administration revealed markedly prolonged prothrombin and activated prothrombin times. The pathological findings were subcutaneous bleeding extending from the inguinal to  femoral  regions,  haemorrhage  was  also  seen  under  the  retroperitoneum.  The  cause  of  death  was considered to be related to the loss of a large quantity of blood. Based on these findings the lethal dose was considered to be below 25 mg/kg.

Medicinal product no longer authorised RhAPC  was  administered  to  male rhesus monkeys  at  a  constant  rate  intravenously.  Average concentrations  at  steady  state  (Css)  were  measured  after  administration  of  1,  2,  or  4  mg/m 2 /hr. At all dose levels, steady-state was achieved at 24 hours and levels were maintained through 96 hours. The average Css increased in a dose-related although not strictly dose-proportional fashion. Average steady-state concentrations were also measured after administration of 4.2, 8.3, and 16.7 mg/kg/day. There was a trend towards an increase in volume of distribution and a decrease in plasma clearance with increasing dose. The lack of proportionality was most evident between the 8.3 and 16.7 mg/kg/d dose levels.  Since a major mechanism involved in the clearance of Activated Protein C is through its inactivation via interaction with circulating plasma protease inhibitors, the disproportionately high C ss and AUC (that is, decreased clearance) at the high dose(s) may be related to saturation of the inhibitorcomplex compartment leading to a higher than anticipated measurement of amidolytic activity. A comparative study of pharmacokinetic parameters of rhAPC and plasma derived activated protein C was carried out in cynomolgus monkeys following intravenous administration. The half-life of the two test articles was shown to be different in the initial period after administration. The disappearance of rhAPC was found to be faster than that of plasma derived activated protein C. The half-life of rhAPC was reported  to be slightly shorter  than that of plasma derived activated protein C in a baboon AV shunt model. RhAPC  has unique carbohydrate chains that may cause differences in the pharmacokinetics of rhAPC and plasma derived activated protein C. Toxicology -Single dose toxicity. The single-dose toxicity program of rhAPC was conducted in the mouse and monkey. A single dose toxicity study was performed in ICR mice that were allocated to seven groups, two control groups and 5  groups  of  mice  that  received  0.78,  3.13,  12.5,  50  and  200  mg/kg  IV  of  rhAPC  respectively. Prolongation  of  haemostasis  at  the  injection  site  was  seen  in  animals  that  received  12.5  mg/kg  of product  or  more.  Necropsy  revealed  no  macroscopic  changes  considered  to  be  associated  with  the administration.  No  deaths  occurred  during  the  observation  period  and  the  minimal  lethal  dose  was therefore estimated to be greater than 200 mg/kg bodyweight.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Repeated dose toxicity

The repeated dose toxicity of drotrecogin alfa activated was investigated in rhesus monkeys in a single 96-hour continuous intravenous infusion study and in cynomolgus monkeys in two studies (2-week and 1-month). It was concluded that the responsiveness of rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys to rhAPC utilised in the toxicology studies was comparable to that seen in the baboon in the pharmacodynamic studies.

A 96-hour toxicity study with rhAPC administered by continuous intravenous infusion was conducted in rhesus monkeys.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  the  toxicity  of  rhAPC  when administered at doses of 0, 4.2, 8.3 and 16.7 mg/kg/day (approximately 0, 2, 4 and 8 mg/m 2 /h) with an infusion rate of 1ml/kg/h through a catheter for 96 hours.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Two animals out of 4 in the high dose group died following a haemorrhage. As expected, infusion of rhAPC in all treatment groups resulted in increases in coagulation parameters. Dose-related increases in  prothrombin  time,  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  and  whole  blood  partial  thromboplastin time were measured throughout the dosing period. Moderate to severe haemorrhagic lesions affected the animals in the mid and high dose groups. However, haemorrhagic effects were not distinguishable between control and low dose group. In addition, there was a large intra- and inter-group variation in bleeding time. Based on these findings it was concluded that the no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) was estimated to be 2 mg/m 2 /hr. RhAPC was administered intravenously to cynomolgus monkeys at doses of 0, 0.2, 1 and 5 mg/kg/day for  two  weeks.  Haematological  changes  attributable  to  the  pharmacological  action  of  rhAPC  were noted, including prolonged prothrombin time in the mid- and highdose groups and prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time in all dose groups 15 min after the end of administration. Although these effects  were  still  present  180  minutes  after  dosing,  full  recovery  was  achieved  by  the  next  day. There  were  no  adverse  effects  related  to  the  repeated  dosing.  Although  there  was  a  decrease  in erythrocytic parameters and an increased reticulocyte count, these were considered as being unrelated to rhAPC. Further, a decreased food intake was shown, but without any effect on body weight, in all treatment groups especially in the late stages of dosing. There were no treatment-related changes in ophthalmology,  urinalysis,  blood  chemistry,  occult  blood,  organ  weight,  and  gross  pathology. Consequently, since the observed changes could be attributed to the pharmacological action of rhAPC, 5 mg/kg/day was considered as the non-toxic dose (NOAEL). TCC-222 was administered intravenously to monkeys at the same dose levels as in the previous study over  a  1-month  period.  In  general,  higher  doses  produced  prolongation  of  prothrombin  time  and activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  and  haemorrhaging  at  sites  of  vascular  injury,  occasionally leading to morbidity and death. Effects at lower doses were limited to prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time but without evidence of haemorrhaging. In addition, an intravenous dose toxicity study  of  rhAPC  was  performed  in  Monkeys  with  a  1-Month  Recovery  Period.  RhAPC  was administered  intravenously  to  cynomolgus  monkeys  at  doses  of  0,  0.2,  1  and  5  mg/kg/day  over  a 4 weeks period coupled to a 4-week recovery phase to assess the effects of the test article as well as the  reversibility  of  these  effects.  The  haematological  examination  revealed  prolonged  prothrombin time in all animals in the mid- and highdose group. Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time in all  treatment  groups  was  noted  15  minutes  after  the  end  of  dosing.  These  effects  were  seen  to  be reversible at the end of the recovery period. Histopathological examination revealed some abnormalities  of  megakaryocytes  in  all  treatment  groups.  These  changes  disappeared  during  the recovery period except for those in megakaryocytes.

In  conclusion,  changes  observed  in  monkeys  at  the  same  level  or  in  small  excess  of  the  human exposure during repeated dose studies, were all related to the pharmacological effect of rhAPC and include,  beside  the  expected  prolongation  of  APTT,  decreases  in  haemoglobin,  erythrocytes,  and haematocrit, and increases in reticulocyte count and PT.

## -Reproduction toxicity

A  study  to  investigate fertility  and  reproductive  performance  was  conducted  in  female  rats. The purpose of this study was to investigate any adverse effect of TCC-222 on mating, fertility and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

early embryonic development when administered intravenously to female rats on a daily basis from 14 days prior to mating, throughout the mating period until day 7 of gestation in doses from 0.6, 2 and 5 mg/kg/day.

There  were  no  signs  of  influence  on  reproductive  functions  and  general  toxicity  in  female  rats. The  effects  on  embryonic  and  foetal  development  were  investigated  in  rats  following  intravenous administration  of  TCC-222.  The  study  was  performed  to  investigate  the  influence  of  TCC-222  on pregnant rats and on development of embryos/foetuses when administered intravenously in doses of 0, 0.6, 2 and 5 mg/kg/day to female rats from implantation to closure of the hard palate (day 7-17 of gestation). No deaths or abortions were observed in this study.

Medicinal product no longer authorised There were no significant differences between the control and treatment group regarding parameters such as number of corpora lutea or implantation sites, pre- and post-implantation loss, number of live foetuses, sex ratio and foetal weight. Since the animal studies performed with respect to effects on pregnancy, embryonal/foetal development, parturition and postnatal development are very limited, the potential risk for humans is considered unknown. APC should therefore not be used during pregnancy unless clearly necessary. Furthermore, it is not known whether the product is excreted in human milk or if there is a potential effect  on  the  nursed  infant.  Therefore,  the  patient  should  not  breast  feed  whilst  treated  with  Xigris. This has been adequately reflected in the SPC. -Genotoxicity studies The  mutagenic  potential  of  rhAPC  was  evaluated  in  an in  vitro chromosomal  aberration  test  using human  peripheral  lymphocytes.  It  was  shown  that  the  test  article  did  not  induce  any  structural aberrations  but  a  few  numerical  aberrations  at  high  concentration  in  cultures  treated  for  48  hours. These results indicate that the test article was not clastogenic under the test conditions and that the polyploid  induction  might  be  due  to  the  non-specific  reaction by  the  treatment  within  high concentration in the presence of cytotoxicity. The micronucleus test for rhAPC was performed in CD-1 (ICR) mice following intravenous injection. In  this  study  the  ability  of  rhAPC  to  induce micronuclei in  mice  bone  marrow  erythrocytes  was investigated after a single intravenous administration in male and female mice in doses of 25, 50 and 100  mg/kg. The analysis of bone  marrow smear revealed no significant increase  of  micronucleated erythrocytes. -Carcinogenicity studies In view of the short duration of treatment and in accordance with current guidance documents, studies to assess the carcinogenic potential of rhAPC were not conducted. -Local tolerance Studies  specifically  designated  to  evaluate  the  local  tolerance  of  the  product  were  not  conducted; however,  no  evidence  of  irritation  was  identified  at  the  injection-  or  infusion  sites  in  any  of  the repeated  dose  toxicity  studies.  Additionally,  mixture  of  rhAPC  with  whole  blood  from rhesus monkeys or humans did not cause haemolysis.

## -Immunogenicity studies

A  pilot  toxicity  and  immunogenicity  study  was  performed  in rhesus monkeys  following  an intravenous administration of drotrecogin alfa activated. Rhesus monkeys were given two intravenous infusions of rhAPC. Loading doses of 0, 16, or 80 mg/m 2 were given by intravenous bolus infusion and  were  followed  by  48-  or  72-hour  continuous  intravenous  infusion  of    0,  16  and  80  mg/m 2 /hr.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Eight  weeks  later  the  same  animals  received  a  second  continuous  intravenous  infusion  of  0,  4,  or 8 mg/m 2 /hr over a 72-hour time period.  Treated animals were thereafter observed for an additional 12 weeks.

Severe haemorrhagic anaemia, from bleeding at catheter and venipuncture sites, occurred following the first infusion in both the 16- and 80-mg/m 2 /hr treatment groups; bleeding times were increased in the  80-mg/m 2 /hr-treatment group. There was no evidence of anaemia or haemorrhage following the second  infusion.    Coagulation  parameters  (i.e.  whole  blood  partial  thromboplastin  times,  activated partial  thromboplastin  times,  and  prothrombin  times)  were  increased  in  a  dose-related  manner following the initial treatment phase and again following re-challenge. One animal each in the 4- and 8-mg/m 2 /hr  treatment  groups  was  judged  moribund  and  euthanasied.  Both  euthanasied  animals exhibited lesions consistent with disseminated intravascular coagulation secondary to septicemia.

| Protocol                                                               | Phase             | Design     | Population                                                                  | Duration                                                                                           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study F1K-LC-GUAA/B: Dose- ranging: short infusion to steady state.    | 2 Phase 1 studies | Open-label | 2 x 4 (healthy males)                                                       | 3 single 3 hour IV perfusions per subject separated by 2 wks                                       |
| Medicinal Study F1K-LC-GUAC/D: Dose- ranging: 6 and 24-hour infusions. | 2 Phase 1 studies | Open-label | 32 subjects (24 completed the study) - 51 subjects (43 completed the study) | Two dosing periods 6- and 24- hr IV infusions separated by at least 2 wks (GUAC) and 5 days (GUAD) |
| Study F1K-LC-GUAE: Study in end stage renal disease.                   | Phase 1           | Open-label | 13 subjects (12 completed the study)                                        | One 6-hr IV infusion                                                                               |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Anti-APC IgG antibodies were produced following challenge and rechallenge with rhAPC; however, no adverse hypersensitivity reactions were associated with these nonneutralizing antibody responses. In conclusion, the toxicity observed following treatment with rhAPC was considered an extension of the anticoagulant properties of the compound. -Ecotoxicity/Environmental risk assessment Given the physico-chemical properties of rhAPC and the predicted low concentrations likely to enter the environment, there was no need to carry out further investigations of this particular risk. 4. Part IV: Clinical aspects Drotrecogin alfa is a recombinant human APC developed for treatment of patients with severe sepsis. APC  is  an  important  modulator  of  the  systemic  response  to  infection  and  has  antithrombotic  and profibrinolytic properties. The clinical efficacy of drotrecogin alfa activated has been evaluated in one dose-finding Phase 2 study (EVAA) and a Pivotal Phase 3 study (EVAD). The clinical studies were conducted in accordance with the principles of Good Clinical Practice.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Study F1K-LC-GUAF: Aspirin interaction.                                                                                                                     | Phase 1   | Part A: aspirin alone Part B: single blind crossover design   | Phase 1: 15 subjects Phase 2: 27 subjects                                                  | 2 phases: 1 single dose of aspirin then 2 treatments separated by at least 14 days (aspirin or placebo foll. by rhAPC)   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Study F1K-LC-EVAK: Bolus injection study.                                                                                                                   | Phase 1   | Open-label                                                    | 11 subjects                                                                                | authorised (rhAPC administered either via a bolus or a 6-hr constant rate IV infusion)                                   |
| Study F1K-LC-EVAM: Loading-dose: dose range.                                                                                                                | Phase 1   | Open-label                                                    | 14 subjects                                                                                | Single loading dose followed by a 5.5 hr constant rate IV infusion                                                       |
| Study F1K-LC-EVAB: activated protein C: dose ranging study in hereditary protein C deficient patients                                                       | Phase 1B  | longer Open-label                                             | 9 patients (6 patients enrolled)                                                           | Up to 3 24-hr IV infusions; each infusion separated by a minimum of 3 wks                                                |
| product Study F1K-MC-EVAA: Phase 2 study to determine the safety, pharmacokinetics and effective dose range and dosing duration for rhAPC in severe sepsis. | Phase 2   | no Double blind, placebo controlled, dose ranging.            | Stage 1: 72 patients Stage 2: 59 patients Total 135 enrolled. 131 intent to treat patients | Stage 1: 48-hr continuous IV infusion Stage 2:96-hr continuous IV infusion                                               |
| Study F1K-MC-EVAD: A phase 3 study to determine the efficacy and safety for rhAPC in severe sepsis.                                                         | Phase 3   | Double blind, placebo controlled                              | 1728 patients 1690 intent to treat patients                                                | 96 + 1-hr continuous IV infusion                                                                                         |

The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic features of drotrecogin alfa (activated) were studied in 8 Phase-1 studies involving 112 naive exposures to rhAPC in healthy subjects. These properties were further  investigated  in  one  phase  II  dose-finding  study  (EVAA)  and  in  the  pivotal  phase  III  study (EVAD).

## Pharmacodynamics

## -Mechanism of action

The  Phase  1  studies  were  limited  to  infusions  of  rhAPC  at  0.5  to  50  µg/kg/hr  for  durations  up  to 24  hours.  The  dose-finding  studies  in  healthy  subjects  revealed  a  good  correlation  between  rhAPC infusion  rate,  plasma  rhAPC  concentration,  and  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  prolongation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Activated partial thromboplastin time had to be assayed immediately after blood sampling because of rapid  inactivation  of  rhAPC  by  plasma  serine-protease  inhibitors  (serpins  -  natural  inhibitors  of  the proteases  belonging  to  the  family  of  the  serine  proteases).  Activated  partial  thromboplastin  time increased  about  1.5-fold  during  24-hr  infusion  of  rhAPC  at  24  µg/kg/hr,  and  about  2-fold  at 48  µg/kg/hr.  Prothrombin  time  and  bleeding  time  were  either  slightly  prolonged  within  the  normal range,  or  remained  unchanged.  Factors  V  and  VIII  declined  slightly  while  remaining  within  the normal range. Platelet function was unaffected.

## Pharmacokinetics

Medicinal product no longer authorised -General: Drotrecogin alfa (activated) and endogenous human Activated Protein C are inactivated in plasma by endogenous protease inhibitors but the mechanism by which they are cleared from plasma is unknown. Plasma concentrations of endogenous Activated Protein C in healthy subjects and patients with severe sepsis  are  usually  below  detection  limits  (&lt; 10 ng/ml)  and  do  not  significantly  influence  the pharmacokinetic properties of drotrecogin alfa (activated). The pharmacokinetics of drotrecogin alfa activated was characterised in patients with sepsis. Plasma concentrations of rhAPC were measured using an immunocapture-amidolytic activity assay specific for APC. This method does not distinguish between rhAPC and endogenous activated protein C, but since  the  plasma  levels  of  the  latter  (~2  ng/mL  in  normal  subjects)  are  much  lower  than  those  of administered rhAPC (~30-100 ng/mL at the therapeutic dose), this lack of specificity is not a concern. No  metabolisation  study  with  rhAPC  was  performed  since  it  is  a  short-acting  human  recombinant protein.  Both  endogenous  APC  and  rhAPC  are  rapidly  inactivated  by  the  plasma  serine  proteases inhibitors  (serpins).  The  mean  plasma  clearance  of  rhAPC  in  healthy  subjects  was  28  L/hr. Steady state was reached in less than 2 hours after starting the infusion. Two studies were performed to evaluate the benefit of loading doses (bolus or injections). The volume of distribution of rhAPC at steady-state was 10 to 17 L in healthy subjects, close to the volume  of  extracellular  fluid.    The  mean  plasma  concentration  in  healthy  subjects  at  steady-state, based on all infusions given during Phase 1 studies, was 70 ng/mL for a 24-hr infusion at 24 µg/kg/hr. There was a strong linear relationship between infusion rate (0.5 to 50 µg/kg/hr) and average steadystate concentrations across all subjects. The half-life of rhAPC measured at the end of an infusion was relatively  short  (0.5  to  1.9  hr).  The  pattern  of  disappearance  of  rhAPC  was  biphasic,  with  a  rapid initial phase (t½ α = 13 min) accounting for 80 % of the AUC and a slower second phase (t½ β = 1.6 hr). In  both  healthy  subjects  and  sepsis  patients,  plasma  rhAPC  concentrations  fell  below  the  detection limit (10 ng/mL)  within  2 hr after termination of the infusion. The  mean  steady-state  plasma  concentration  of  drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  in  healthy  subjects receiving 24 µ g/kg/hr is 72 ng/ml.

In the Phase 3 trial, the pharmacokinetics of drotrecogin alfa (activated) was evaluated in 342 patients with severe sepsis administered a 96-hour continuous infusion at 24 µ g/kg/hr. The pharmacokinetics of drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  were  characterised  by  attainment  of  steady-state  plasma  concentration within  2  hours  following  the  start  of  the  infusion.  In  the  majority  of  patients,  measurements  of Activated Protein C beyond 2 hours after termination of the infusion were below the quantifiable limit, suggesting rapid elimination of drotrecogin alfa (activated) from the systemic circulation. The plasma clearance of drotrecogin alfa (activated) is approximately 41.8 l/hr in sepsis patients as compared with 28.1 l/hr in healthy subjects.

In patients with severe sepsis, the plasma clearance of rhAPC was statistically significantly decreased by  renal  impairment  and  hepatic  dysfunction,  but  the  magnitude  of  the  differences  in  clearance (&lt;30%) does not warrant any dosage adjustment in patients with renal disease. Understandably, there was  no  specific  study  in  patients  with  hepatic  disease,  since  the  risk  of  bleeding  would  be unacceptably high.

In addition, no dose adjustments are required in adult patients with severe sepsis with regard to age, gender, or hepatic function (as measured  by transaminase levels). The  pharmacokinetics of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  has  not  been  studied  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis  and  preexisting endstage renal disease and chronic hepatic disease. This is appropriately reflected in the SPC.

- -Interaction studies:

Only one formal interaction  study  was  performed  evaluating  the  effect  of  a  single  dose  of  500  mg enteric-coated aspirin given 24 hours prior to rhAPC. No effect of aspirin on rhAPC pharmacokinetics was  detected  under  these  admittedly  restrictive  conditions.  Caution  is  required  if  rhAPC  is  to  be infused shortly after, or during, administration of any drug that can modify coagulation parameters or decrease platelet aggregation.

| Stage 1 (48 hours infusion)   | Stage 1 (48 hours infusion)   | Stage 2 (96 hours infusion)   | Stage 2 (96 hours infusion)   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 12 µ g/kg/hr                  | 11 patients                   | 12 µ g/kg/hr                  | 14 patients                   |
| 18 µ g/kg/hr                  | 11 patients                   | 18 µ g/kg/hr                  | 15 patients                   |
| 24 µ g/kg/hr                  | 12 patients                   | 24 µ g/kg/hr                  | 15 patients                   |
| 30 µ g/kg/hr                  | 12 patients                   |                               |                               |
| Placebo                       | 26 patients                   | Placebo                       | 15 patients                   |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Compared with healthy subjects, the pharmacokinetics of rhAPC in sepsis patients were characterized by a 50 % faster clearance. This did not modify the time to reach steady-state or the elimination halflife of rhAPC in a clinically significant way. However, a much larger variation in individual Css and Clp was observed in sepsis patients (see discussion on pharmacokinetics). Clinical efficacy The clinical efficacy of drotrecogin alfa (activated) was investigated in a dose-finding phase II study and a phase III (pivotal) study. Phase 2 dose-response study (F1K-MC-EVAA). This was a multicentre (40 centres in total), double blind, randomised and placebo-controlled doseranging study. It was undertaken in order to characterise the safety, pharmacokinetics, and effective dose range and dosing duration for drotrecogin alfa (activated) (rhAPC) in patients with severe sepsis. Further, the purpose of the study was to determine a dose of rhAPC that would have an effect on the coagulation abnormalities associated with severe sepsis as well as a favourable safety profile. The study was divided into 2 stages: during stage 1 doses of rhAPC were administered as a continuous intravenous infusion for 48 hours and during stage 2 doses were administered for 96 hours. The initial rhAPC dose used in both stages was 12 µ g/kg/hr; the maximum dose used in Stage 1 was 30 µ g/kg/hr and in Stage 2, 24 µ g/kg/hr. The study was limited to adult patients of either gender with severe sepsis with a known or suspected site of infection that met at least three modified systemic inflammatory response syndrome criteria and at least one organ failure criterion. Intensive care unit patients of either gender  were  evaluated  for  entry  into  the  study  if  they  met  Criterion  A  (modified  systemic inflammatory response syndrome [SIRS] criteria) and Criterion B (organ failure) qualifications. Dosing groups 12 18 24 30 Placebo

Studies in healthy volunteers indicated an underlying linear correlation between Activated Protein C concentration and a rapidly performed bedside measurement of activated partial thromboplastin time. Therefore, rapid bedside activated partial thromboplastin time measurements were performed during dosing to assess if a particular dose of rhAPC was associated with unacceptable elevations in activated partial thromboplastin time and by inference, high activated protein C concentrations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Objectives of the study - endpoints

The primary objective of the study was to assess the safety of administration of rhAPC as a function of dose  and  dose  duration;  to  determine  the  degree  to  which  the  coagulation  abnormalities  of  severe sepsis  are  affected  by  the  administration  of  rhAPC  as  a  function  of  dose  and  dose  duration; to determine for use in future studies, an effective dose and dose duration of rhAPC administration, based on the ability of rhAPC to alter the coagulation abnormalities of severe sepsis.

The primary coagulation markers used in this study were D-dimer (fibrin degradation products) level, fibrinogen level, and platelets count. All patients who were enrolled and received study drug for any length of time were included in the primary efficacy analyses.

The figure below contains a graphical presentation of the monotonic dose response with respect to the percent  change  from  baseline  D-dimers  levels  at  the  end  of  infusion  (p&lt;.001).  The  rhAPC  doses ranged  from  12 µ g/kg/hr  to  30 µ g/kg/hr  with  48-hour  and  96-hour  infusion  duration's  combined. The median percent decreases at end of the infusion were 0% for patients receiving placebo, 9%, for patients receiving 12 µ g/kg/hr, 28% for patients receiving 24 µ g/kg/hr, and 46% for patients receiving 30 µ g/kg/hr. A 4% increase from baseline was observed in patients receiving 18 µ g/kg/hr.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The major surrogate marker for assessing the efficacy of rhAPC was D-dimer concentration. Data for prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were also collected and analysed. The  prothrombin  time  reflects  the  activity  of  the  extrinsic  and  common  pathways  of  coagulation. The activated partial thromboplastin time explores the integrity of the intrinsic and common pathways of  coagulation.  Prolongation  of  the  prothrombin  time  and/or  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time indicates  an  abnormality  of  the  secondary  haemostasis,  which  may  be  present  in  patients  with disseminated  intravascular  coagulation  or  sepsis.  Interleukine-6  (IL-6)  levels  were  monitored  in  an attempt  to  assess  rhAPC  effect  by  dose  and  duration  on  an  inflammatory  cytokine  as  compared  to placebo. -Results A  total  of  72  patients  participated  and  received  study  medication  in  Stage  1  (rhAPC  or  placebo according  to  an  allocation  ratio  of  2:1).  A  total  of  59  patients  participated  and  received  study medication  in  Stage  2  (rhAPC  or  placebo  in  a  3:1  ratio).  Patients  were  monitored  for  bedside activated partial thromboplastin time during infusions. If the bedside activated partial thromboplastin time was ≥ 95 seconds, the investigator reduced the infusion rate or stopped the infusion altogether. Twenty-eight day survival was determined for all patients.  A total of 64 (71.1%) of the 90 patients who received rhAPC and 27 (65.9%) of the 41 placebo patients survived the 28-day study period. The results of this study indicate that a 96-hour continuous infusion provided greater benefit to the patient  than  a  48-hour  infusion  with  no  greater  safety  risk.  During  the  study,  the  dose of 30 µ g/kg/hour was associated with elevated levels  of activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  that,  in accordance with protocol requirements, necessitated a reduction in the dose of rhAPC. Considering the higher frequency of dose reductions recorded in the 30 µ g/kg/hr for 48 hours dose group and the fact that 30 µ g/kg/hr for 96 hours was not investigated, the highest dose assessed was 24 µ g/kg/hr for 96 hours. Based on these results, a constant rate infusion of 24 µ g/kg/hr of rhAPC for 96 hours was selected for a further Phase 3 study. Overall, the safety assessment of rhAPC compared with placebo demonstrated an acceptable safety profile for all doses and treatment durations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## End of Infusion P ercent C hange D -dim er  R esults by D ose

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The results of this study indicate that a 96-hour continuous infusion provided greater benefit to the patient  than  a  48-hour  infusion  with  no  greater  safety  risk.  Based  on  these  results,  a  constant  rate infusion of 24 µ g/kg/hr of rhAPC for 96 hours was chosen for further Phase 3 study.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Placebo APC12 -80 -60 -40 -20 Nobs 35 21 Mean 62.2 10.2 1stQ -2 1 .3 -3 8 .6 Median -0.4 -8.9 3rdQ 77.9 24.9 End of Infusion is S tudy D ay 2 for S tage 1 P atients and S tudy D ay 4 for S tage 2 P atients F1K-MC-EVAA Final Report.  R eport Produced  Fri M ar  3 11:34:47 2000 Source is E VA A  F inal R e p o rt G ra p hs.ssc.  D a ta  fro m  R M P .S A S .F 1 K M .M C E V A A S C .F IN A L . Data analyzed using analysis of variance (A N O V A ) on the ranks.  M issing data im putation m ethod:LO C F. No statistically significant differences were observed in the percent change from baseline fibrinogen and platelet count levels for Stage 1 (48-hour infusion) patients and for Stage 2 (fibrinogen - 96-hour infusion) patients. Baseline interleukine-6 data were available for 124 of the in total 131 patients (94.7%) who received the study drug. The observed distribution of baseline interleukine-6 values was similar among rhAPCtreated patients and placebo-treated patients. A statistically significant difference was observed among the five treatment groups at Study Day 1 and Study Day 3 (p=.04 and .02, respectively). The median percent  decreases  at  Study  Day  3  were  50%,  40%,  66%,  43%,  and  93%  for  the  placebo-treated, 12 µ g/kg/hr  for  48  hours  rhAPC-treated,  18 µ g/kg/hr  for  48  hours  rhAPC-treated,  24 µ g/kg/hr  for 48  hours  rhAPC-treated,  and 30 µ g/kg/hr for 48 hours rhAPC-treated  patients, respectively. The distributions of the percent change from baseline interleukine-6 measurements over time for all patients  assigned  to  receive  96  hours  of  treatment  in  Stage  2  were  also  analysed,  no  significant differences among the four treatment groups could be demonstrated. A total of 6 (4 rhAPC/2 placebo) bleeding events were reported as serious adverse events during the 28-day study period. Of the 4 events that occurred in rhAPC-treated patients, 1 event occurred in a patient assigned to receive 12 µ g/kg/hr for 48 hours, 1 event occurred in a patient assigned to receive 18 µ g/kg/hr for 48 hours, 1 event occurred in a patient assigned to receive 18 µ g/kg/hr for 96 hours, and 1 event occurred in a patient assigned to receive 30 µ g/kg/hr for 48 hours. None of these bleeding events  occurred  in  patients  with  a  bedside  whole  blood  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time ≥ 95  seconds.  No  bleeding  events  were  noted  in  the  24 µ g/kg/hr  for  48-hour  or  96-hour  infusion duration.

## Pivotal study (Pivotal Phase 3 study EVAD)

This  was  a  double  blind,  placebo-controlled,  multicentre  (in  total  164  centres  in  11  countries), randomised  Phase  3  study  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  and  safety  for  drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  in patients with severe sepsis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The primary objective of this study was to compare the efficacy of rhAPC administration (24 µ g/kg/hr administered as a continuous 96-hour intravenous infusion) to that of placebo on the primary endpoint 28-day  all-cause  mortality  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis.  RhAPC  was  added  to  best  standard  care, comprising adequate antibiotics, source control and supportive treatment (fluids, inotropes, vasopressors and support of failing organs, as required).

The  secondary  objectives  of  this  study  were  to  evaluate  the  effects  of  rhAPC  on  organ  function (cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, hematology, and hepatic), to evaluate the health economic impact of  rhAPC  administration  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis  and  finally  to  further  characterize  the pharmacokinetic properties of rhAPC administration.

There was no statistically significant difference between the two treatment groups with respect to the duration  of  infusion,  the  proportion  of  patients  who  received  the  studydrug  for ≥ 95  hours,  or  the proportion  of  patients  who  were  treatment  compliant.  Per  protocol,  a  patient  was  classified  as treatment  compliant  if  the  patient  received ≥ 90%  of  the  intended  96-hour  infusion.  In  the  rhAPC treatment group, 654 (76.9%) patients received ≥ 95 hours of the study drug and 707 (83.1%) patients received either ≥ 95 hours of the study drug or died during the infusion or within 1 hour of study drug discontinuation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Study  population:  The  trial  was  designed  to  enroll  2280  patients.  Eligible  patients  were  at  least 18  years  old  and  had  a  diagnosis  of  severe  sepsis,  which  was  defined  as  meeting  at  least  three modified systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria, meeting at least one of five organ failure  criteria  (cardiovascular,  renal,  respiratory,  hematology,  or  metabolic  acidosis),  and  having  a suspected or proven infection. Patients were randomly assigned to rhAPC or placebo according to a 1:1 ratio for the treatment allocation. Exclusion criteria encompassed patients at high risk of bleeding, patients who were not expected to survive for 28 days due to a pre-existing, non-sepsis related medical condition, HIV positive patients whose  most  recent  CD4  count  was ≤ 50/mm 3 ,  patients  on  chronic  dialysis,  and  patients  who  had undergone bone marrow, lung, liver, pancreas or small bowel transplantation, and patients with acute clinical pancreatitis without a proven source of infection. The inclusion and exclusion criteria of this phase 3 study are considered to appropriately define the target population for rhAPC treatment and has been reflected in the SPC. Statistical analysis: Two interim analyses were planned, after 760 patients and 1520 patients had been enrolled (one-third and two-thirds of the planned study size, respectively). The two planned interim analyses occurred under the auspices of an independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). Statistical guidelines to suspend enrolment if drotrecogin alfa activated was found to be significantly more  efficacious  than  placebo  were  determined a  priori and  used  the  O'Brien-Fleming  spending function according to the method of Lan and DeMets. Trial enrolment was suspended after the second interim analysis [because the differences in the mortality rate between the two groups exceeded the a priori threshold for stopping the trial]. At the time when enrolment was suspended, 1728 patients had been enrolled in the trial, 1690 of these patients had received rhAPC (n = 850) or placebo (n = 840) for some length of time and constituted the intention-to-treat (ITT) population for the study. The  primary  analysis  was  based  on  a  Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel  test  in  which  the  groups  were stratified on the basis of three baseline covariates: severity of the disease as reflected by the score on the  Acute  Physiology  and  Chronic  Health  Evaluation  II  (APACHE  II),  age  and  plasma  protein  C activity level. The results from both stratified and nonstratified analysis are reported. -Results

## Mortality analysis

Based  on  a  nonstratified  mortality  analysis  for  the  intent  to  treat  (ITT)  population,  relative  to  the placebo treatment group, the rhAPC  treatment  group  experienced  improved  28-day  survival. At 28 days, the observed mortality rates were 24.71% for the rhAPC treatment group and 30.83% for

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  placebo  treatment  group  (nonstratified  p=0.0049).  These  results  represent  an  absolute  risk reduction of 6.12% with reference to mortality, corresponding to a 19.87% reduction in the relative risk of death, a 26.39% reduction in the odds of death, and a 35.85% increase in the odds of survival in the rhAPC treatment group compared with the placebo treatment group.

A statistically significant reduction in 28-day all-cause mortality was observed in patients ( all enrolled patients )  randomly assigned to rhAPC treatment compared with those assigned to placebo treatment (p=0.0027).  Relative  to  the  placebo  treatment  group,  the  rhAPC  treatment  group  experienced  a 20.70% reduction in the relative risk of death, a 27.52% reduction in the odds of death, and a 37.97% increase in the odds of survival.

| Treatment Group   | Deceased     | Survived      | Total       |
|-------------------|--------------|---------------|-------------|
| rhAPC             | 210 (24.71%) | 640 (75.29%)  | 850 (50.3%) |
| Placebo           | 259 (30.83%) | 581 (69.17%)  | 840 (49.7%) |
| All Patients      | 469 (27.75%) | 1221 (72.25%) | 1690 (100%) |

| Analysis                                               |   p-Value a | Relative Risk   | no Relative Risk 95% CI   |   Odds Ratio | Odds Ratio 95% CI   | Interaction   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|-------------|-----------------|---------------------------|--------------|---------------------|---------------|
| Primary Analysis - Primary Stratification with Pooling |      0.0054 | product 0.8057  | 0.6950- 0.9339            |       0.7241 | 0.5735- 0.9143      | 0.2359        |
| Primary Stratification with No Pooling                 |      0.0027 | 0.8215          | 0.7088- 0.9522            |       0.7288 | 0.5755- 0.9230      | 0.0585        |
| Nonstratified                                          |      0.0049 | 0.8013          | 0.6862- 0.9356            |       0.7361 | 0.5943- 0.9116      | -             |

Medicinal product no longer authorised The results of the prospectively defined ( stratified ) primary mortality analysis were consistent with the previous findings. A statistically significant reduction in 28-day all-cause mortality was observed for patients receiving rhAPC compared with those receiving placebo (p=0.0054). A 19.43% reduction in the relative risk of death, a 27.59% reduction in the odds of death, and a 38.1% increase in the odds of survival were observed comparing the rhAPC treatment group with the placebo treatment group. a Two-sided p-value from the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test for stratified analyses and Pearson's chisquare test for the nonstratified analysis. The following figure displays the Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the ITT population by treatment group.  A  statistically  significant  increase  in  survival  was  observed  for  the  rhAPC  treatment  group compared with the placebo treatment group (stratified p=0.0056, nonstratified p=0.0059).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised There was no consistent treatment effect in subgroups defined by APACHE II disease severity score at baseline. (The APACHE II score is designed to assess the risk of mortality based on acute physiology and chronic health evaluation). In the subgroup of patients with an APACHE II score &gt;25 at baseline, the mortality was 31% in the Xigris  group (128 out of 414) and 44% in the placebo group (176 out of 403). In the subgroup of patients  with  at  least  2  acute  organ  dysfunctions  at  baseline,  the  mortality  was  26.5%  in  the  Xigris group  (168  out  of  634)  and  33.9%  in  the  placebo  group  (216  out  of  637).  No  significant  death reduction  was  observed  in  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  less  than  2  acute  organ  dysfunctions  at baseline. No improvement in mortality in first APACHE II quartile was observed and only a marginal one in the second quartile; taken together, for the patients included in the 1st and 2nd APACHE II quartiles no improvement in mortality was apparent. A borderline statistically significant treatment-by-APACHEII-quartile  interaction  was  observed  based  on  the  Breslow-Day  test  for  homogeneity  of  odds  ratios across strata (p=0.0899). The observed interaction was primarily due to the difference in the odds of death observed in the first APACHE II quartile compared with the second, third, and fourth quartiles. In the first APACHE II quartile 15% of the patients died in the rhAPC group in comparison to 12% in the placebo group (RR= 1.2518). The observed relative risk reductions in 28-day all-cause mortality with  rhAPC  treatment  compared  with  placebo  treatment  were  greatest  for  patients  in  the  third  and fourth APACHE II quartiles (34.28% and 22.20%, respectively). Based on the efficacy results from the single phase III study, there seems to be a clear clinical benefit of treatment with APC in a subgroup of patients with more severe sepsis, defined as patients belonging to the 3 rd and 4 th APACHE II quartile. There is a need for further clinical data in patients with less severe sepsis (e.g. APACHE II score ≤ 24). The Company will provide further safety and efficacy data in sepsis patients at lower risk of death as soon as they are available.

<!-- image -->

The  selection  of  appropriate  patients  for  rhAPC  treatment  based  on  APACHE  II  disease  severity scores  would  not  be  clinically  manageable.  There  was  therefore  a  need  to  translate  the  inclusion criteria for the phase 3 study into clinically meaningful terms, such as severe sepsis, organ dysfunction and/or  shock  in  a  way  that  could  be  acceptable  from  both  a  clinical  and  regulatory  perspective. This has been appropriately reflected in the SPC.

The observed relative risk reductions in 28-day all-cause mortality with rhAPC treatment compared with placebo treatment were similar across age classes. (A statistically significant treatment-by-ageclass (&lt;75 or ≥ 75 years) interaction was observed based on the Breslow-Day test for homogeneity of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

odds ratios across strata (p=0.0826). The observed relative risk reduction in 28-day all-cause mortality in  the  rhAPC treatment group compared with the placebo treatment group was greatest for patients ≥ 75  years  (31.55%)  compared  with  patients  &lt;75  years  (15.26%).  However,  this  pattern  was  not observed  in  the  age  class  of  &lt;65  or ≥ 65.  The  observed  relative  risk  reduction  in  28-day  all-cause mortality in the rhAPC treatment group compared with the placebo treatment group was 18.52% for patients ≥ 65 years and 25.67% for patients &lt;65 years).

Patients  in  the  highest  quartile  of  rhAPC  plasma  concentrations  (Css)  have  a  significantly  higher mortality (33.3 % vs 21.2 % for the entire population analyzed and vs 14.8 % for the first quartile). There  is  a  clear  trend  for  higher  mortality  in  patients  with  higher  plasma  rhAPC  concentrations (P=0.017).  Some  elements  suggests  that  patients  with  the  lower  rhAPC  clearance  (fourth  quartile) were more likely to be older, have higher baseline APACHE II scores, higher baseline AST and ALT concentrations, more abnormal renal function and longer PT at baseline.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  observed  relative  risk  reduction  in  28-day  all-cause  mortality  in  the  rhAPC  treatment  group compared with the placebo treatment group was greater for men (21.57%, 95% CI = [0.6380-0.9641]) than for women (17.63%, 95% CI = [0.6512-1.0420]). A statistically significant treatment-by-Protein-C-activity-class interaction was observed based on the Breslow-Day test (p=0.0403). The observed relative risk reductions in 28-day all-cause mortality with rhAPC treatment compared with placebo treatment were greatest for patients in the ≤ 40% baseline Protein C activity class (33.96%) and in the &gt;80% Protein C activity class (41.67%). There was no statistically  significant  treatment-by-subgroup  interaction  observed  based  on  subgroups  defined  by baseline Protein C deficiency status (p=0.3338). In addition, a logistic regression analysis of 28-day survival  status  did  not  yield  a  statistically  significant  treatment-by-baseline-Protein-C-activity-level interaction (p=0.731). A non-statistically significant increase of 9.78% in the relative risk of death for rhAPC-treated patients (27.08%) compared with placebo-treated patients (24.67%) was observed in the subgroup of patients with a baseline Protein C activity level between 41% and 60% (p=0.5518). In this subgroup, a lower percentage of rhAPC-treated patients had the urinary tract identified as their primary site of infection (7.5%  versus  14.5%)  or  had  recent  trauma  as  a  solicited  historical  diagnosis  (1.7%  versus  4.8%) relative to placebo-treated patients. Among placebo-treated patients in the ITT population, those with urinary tract as the primary site of infection or recent trauma as a historical diagnosis had lower 28day all-cause mortality than the ITT placebo population as a whole (20.93% versus 30.83%, urinary tract  infection;  23.26%  versus  30.83%,  recent  trauma).  When  Protein  C  level  is  analyzed  as  a continuous  variable,  no  relationship  is  seen  between  the  relative  risk  reduction  in  mortality  and baseline Protein C activity level. These findings suggest a treatment benefit associated with rhAPC administration in patients with a clinical diagnosis of severe sepsis irrespective of the baseline Protein C activity level. An amended protocol was approved and 970 patients were enrolled and received the study medication under this version of the protocol. Patients enrolled under the amended protocol were less likely to have  chronic  health  points  as  a  component  of  the  APACHE  II  score,  and  were  less  likely  to  have metabolic acidosis as an organ failure. However, the overall APACHE II score remained similar and patients enrolled under the amended protocol had higher median baseline IL-6 levels (565.80 pg/mL versus  388.55  pg/mL),  suggesting that  there  was  no  resulting  reduction  in  the  severity  of  the  acute sepsis  episode.  These  findings  suggest  that  the  amended  protocol  was  successful  in  increasing  the percentage of patients who had sepsis as their primary determinant of mortality.

The other main change related to the protocol amendment, to further ensure the integrity of the study blinding, was the introduction of human serum albumin as placebo (apart from investigation centers located  in  France  for  regulatory  reasons).  The  concentration  used  for  the  placebo  infusion  was 1 mg/mL (0.1% in normal saline), the resulting daily dose was 100-fold less than the recommended daily therapeutic dose of human serum albumin and is 300- to 600-fold less than the maximum dose.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## D-dimer analysis

D-dimer levels were determined at baseline (within 24 hours prior to study drug infusion), daily at days 1 through 7, and at days 14 and 28. D-dimer analyses included only those patients with available baseline and post-baseline data.

D-dimer  levels  were  statistically  significantly  lower  for  rhAPC-treated  patients  compared  with placebo-treated  patients  on  Study  Day  1  (p&lt;0.001)  and  on  Study  Days  2  through  7,  (all  p ≤ 0.014). The more rapid decrease in D-dimer levels observed for rhAPC-treated patients is indicative of the antithrombotic pharmacodynamic properties of the molecule. D-dimer levels rose following the end of study drug infusion in the rhAPC treatment group, but remained below baseline levels. This rise in Ddimer  levels  may  reflect  ongoing  thrombin  generation  due  to  sepsis  or  the  restoration  of  normal fibrinolysis, as D-dimer is also a product of fibrinolysis.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Various other biomarkers were measured to assess rhAPC effect on thrombin generation. The clinical data  support  the in  vitro/ex  vivo data  that  rhAPC  does  not  function  purely  as  an  antithrombotic. RhAPC may also have anti-inflammatory properties evidenced by a more rapid fall in interleukine-6. The relevance of this effect, however, when assessing the anti-inflammatory properties of drotrecogin alfa (activated) is unclear. A greater fall in PAI-1 levels was recorded in the rhAPC treatment group. The  greater  increases  in  plasminogen  levels  recorded  in  the  rhAPC  treatment  group  cannot  be regarded as a qualified marker for demonstration of profibrinolytic effects of rhAPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Median D-dimer levels on Study Days 1 through 7 for the ITT population in Study F1K-MCEVAD. Other endpoints

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Concomitant medications

A statistically significant treatment-by-concomitant heparin-exposure interaction was observed based on  the  Breslow-Day  test  for  homogeneity  of  odds  ratios  across  strata  (p=0.026)  in  a  post-baseline analysis (see table). The observed relative risk reduction in 28-day all-cause mortality for the rhAPC treatment  group  compared with  the  placebo  group  was  greatest  for  patients  not  exposed  to  heparin (38.91%) than for patients who were exposed to heparin (11.31%).

## Summary of 28-Day Mortality by Heparin Exposure

## Study F1K-MC-EVAD

|                                             | Drotrecogin Alfa (Activated)                | Drotrecogin Alfa (Activated)                | Placebo                                     | Placebo                                     |                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|                                             | No. of Patients (%)                         | Died n (%)                                  | No. of Patients (%)                         | Died n (%)                                  | authorised Interaction p-Value              |
| Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a | Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a | Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a | Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a | Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a | Concomitant Prophylactic Heparin Exposure a |
| With Heparin                                | 634 (74.6)                                  | 158 (24.9)                                  | 637 (75.8)                                  | 179 (28.1)                                  | 0.026                                       |
| No Heparin                                  | 216 (25.4)                                  | 52 (24.1)                                   | 203 (24.2)                                  | 80 (39.4)                                   |                                             |
| Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    | Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    | Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    | Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    | Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    | Baseline Prophylactic Heparin Exposure b    |
| With Heparin                                | 532 (62.6)                                  | 138 (25.9)                                  | 559 (66.5)                                  | 170 (30.4)                                  | 0.298                                       |
| No Heparin                                  | 318 (37.4)                                  | 72 (22.6)                                   | 281 (33.5)                                  | 89 (31.7)                                   |                                             |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Abbreviations:  No. = number. a Includes all patients who received any heparin during the study drug infusion or the next calendar day after the completion of the infusion. b Includes all patients who were receiving heparin at baseline (the day before or the day of the start of study drug infusion). Source: Table EVAD.11.89, Clinical Study Report F1K-MC-EVAD; SAS Output. The analysis indicates a significant difference in mortality between patients having received heparin as concomitant  therapy  as  compared  to  those  who  did  not.  In  the  rhAPC-treated-group  there  was  no difference in mortality rate between patients who received heparin (24.92%) and those who did not (24.07%).  In  the  placebo-treated-group,  however,  there  was  a  statistically  significant  difference  in mortality rate  between those  who  had received  heparin (28.10%) and those who had not (39.41%). The  highest  mortality  rate  was  reported  in  the  placebo-treated-group  with  no  heparin.  In  this  postbaseline analysis the  mortality  rates  in  the  three  other  groups  (rhAPC  with  or  without  heparin,  and placebo with heparin) were similar.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Mortality by prophylactic dose heparin exposure at baseline and or during study medication infusion.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Heparin + No heparin 0 10 20 30 n=216 n=634 n=637 24.92% 28.10% 24.07% Number of patients treated : The Phase 3 trial was designed to have adequate power for the comparison of all rhAPC patients to all placebo patients. However, post hoc analysis comparing the mortality rates in 4 subgroups defined by exposure  to  prophylactic  dose  heparin  either  at  baseline  and/or  during  study  drug  infusion  were performed (see table below). Although based on subgroups modified post randomisation and therefore subject to bias, these analyses suggest that the efficacy of drotrecogin alfa activated was most evident in  the  subgroup  of  patients  who  were  never  exposed  to  heparin  (see  D  vs.  D').  This  subgroup represents  only  25  %  of  the  whole  population.  It  is  also  noted  that  within  the  subgroup  of  patients being treated with prophylactic dose heparin at baseline (65 % of the whole population) and who were randomised  to  rhAPC  vs.  placebo,  no  statistically  significant  effect  of  rhAPC  was  demonstrated (within  subgroup  P=0.106  if  one  considers  all  patients  with  heparin  at  baseline  [N=1091],  and P=0.172  if  one  considers  the  subgroup  of  patients  receiving  heparin  both  pre-  and  post-baseline [N=1056]). A  difference  in  mortality  rate  between  the  three  groups  of  patients  who  were  exposed  to  heparin and/or  rhAPC  (i.e.,  rhAPC  with  concomitant  heparin,  rhAPC  without  concomitant  heparin,  and placebo with concomitant heparin) could not be demonstrated by a chi-square test (P=0.328).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Group       | Baseline Heparin   | Post-Baseline Heparin during study drug infusion period   | 28-Day Mortality Results   |
|-------------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|
| A. rhAPC    | Yes                | Yes                                                       | 132/515 (25.6%)            |
| B. rhAPC    | Yes                | No                                                        | 6/17 (35.3%)               |
| C. rhAPC    | No                 | Yes                                                       | 26/119 (21.9%)             |
| D. rhAPC    | No                 | No                                                        | 46/199 (23.1%)             |
| A'. placebo | Yes                | Yes                                                       | 159/541 (29.4%)            |
| B'. placebo | Yes                | No                                                        | 11/18 (61.1%)              |
| C'. placebo | No                 | Yes                                                       | 20/96 (20.8%)              |
| D'. placebo | No                 | No                                                        | 69/185 (37.3%)             |

| Statistical Comparison    | Observed Relative Risk of Death with 95% confidence interval rhAPC vs. Placebo   |   Chi-square test p-value |
|---------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| A versus A'               | 0.87 (0.72 - 1.06)                                                               |                     0.172 |
| B versus B'               | 0.58 (0.28 - 1.21)                                                               |                     0.127 |
| C versus C'               | 1.05 (0.63 - 1.76)                                                               |                     0.857 |
| D versus D'               | longer 0.62 (0.45 - 0.85)                                                        |                     0.002 |
| A, B, C versus A', B', C' | 0.87 (0.73 - 1.04)                                                               |                     0.121 |
| A, B versus A', B'        |                                                                                  |                     0.106 |

Caution should therefore be employed when Xigris is used with other drugs that affect haemostasis including Protein C, thrombolytics (e.g. streptokinase, tPA, rPA and urokinase), oral anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin), hirudins, antithrombin, aspirin and other anti-platelets agents, e.g. non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs, ticlopidine and clopidogrel, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists (such as abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban) and prostacyclins such as iloprost. This has been appropriately reflected in the SPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised To summarise, two-thirds of patients in the phase 3 trial received prophylactic doses of unfractionated or  low  molecular  weight  heparin.  There  was  no  observed  increase  in  the  risk  of  bleeding  events reported as serious adverse events in drotrecogin alfa (activated) patients receiving heparin. The effects of prophylactic low dose heparin and other coagulation-active medications on the efficacy of drotrecogin alfa (activated) have not been evaluated in a randomized controlled clinical trial. However, some evidence from recent in  vitro studies  seems  to  suggest  that  an  interaction  between heparin and APC might be biologically plausible. Furthermore, the findings of the retrospective posthoc analysis of the phase 3 study seem to indicate that concomitant treatment with low dose heparin could potentially result in a decreased effect of APC. Therefore, it cannot totally be excluded that the co-administration of low dose heparin with drotrecogin alfa (activated) could potentially reduce the efficacy of the drotrecogin alfa (activated). Further drug interaction studies with heparin (as well as other coagulation active medications) are needed, since it is likely that septic patients might receive treatment with one of these drugs due to underlying disease/condition. The applicant has committed to undertake a further specific clinical study to investigate the potential interaction  of  heparin  and  APC.  Furthermore,  the  applicant  will  seek  Scientific  Advice  prior  to initiation of such a study. No data on treatment with drotrecogin alfa activated and other coagulation active medications than heparin are available since patients receiving these medications were not enrolled in the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical studies in special populations

A  study  in  paediatric  patients  with  severe  sepsis  has  been  conducted  (Study  F1K-MC-EVAO). This study was an open-label study that assessed the safety, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of drotrecogin alfa activated administration in paediatric patients from newborn to &lt;18 years of age. The objectives of this  study  were  to  provide  evidence  that  the  course  of  severe  sepsis  is  similar  in paediatric patients and adult patients and that the beneficial effect and safety profile of drotrecogin alfa activated administration is similar in paediatric as in adult patients. Comparability of the disease state between the two patient populations was assessed by clinical evidence, clinical history, and baseline measurements of coagulation markers (D-dimer, Protein C, and antithrombin). Comparability of the effect  of  rhAPC  administration  in  the  two  patient  populations  was  further  assessed  by  observed changes in plasma D-dimer concentrations.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The available data obtained from this study suggest that baseline data describing the disease process for  paediatric  patients  with  severe  sepsis  in  Study  F1K-MC-  EVAO  are  similar  to  baseline  data describing the disease process observed for adult patients in Study F1K-MC-EVAD. These data suggest that both the pharmacodynamic properties and the safety profile of rhAPC were similar  in  paediatric  and  adult  patients  with  severe  sepsis.  The  experience  with  drotrecogin  alfa activated in children under the age of 18 is limited; the efficacy and safety of Xigris have not been established  in  this  age  group;  therefore  no  dosage  recommendation  can  be  made.  This  has  been adequately reflected in the SPC. The Company has committed to performing a further clinical trial to gather more data in paediatric patients including purpura fulminans. Clinical safety Drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  exhibits  antithrombotic  and  antifibrinolytic  properties.  Due  to  these pharmacological properties, an increased risk of bleeding would be expected in patients receiving the medication. -Patient exposure Eight phase I clinical studies were conducted and evaluated the safety and pharmacokinetic properties of recombinant human Activated Protein C (rhAPC) in healthy subjects (seven studies) and in patients with end-stage renal disease (one study). A total of 112 unique subjects were exposed to rhAPC during these studies. In one phase Ib study (F1K-MC-EVAB) in heterozygous Protein-C deficient patients, 6 patients received rhAPC. In the two-stage phase II (duration and dose ranging study) and phase III studies (24 mcg/kg/h during 96 hours), 940 patients were exposed to rhAPC, in comparison to 881 to placebo. The overall rate of serious adverse events (SAE) related to drotrecogin alfa (activated) (as reported by the Applicant) ranges from 2.1% in the 850 patients participating in Study F1K-MC-EVAD, to 3.3% in  1158  patients  in  the  open-label  trials  F1K-MC-EVBE,  F1K-MC-EVBF,  and  F1K-MC-EVBG  to 5.4%  in  258  patients  in  the  compassionate  use  trial,  F1K-MC-EVBC,  and  3.5%  in  the  patients receiving treatment outside of clinical trials. -Adverse events related to general disorders and administration site conditions: Deaths

<!-- image -->

There  were  no  deaths  among  the  subjects  in  the  phase  1/1b  studies.  In  the  phase  2/3  studies,  the majority  of  deaths  in  both  treatment  groups  were  due  to  either  refractory  septic  shock  or  sepsisinduced multi-system organ failure. A total of 6 patients in the rhAPC treatment group and 2 patients in the placebo treatment group experienced haemorrhage as a potential cause of death. Four of these haemorrhagic events were assessed by the investigators as being possibly related to study medication (all  four  in  the  rhAPC  treatment  group).  In  each  case,  the  patient  was  predisposed  to  bleeding  as  a result of a severe underlying coagulopathy or as a result of trauma to a major artery.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There  were  509  (rhAPC:  236,  placebo:  273)  deaths  reported  in  the  completed  Phase  2/3  studies. Among the 509 deaths, 6 were reported to be study-medication related by the investigator (rhAPC: 5, placebo: 1). Four of the rhAPC-treated related deaths were associated with bleeding serious reactions: 2 patients experienced fatal cerebral haemorrhage, 1 patient experienced fatal pulmonary haemorrhage, and 1 patient experienced a fatal haemorrhage from an aortic disruption. A fifth rhAPCtreated patient experienced cerebral oedema and severe hypoxia. The patient in the placebo treatment group  developed  cerebral  infarcts  and  died.  These  deaths  are  all  included  in  the  overall  mortality analyses.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The 28-day all-cause mortality of patients with severe sepsis was the primary endpoint in the Pivotal study  (Pivotal  Phase  3  EVAD  study).  A  statistically  significant  treatment-by-surgical  status  on  the incidence of death was observed (p=0.0538). For emergency post-operative patients, increased 28-day mortality was observed for rhAPC-treated patients compared with placebo-treated patients. However, the observed difference in mortality within the emergency post-operative patient stratum between the treatment groups was not statistically significant. Analyses of treatment-emergent bleeding events by surgical status that occurred during the study drug infusion period indicated no significant interaction between  treatment  group  and  surgical  status  for  the  odds  of  experiencing  a  treatment-emergent bleeding event. As previously discussed a statistically significant interaction with heparin exposure has been observed. The  observed  relative  risk  reduction  of  mortality  for  the  rhAPC  treatment  group  compared  to  the placebo treatment group was greatest for patients not exposed to heparin (38.91%) than for patients who were exposed to heparin (11.31%). The observed 28-day all-cause mortality for rhAPC-treated patients  was  similar  for  patients  who  were  exposed  or  not  exposed  to  heparin  (24.92%  versus 24.07%). The incidence of death (28-day all-cause mortality) was also examined by looking at the relationship between maximum activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time and minimum platelet count during study days 1 through 5 (a time period similar to the study drug infusion period for the majority  of  patients).  There  was  an  increased  incidence  of  death  as  maximum  activated  partial thromboplastin  time  and  maximum  prothrombin  increased  and  minimum  platelet  count  decreased within  both  the  rhAPC  and  placebo  treatment  groups.  There  was  a  decreased  risk  of  dying  for  the patients enrolled in the rhAPC treatment group compared to placebo for all three categories examined. The risk reduction remained fairly constant with no statistically significant interaction between these parameters  and  odds  of  death.  A  similar  pattern  was  seen  when  death  was  analysed  by  baseline coagulation profile. -Adverse events related to general disorders and administration site conditions: Haemorrhage NOS - Bleeding. APC has the potential to increase the risk of bleeding. No cases of serious bleeding events were reported in the completed Phase 1/1B studies. In the phase 1 studies,  adverse  events  with  a  frequency  of ≥ 5% included headache (30.9%), ecchymosis (23.0%), and pain (5.8%).

The  percentage  of  patients  experiencing  at  least  one  bleeding  event  in  the  Phase  3  clinical  trial involving  850  drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)-treated  and  840  placebo-treated  patients  was  24.9%  and 17.7%, respectively.  In  both  treatment  groups,  the  majority  of  bleeding  events  were  ecchymosis  or gastrointestinal tract bleeding.

In the completed Phase 2/3 studies, the rhAPC treatment group had a statistically significantly greater percentage of patients who experienced at least one bleeding event considered as being serious during the study drug infusion period (2.4% versus 0.9%) and during the 28-day study period (3.6% versus 2.0%) compared with the placebo treatment group. The absolute difference in the incidence of serious bleeding events between the two treatment groups was 1.5% during the study drug infusion period and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

1.6%  during  the  28-day  study  period.  Serious  bleeding  events  were  defined  as  any  intracranial haemorrhage, any life-threatening bleed or any bleeding event requiring the administration of ≥ 3 units of packed red blood cells per day for 2 consecutive days, or any bleeding event assessed as serious by the investigator. Increased bleeding with rhAPC was seen only during the study drug infusion, which is consistent with its short half-life. Serious bleeding events were almost always associated with vessel trauma, tissue trauma (either accidental or iatrogenic), or ulceration of the gastrointestinal tract.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In the pivotal phase III study, the percentage of patients who had at least one serious adverse event was  similar  in  the  two  groups  and  the  incidence  of  serious  bleeding  episodes  was  higher  in  the drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  group  than  in  the  placebo  group  (3.5  percent  vs.  2.0  percent)  (p=0.06). The difference in the incidence of serious bleeding was only observed during the study drug infusion period.  In  both  the  drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  and  the  placebo  group  serious  bleeding  occurred primarily in patients with an identifiable predisposition to bleeding such as gastrointestinal ulceration, an  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  of  more  than  120  seconds,  a  prolonged  prothrombin  time (corresponding to an international normalized ratio of more than 3.0), a platelet count that decreased to less than 30,000 per cubic millimetre and remained at that level despite standard therapy, traumatic injury of a blood vessel, or traumatic injury of a high vascular organ. After adjustment for the duration of survival, blood-transfusions requirements were similar in the two groups (p=0.90). A statistically significantly greater percentage of rhAPC-treated patients experienced gastrointestinal haemorrhage,  ecchymosis,  injection  site  haemorrhage,  melaena,  and  rectal  haemorrhage  during  the study drug infusion period, whereas more placebo-treated patients experienced haemoptysis. In both treatment  groups,  the  majority  of  the  bleeding  events  were  mild  (10.1%  versus  7.4%)  or  moderate (5.1% versus 1.8%) in severity. Severe  bleeding  events occurred  less  frequently  but  were  similarly more common in the rhAPC treatment group (2.7% versus 1.2%). There  was  no  interaction  between  surgical  status  and  incidence  of  bleeding  events.  However,  the bleeding  event  rate  in  the  placebo-treated  surgical  patients  appeared  lower  than  in  the  non-surgical patients. This may have reflected the exclusion criteria of surgery within 12 hours, which may have produced populations with differing bleeding risks. The numbers of surgical patients with a bleeding event was also small, making it difficult to draw firm conclusions from these data. In the phase 3 study, 2 cases of intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) occurred during the infusion period for drotrecogin alfa (activated)-treated patients and no cases were reported in the placebo-treated patients. In  non-placebo  controlled  trials,  ICH  has  been  reported  in  patients  receiving  drotrecogin  alfa (activated)  with  an  incidence  of  approximately  0.9%  during  the  infusion  period.  The  estimation  of spontaneously reported ICHs is found to be similar (0.2%). The risk of ICH may increase with severe coagulopathy and severe thrombocytopenia. The risk of ICH was higher in patients treated with Xigris in  compassionate  studies  than  in  non-compassionate  studies.  The  difference  might  be  explained  by different risk profiles of the study populations at entry. The  incidence  of  serious  bleeding  in  the  ongoing  open  studies  is  3.9%  during  infusion  period  and 6.6% during study period. The spontaneous reporting rate has been 1.1%. The assessment of the nonbleeding  events  may  be  confounded  by  underlying  disease.  The  events  might  be  explained  by complications of sepsis. It has to be noted that it is difficult to assess the true incidence of an event using spontaneous data, due to the unknown effect of underreporting.

It  is  feasible  to  identify  the  patients  at  risk  of  bleeding  prior  to  treatment  and  exclude  them  from therapy on the bases of the exclusion criteria related to an increased risk of bleeding, (as defined by the study protocol) that are included as contraindications in section 4.3 of the SPC .

Nevertheless, there is a need for a thorough analysis of currently available data, close monitoring of reports  and  serious  adverse  events  during  the  post-marketing  phase  as  well  as  data  from  further studies.  The  applicant  has  committed  to  address  all  serious  bleeding  events  every  6  months  by providing  a  detailed  section  on  bleeding  in  the  PSURs.  The  first  PSUR  will  be  provided  within 60 days of 21 st November 2002, which is one year after the International Birth Date.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## -Other safety issues

For the combined studies EVAA and EVAD, there was no statistically significant difference between the rhAPC treatment group relative to the placebo treatment group in the percentage of patients who experienced  at  least  one  serious  adverse  event  during  the  study  drug  infusion  period  (7.3%  versus 6.8%) and during the 28-day study period (13.2% versus 12.9%). There also were no serious adverse events  (other  than  the  bleeding  event  haemorrhage),  individually  or  grouped  by  body  system,  for which  differences  between  treatment  groups  were  statistically  significant  during  the  study  drug infusion period and during the 28-day study period.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The percentage of patients experiencing at least one adverse reaction was not statistically significantly different between the rhAPC treatment group and the placebo treatment group during the study drug infusion  period  (67.6%  and  64.4%,  respectively)  and  during  the  28-day  study  period  (80.2%  and 77.2%, respectively). Mild  headache  was  the  most  common  adverse  event  reported  in  subjects  in  Phase  1  studies. The incidence of headache was dose but not dose duration dependent. The aetiology of headache is unclear. Ecchymosis was also frequently reported. Ecchymosis was reported to occur most often at the site of venipuncture. Additionally, there was a higher than expected occurrence of occult blood in the urine in healthy subjects. Both of these findings are very likely to be the result of the antithrombotic and profibrinolytic properties of rhAPC. -Laboratory findings Clinical laboratory evaluations of serum electrolytes; chemistry and haematology panels, urinalysis; and platelet function were performed in Phase 1 studies. Administration of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in  subjects  did  not  appear  to  be  associated  with  abnormalities  in  either  chemistry  or  haematology laboratory parameters. In both Studies F1K-MC-EVAA and F1K-MC-EVAD extensive analyses of the central chemistry and haematology data  were conducted. Based  on the assessments  of  the central  laboratory  data  in  each study, there were no identifiable safety concerns associated with rhAPC administration. -Immunogenicity No antibody response was detected in any of the subjects in Phase 1/1B studies (n=104) exposed to drotrecogin alfa (activated), even upon multiple re-administrations. A majority (87%) of the subjects participating  in  the  Phase  1/1B  studies  were  exposed  to  rhAPC  more  than  once,  and  18%  of  these subjects were exposed to rhAPC four to six times.

In  patients  with  severe  sepsis  exposed  to  rhAPC,  anti-APC  antibody  formation  was  uncommon (2/370  patients;  0.54%),  was  low  in  titre,  and  was  unrelated  to  the  specific  bulk  drug  substance administered  (BDS2  versus  BDS2+).  These  anti-activated  protein  C  antibodies  were  not  able  to neutralise the effect of plasma-derived human derived activated protein C or rhAPC on the activated partial  thromboplastin  time  assay.  Both  patients  in  whom  anti-activated  protein  C  antibodies  were detected survived to Study Day 28. Antibody formation in one patient was transient and not associated with  any  clinical  adverse  reaction.  The  other  patient  did  experience  superficial  and  deep  venous thromboses that were not considered as serious by the investigator. No follow-up beyond the study at day 28 is available for this patient. In the Phase 2 and Phase 3 studies, the incidence rate of thrombosis was  higher in placebo-treated patients than in rhAPC-treated  patients. To  date, there is no re-administration experience of rhAPC in patients with severe sepsis.

The possibility of allergic reactions to constituents of the preparation cannot be completely excluded in  certain  predisposed  patients.  If  allergic  or  anaphylactic  reactions  occur,  treatment  should  be discontinued  immediately  and  appropriate  therapy  initiated.  Xigris  has  not  been  readministered  to patients  with  severe  sepsis.  If  Xigris  is  readministered  to  patients,  caution  should  be  employed. No anti-activated  Protein  C  antibody  formation  was  detected  in  healthy  subjects,  even  after  repeat administration. This has been appropriately reflected in the SPC.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on Clinical aspects

## Discussion on clinical efficacy

Xigris  was  studied  in  one  Phase  3  international,  multi-centre,  randomized,  double-blind,  placebocontrolled  trial  (PROWESS)  in  1690  patients  with  severe  sepsis.  Severe  sepsis  is  defined  as  sepsis associated with acute organ dysfunction. Patients meeting the clinical diagnosis of severe sepsis had a) known or suspected infection, b) clinical evidence of systemic response to infection including fever or hypothermia, leucopenia or leucocytosis, tachycardia and tachypnoea, and c) acute organ dysfunction. Organ  dysfunction  was  defined  as  shock,  hypotension  or  the  need  for  vasopressor  support  despite adequate fluid resuscitation, relative hypoxemia (ratio of partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood in mmHg to the percentage of oxygen in the inspired air expressed as a decimal (PaO2/FiO2 ratio) &lt; 250), oliguria  despite  adequate  fluid  resuscitation,  marked  reduction  in  blood  platelet  counts,  and/or elevated lactic acid concentrations.

Significant  absolute  death  reduction  was  limited  to  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  greater  disease severity  i.e.  baseline  APACHE  II  score  &gt;25  or  at  least  2  acute  organ  dysfunctions  at  baseline. (The  APACHE II  score  is  designed  to  assess  the  risk  of  mortality  based  on  acute  physiology  and chronic health evaluation). In the subgroup of patients with an APACHE II score &gt;25 at baseline, the mortality was 31% in the Xigris group (128 out of 414) and 44% in the placebo group (176 out of 403).  No  death  reduction  was  observed  in  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  lower  disease  severity. In  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  at  least  2  acute  organ  dysfunctions  at  baseline,  the  mortality  was 26.5% in the Xigris group (168 out of 634) and 33.9% in the placebo group (216 out of 637). No significant  death  reduction  was  observed  in  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  less  than  2  acute  organ dysfunctions at baseline.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Exclusion criteria encompassed patients at high risk of bleeding (see Sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the SPC), patients who were not expected to survive for 28 days due to a pre-existing, non-sepsis related medical condition,  HIV  positive  patients  whose  most  recent  CD4  count  was ≤ 50/mm 3 ,  patients  on  chronic dialysis,  and  patients  who  had  undergone  bone  marrow,  lung,  liver,  pancreas  or  small  bowel transplantation, and patients with acute clinical pancreatitis without a proven source of infection. The  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  of  this  phase  3  study  are  considered  appropriate  to  define  the target population for APC treatment and has been reflected in the SPC. Patients  were  given  a  96-hour  constant  rate  infusion  of  Xigris  at  24 µ g/kg/hr  (n=850)  or  placebo (n=840).  Xigris  was  added  to  best  standard  care.  Best  standard  care  includes  adequate  antibiotics, source control and supportive treatment (fluids, inotropes, vasopressors and support of failing organs, as required). Patients treated with Xigris experienced improved 28-day survival compared to those treated with placebo. At 28 days, the overall mortality rates were 24.7% for the Xigris-treated group and 30.8% for the placebo-treated group (p=0.005). In  patients  with  severe  sepsis,  the  plasma  clearance  of  rhAPC  was  significantly  decreased  by  renal impairment and hepatic dysfunction, but the magnitude of the differences in clearance (&lt;30%) does not  warrant  any  dosage  adjustment  in  patients  with  renal  disease.  Understandably,  there  was  no specific study in patients with hepatic disease, since the risk of bleeding would be unacceptably high. In addition, no dose adjustments are required in adult patients with severe sepsis with regard to age, gender, hepatic function (as measured by transaminase levels). The pharmacokinetics of drotrecogin alfa  (activated)  have  not  been  studied  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis  and  preexisting  endstage  renal disease and chronic hepatic disease. This is appropriately reflected in the SPC.

There is a need for further clinical data in patients with less severe sepsis (e.g. APACHE II score ≤ 24). The Company will provide further safety and efficacy data in sepsis patients at lower risk of death as soon as they are available.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Approximately 2/3 of the patients received prophylactic low dose heparin during the course of study. The  mortality  rate  in  patients  receiving  Xigris  and  concomitant  prophylactic  low  dose  heparin  was 24.9%  and  the  mortality  rate  in  patients  receiving  placebo  and  concomitant  prophylactic  low  dose heparin was 28.1% (p=0.20). There is uncertainty if heparin could interfere with the activity of Xigris. The effect of low dose heparin on the efficacy of Xigris has not been evaluated in specific randomised controlled clinical trials.

Further  drug  interaction  studies  with  heparin  (as  well  as  other  coagulation  active  medications)  are needed, since it is likely that septic patients might receive treatment with one of these drugs due to underlying disease/condition.

The applicant has committed to undertake a further specific clinical study to investigate the potential interaction  of  heparin  and  APC.  Furthermore,  the  applicant  will  seek  Scientific  Advice  prior  to initiation of such a study.

<!-- image -->

In the phase 3 study, 2 cases of intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) occurred during the infusion period for drotrecogin alfa (activated)-treated patients and no cases were reported in the placebo-treated patients. In  non-placebo  controlled  trials,  ICH  has  been  reported  in  patients  receiving  drotrecogin  alfa (activated) with an incidence of approximately 0.9% during the infusion period. The risk of ICH may increase with severe coagulopathy and severe thrombocytopenia (see sections 4.3 and 4.4 of the SPC). The  risk  of  ICH  was  higher  in  patients  treated  with  Xigris  in  compassionate  studies  than  in  noncompassionate  studies.  The  difference  might  be  explained  by  different  risk  profiles  of  the  study populations at entry.

Medicinal product no longer authorised No data on treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated) and other coagulation active medications than heparin are available since patients receiving these medications were not enrolled in the study. Caution should therefore be employed when Xigris is used with other drugs that affect haemostasis including Protein C, thrombolytics (e.g. streptokinase, tPA, rPA and urokinase), oral anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin), hirudins, antithrombin, aspirin and other anti platelets agents, e.g. non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs, ticlopidine and clopidogrel, glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists (such as abciximab, eptifibatide, tirofiban) and prostacyclins such as iloprost. This has been appropriately reflected in the SPC. The  results  of  the  clinical  programme  suggest  that  both  the  pharmacodynamic  properties  and  the safety profile of rhAPC  were similar in adult and paediatric patients with severe sepsis. The experience with drotrecogin alfa activated in children under the age of 18 is limited; the efficacy and safety of Xigris have not been established in this age group; therefore no dosage recommendation can  be  made.  This  has  been  adequately  reflected  in  the  SPC.  The  Company  has  committed  to performing  a  further  clinical  trial  to  gather  more  data  in  paediatric  patients  including  purpura fulminans. Discussion on clinical safety Xigris  has  the  potential  to  increase  the  risk  of  bleeding.  The  percentage  of  patients  experiencing  at least one bleeding event in the Phase 3 clinical trial involving 850 drotrecogin alfa (activated)-treated and  840  placebo-treated  patients  was  24.9%  and  17.7%,  respectively.  In  both  treatment  groups, the majority of bleeding events were ecchymosis or gastrointestinal tract bleeding. In  the  Phase  3  clinical  trial,  serious  bleeding  events  occurred  in  3.5%  and  2.0%  in  drotrecogin  alfa (activated)-treated and placebo-treated patients, respectively. Serious bleeding events were defined as any  intracranial haemorrhage,  any  life-threatening  bleed or any  bleeding  event  requiring the administration of ≥ 3 units of packed red blood cells per day for 2 consecutive days, or any bleeding event  assessed  as  serious  by  the  investigator.  The  difference  in  the  incidence  of  serious  bleeding events between the two treatment groups occurred primarily during study drug administration.

The incidence of all serious bleeding events in open clinical trials (during study period) is 6.6%.

It  is  feasible  to  identify  the  patients  at  risk  of  bleeding  prior  to  treatment  and  exclude  them  from therapy on the bases of the exclusion criteria related to an increased risk of bleeding, (as defined by the study protocol) that are included as contraindications in section 4.3 of the SPC . Special attention has also been given to the SPC text under 4.4 Special warnings and special precautions for use.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Nevertheless, there is a need for a thorough analysis of currently available data, close monitoring of reports  and  serious  adverse  events  during  the  post-marketing  phase  as  well  as  data  from  further studies. Further data on bleeding should be obtained in order to evaluate the incidence if severe/fatal bleeding episodes (intracranial bleedings), incidence of severe/ fatal bleeding episodes overall and the identification of specific subgroups at higher risk of severe bleeding. The applicant has committed to address all serious bleeding events every 6 months by providing a detailed section on bleeding in the PSURs.

The possibility of allergic reactions to constituents of the preparation cannot be completely excluded in  certain  predisposed  patients.  If  allergic  or  anaphylactic  reactions  occur,  treatment  should  be discontinued  immediately  and  appropriate  therapy  initiated.  Xigris  has  not  been  readministered  to patients  with  severe  sepsis.  If  Xigris  is  readministered  to  patients,  caution  should  be  employed. No anti-activated  Protein  C  antibody  formation  was  detected  in  healthy  subjects,  even  after  repeat administration. This has been appropriately reflected in the SPC.

Overall, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies provided adequate evidence in support of the safety and efficacy of drotrecogin alfa (activated).  Consistent antithrombotic and fibrinolytic effects associated  with  the  known  pharmacology  of  APC  were  observed  and  include,  beside  the  expected prolongation  of  APTT,  decreases  in  haemoglobin,  erythrocytes,  and  haematocrit,  and  increases  in reticulocyte  count  and  PT.  In  addition,  in  vitro  studies  suggest  that  APC  might  exert  a  direct  antiinflammatory effect, the clinical relevance of which, however, remains unclear.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality Xigris  is  supplied  as  powder  for  solution  for  infusion  in  two  presentations  :  20  mg  and  5  mg. The  active  substance,  recombinant  human  Activated  Protein  C  (rhAPC),  is  obtained  by  DNA recombinant  technology.    An  inactive  zymogen  (rhPC),  produced  by  a  well  characterised  primary human cell  line  (HEK293),  is  subsequently  activated  by  addition  of  bovine  thrombin,  followed  by several purification steps before storage  or formulation of the drug product. Issues  which  remained  unsolved  at  the  time  of  the  December  2001  CPMP  meeting  have  all  been addressed properly in the last responses of the applicant: An appropriate potency (APTT) assay has been developed and validated in accordance with Ph. Eur requirements; All available drug substance and drug product batches have been retested with this new assay, and the submitted results provide assurance on product quality and production consistency, also with regard to the  filling  strategy  proposed  by  the  company.    The  former  has  been  further  confirmed  by  preauthorisation sample testing; In use stability has been checked for commonly available commercial EU sources of infusion sets, and those compatible with the product are mentioned in the SPC. Additional measures have been taken to ensure the absence of residual bovine thrombin impurities. The requested information regarding product identity specifications, including justification of specification limits (RP-HPLC, Peptide mapping), has been provided. In summary, as the application stands now, the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological documentation is of  an acceptable  quality,  and  provides  a  sound  basis  for  the  production  of  a  well controlled, consistent product, provided the applicant agrees to the list of commitments issued by the CPMP. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology

As  activated  protein C  is  a  potent  antithrombotic,  bleeding  may  be  a  potential  pharmacological toxicity and this was confirmed by the pharmacology and toxicology studies performed. Beyond this, no direct vasoactive effects of rhAPC were demonstrated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Pharmacodynamic interaction studies revealed an additive effect of unfractionated heparin and rhAPC on the prolongation of in vitro activated partial thromboplastin clotting time, which was shown to be almost entirely mediated by reduced antithrombin III levels. It would be very difficult to adequately address  the  question  of  potential  additive  effects  of  heparin  and  APC  in  animal  models  of  sepsis. This issue is therefore discussed further in the clinical part of this report.

Limited animal studies were performed to elucidate any effects of Xigris on pregnancy, embryonal/foetal  development,  parturition  and  postnatal  development  and  the  potential  risk  for humans is considered unknown. APC should therefore not be used during pregnancy unless clearly necessary. Furthermore, it is not known whether the product is excreted in human milk or if there is a potential effect on the nursed infant. Therefore, the patient should not breast feed whilst treated with rhAPC. This has been adequately reflected in the SPC.

In the present state of scientific knowledge, comprehensive information on the safety and efficacy of the  medicinal  product  cannot  be  provided  by  the  applicant.  In  order  to  collect  additional  data,  the applicant has committed to complete a programme of clinical studies post-authorisation, the results of which shall form the basis of an annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Efficacy The results  from  clinical  studies  support  the  use  of  Xigris  in  the  approved  indication  ' treatment  of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care.' In the present state of scientific knowledge, comprehensive information on the safety and efficacy of the  medicinal  product  cannot  be  provided  by  the  applicant.  In  order  to  collect  additional  data, the applicant has committed to complete a programme of clinical studies post-authorisation, the results of which shall form the basis of an annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile. There is a need for further drug interaction studies with heparin , since it is likely that septic patients might receive treatment with one of these drugs due to underlying disease/condition. The applicant has committed to undertake a specific clinical study to investigate the potential interaction of heparin and APC.  Furthermore,  the  applicant  will  seek  Scientific  Advice  prior  to  initiation  of  such  a  study. No data on treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated) and other coagulation active medications than heparin are available since patients receiving these medications were not enrolled in the study, which has been appropriately reflected in the SPC. In addition, further clinical data in patients with less severe sepsis (e.g. APACHE II score ≤ 24) are needed. The Company will provide further safety and efficacy data in sepsis patients at lower risk of death as soon as they are available. The experience with drotrecogin alfa activated in children under the age of 18 is limited; the efficacy and safety of Xigris have not been established in this age group; therefore no dosage recommendation can be made. This has been adequately reflected in the SPC. The Company has committed to perform a further clinical trial to gather more data in paediatric patients including purpura fulminans. Safety Safety data show an acceptable adverse event profile and good tolerability to Xigris. However, Xigris has  the  potential  to  increase  the  risk  of  bleeding  which  is  reflected  in  the  results  from  the  clinical programme. It is considered feasible to identify the patients at risk of bleeding prior to treatment and exclude them from therapy on the bases of the exclusion criteria related to an increased risk of bleeding, (as defined by the study protocol) that are included as contraindications in section 4.3 of the  SPC . Special  attention  has  also  been  given  to  the  SPC  text  under  4.4  Special  warnings  and  special precautions for use.

There is a need for a thorough analysis of currently available data on bleeding, close monitoring of reports  and  serious  adverse  events  during  the  post-marketing  phase  as  well  as  data  from  further studies. Further data on bleeding should be obtained in order to evaluate the incidence if severe/fatal bleeding episodes (intracranial bleedings), incidence of severe/ fatal bleeding episodes overall and the identification of specific subgroups at higher risk of severe bleeding. The applicant has committed to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

address all serious bleeding events every 6 months by providing a detailed section on bleeding in the PSURs.

## Benefit/risk assessment

Following  the  assessment  of  the  supplementary  documentation  provided  by  the  applicant,  it  was concluded  that  further  data  was  needed  to  support  the  quality,  safety  and  efficacy  of  the  product. Although the  majority  of  these  questions  could  be  addressed  by  the  applicant  as  post-authorisation commitments, a number of key issues were identified that needed further discussion at the CPMP's Biotechnology Working Party as well as at an ad hoc Expert meeting on clinical aspects of Xigris and at an Oral explanation by the applicant before the CPMP.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The conclusions from the Experts were: 1) The inclusion / exclusion criteria of the single phase III study are appropriate to define the target population for treatment with Xigris; exclusion criteria should clearly be reflected in the appropriate sections of the SPC; 2)  Based  on  the  efficacy  results  from  the  single  phase  III  study,  there  seems  to  be  a  clear  clinical benefit  of  treatment  with  Xigris  in  a  subgroup  of  patients  with  more  severe  sepsis,  but  it  was  also emphasized that a selection of appropriate patients for Xigris treatment based on APPACHE II disease severity  scores,  would  not  be  clinically  manageable.    The  inclusion  criteria  for  the  phase  3  study should  therefore  be  translated  into clinically  meaningful  terms,  such  as  severe  sepsis,  organ dysfunction  and/or  shock  in  a  way  that  could  be  acceptable  from  both  a  clinical  and  regulatory perspective; 3) An effect on the efficacy of APC as a result of a possible interaction between low dose heparin and APC cannot be excluded at present; further pre-clinical and/or clinical studies are needed to elucidate the potential interaction of heparin and APC; the currently available data on the concomitant use of heparin should be appropriately reflected as a separate paragraph in section  5.1 'Pharmacodynamic properties' of the SPC; 4) It is feasible to identify the patients at risk of bleeding prior to treatment and exclude them from therapy on the bases of the exclusion criteria related to an increased risk of bleeding, (as defined by the study protocol) that will be included as contraindications in section 4.3 of the SPC (see question 1); close monitoring of reports and serious adverse events during the post-marketing phase as well as data from further studies are needed. The applicant was asked to provide additional supplementary information for review by the CPMP prior to opinion. Proposed study protocols to address the following: a. Any  potential  drug  interaction  of  co-administered  low  dose  heparin  and  drotrecogin  alfa (activated) in patients with severe sepsis; b. Further  safety  and  efficacy  data  should  be  obtained  in  sepsis  patients  at  lower  risk  of  death (APACHE II score of 24 or less); c. Further data on bleeding should be obtained in order to evaluate the incidence of severe/fatal bleeding episodes (intracranial bleedings), incidence of severe/fatal bleeding episodes (overall) and the identification of specific subgroups at higher risk of severe bleeding.

## Draft and/or final study protocols of the following post-marketing studies:

- Efficacy and safety of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in approximately 11,350 adult patients with severe sepsis and a lower risk of death (e.g., APACHE II score of 24 or less);
- Efficacy and safety of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in a study of approximately 500 paediatric patients with severe sepsis;
- Effect of low-dose heparin on mortality in a study of approximately 2000 adult patients with severe sepsis who have a high risk of death and are receiving drotrecogin alfa.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  addition,  the  applicant  submitted  a  cumulative  safety  review  of  all  serious  adverse  drug  reaction reports  which  have  been  reported  for  drotrecogin  alfa  (including  in  open  label  clinical  trials, compassionate use and any post-marketing experience) until 31 January 2002 by 1 March 2002.

Following  the  review  of  the  submitted  documentation,  and  the  final  proposed  SPC,  the  CPMP concluded that a marketing authorisation for Xigris will be granted under exceptional circumstances, subject to fulfilling the chemical, pharmaceutical and biological and clinical follow-up measures and clinical  specific  obligations  undertaken  by  the  applicant. Since  no  other  similar  product  has  yet managed to show efficacy compared to placebo in the same indication and only one pivotal study has been  performed  with  Xigris,  the  CPMP  felt  that in  the  present  state  of  scientific  knowledge,  the applicant cannot be expected to provide comprehensive information on the safety and efficacy of the medicinal  product.  In  order  to  collect  additional  long-term  data,  the  applicant  has  committed  to complete  a  programme  of  clinical  studies  post-authorisation  within  pre-specified  time  frames,  the results of which shall form the basis of an annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Recommendation Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by consensus that the benefit/risk profile of Xigris in the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ  failure  when  added  to  best  standard  care,  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the granting of the marketing authorisation.