---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:52:12
document_pages: 16
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/ytracis-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: ytracis-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.8185015
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 09:26:54.946842
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Ytracis. For information on changes after approval please refer to module 8.

## 1. Introduction

Ytracis is a radiopharmaceutical precursor solution for the in-vitro radiolabelling of specific carriers, such as monoclonal antibodies, peptides or other chemical vectors for radiotherapeutical or diagnostic applications.  The  nature  of  the  disease  to  be  treated  will  be  determined  by  the  pharmaceutical substance  to  be  radiolabelled.  Yttrium-90  chloride  is  not  intended  to  be  administered  directly  to patients.

| Ingredients                                | Quantity                     | Function          |
|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------|
| Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride Hydrochloric acid | 1850 MBq at calibration date | Active ingredient |
|                                            | 4.86 µl                      | pH agent          |
| Water for injections                       | Up to 1 ml                   | Solvent           |

Packaging materials are common for the type of products (2 ml Ph. Eur. type I colourless glass vial with teflonised rubber stopper and aluminium cap). The secondary packaging consists of a lead pot with  sponges,  packed  in  polystyrene  blocks  in  a  tin  can,  packed  in  an  outer  carton  with  wedging. Volumes of 0.5-2.0 ml per vial (925-3700 MBq) will be made available.

The therapeutic use of radioisotopes was recognised in the mid 20 th century following the discovery of methods for production of artificial radioactivity. The objective of radionuclide therapy is to achieve appropriate treatment through delivery of a cytotoxic absorbed radiation dose to the desired target and prevent or minimise toxicity to normal tissues. The established use of in-vivo radiotherapy has been restricted to a small number of diseases where isotopes are concentrated selectively in diseased tissues as  a  result  of  their  normal  distribution,  e.g.  Iodine-131  in  the  treatment  of  hyperthyroidism  and differentiated thyroid carcinoma, and Strontium-89 for palliation of bone pain from metastatic cancer. The  concept  of  targeted  in-vivo  therapy  with  isotopes  conjugated  to  a  carrier  molecule,  to  achieve selective radiation of diseased cells, while sparing healthy cells, has been the subject of research from the  1950's  onwards.  Initially  the  majority  of  attempts  to  develop  targeted  radiotherapy  e.g.  radio immunotherapy,  focused  on 131 I  as  the  radioisotope. 131 I  is  readily  available  and  inexpensive,  its radiochemistry  is  well  known  and  it  can  be  easily  bound  to  carrier  molecules  such  as  antibodies. However, disadvantages of the use of 131 I are a possibly unstable linkage to the carrier molecule, quite weak energy of its therapeutic beta rays, and the emission of gamma rays resulting in exposure of the environment to unwanted radiation. Therefore researchers have looked for a more optimal isotope for systemic radiotherapy and attention has  focussed  on  the  high-energy  beta  emitter  Yttrium-90  as  a  precursor  for  the  labelling  of  carrier molecules. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Composition The  product  consists  of  an  yttrium  [ 90 Y]  chloride  solution  in  0.04  M  HCl  with  the  following composition. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Active substance

[ 90 Y]  is  obtained  from  [ 90 Sr]  which  in  turn  is  obtained  by  purification  of  irradiated  uranium-235 according to the following decaying chain.

235 U + 1 n Æ Æ Æ 90 Kr Æ 90 Sr Æ 90 Y Æ 90 Zr (stable)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

[ 90 Sr] is produced by extraction and purification of fission products of uranium after irradiation with thermal neutrons. Fission results in 90 Kr and 144 Ce leading to the progeny of the former, [ 90 Sr], which is separated from the isotope mixture by concentrated nitric acid and lead nitrate.

[ 90 Sr] Decays by emission of beta radiation with a maximum energy of 0.546 MeV to [ 90 Y], with a half-life  of  28.15  years,  and  is  present  in  the  form  of  Sr(NO 3 ) 2 with  a  relative  molecular  mass  of 211,63.

[ 90 Y] is separated from [ 90 Sr] using bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (HDEHP) in dodecane, followed by subsequent back extraction with hydrochloric acid. Final purification of the yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride bulk solution occurs by passage through an resin.

Release requirements for [ 90 Y] bulk solution are the same as those for the finished product with the exception  of  sterility  and  bacterial  endotoxins.  Testing  is  performed  for  appearance,  identification, metallic impurities, acidity, radiochemical purity, and radio nuclidic purity (0.74 MBq 90 Sr/ 37 GBq 90 Y). Storage of maximal 36 h in the manufacturing hot cell is therefore acceptable. A re-test period for the [ 90 Y] bulk solution is not relevant as all of the bulk solution is used for the production of the finished product.

The identity of [ 90 Sr] is determined by recording the beta spectrum and the identity of chloride and yttrium-90 is  established  in  the  final  active  substance  yttrium  [ 90 Y] chloride.  The  specifications  for both liquids are adequate. For the resin adequate requirements are stated for capacity, water content, particle size, heavy metals and arsenic For dodecane and HDEHP the identities are determined with IR spectroscopy and limits have been adopted for heavy metals and content. In addition, the purity of HDEHP is determined by 31 P NMR spectrometry. Possible impurities in [ 90 Sr] are [ 89 Sr], [ 137 Cs], [ 147 Pm], [ 90 Zr] and isotopes of ruthenium and cerium. The alpha, beta and gamma impurities are limited in the specifications. Regarding the process validation data for the yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride bulk solution the following criteria have been identified as essential : strontium content because of its high toxicity and biological kinetic profile,  levels  of  metallic  and  organic  impurities,  which  can  interfere  with  labelling  through complexation by DTPA, and sterility of the resin column. In-process controls are performed on radioactive concentration, filling volumes, sterilisation and the environment.  Specifications  for  the 90 Sr  source  are  set  for  appearance,  radionuclidic  identification, radioactive  concentration,  radionuclidic  purity,  gamma-impurities,  beta-impurities,  alpha-impurities and specific activity. Specifications of active substance [ 90 Y]  bulk  solution  is  tested  for  alpha-,  beta-,  and  gamma-  impurities,  [ 90 Sr]  content  as  well  as appearance, identity, metallic impurities, acidity, radiochemical purity and radionuclidic purity. Stability of active substance The shelf life for strontium [ 90 Sr] nitrate which is 4 weeks at 18-25°C in glass vial in lead container is based on stability studies in which three batches were stored during 4 weeks at ambient conditions (18-25°C).  Parameters  investigated  were  identity,  appearance  and  radionuclidic  purity  as  well  as radioactive concentration at calibration date. Radionuclidic purity remains at ≥ 99.5% and therefore supports the claimed shelf life. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Other ingredients

The  specifications  of  the  excipients  comply  with  Ph  Eur  monographs  with  additional  limits  for concentrated HCl. Compliance with requirements are supported by batch analyses results.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Product development and finished product

Ytracis  is  intended  for  labelling  of  various  compounds.  As  further  chemical  chelation  must  be achieved,  it  was  logical  to  chose  the  liquid  form.  This  radiopharmaceutical  is  to  be  processed  with either proteins (such as monoclonal antibodies), peptides of any other molecule of biological interest. Thus, yttrium [ 90 Y] had to be supplied as a simple salt, in this case the chloride salt.

0.04 M HCl was found to be a good diluent for [ 90 Y] chloride for the following reasons

- Chloride is also present in the active substance which prevents subsequent mixture of salts

<!-- image -->

· At  neutral  and  alkaline  pH,  the  yttrium  salt  undergoes  hydrolysis.  The  subsequent  complex would not react in the same way as a chloride salt. At pH above 4, adsorption on glass becomes a concern. Therefore acid formulation is necessary. · The acidic formulation furthermore allows the users to easily buffer the solution or to yield their own specific labelling conditions by addition of low concentration of reactants. The high radioactive concentration of 1850 MBq/ml is adequate for therapeutical use and is consistent with safe as well as easy handling and accurate and sterile withdrawal. The finished product is prepared by dilution of the yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride bulk solution with 0.04 M HCl to obtain an activity of 1850 MBq/ml at calibration date. The solution is filled into 2 ml vials and is sterilised during 20 minutes at 121°C. The industrial batch size is 30 vials with a fill volume of 0.5 ml up to 2 ml. The  radioactive  concentration  of  the  finished  product  is  determined  in-process  and  must  be  within 1665-2035 MBq/ml (90-110% of declared). Specifications of the finished product Release requirements for the finished product are the same as those for  [ 90 Y] bulk solution with the addition of sterility and bacterial endotoxins. The specification is given below, since the quality aspects must be compared with those required by the marketing authorisation holder of any prospective carrier molecule, e.g. monoclonal antibody, in order  to  achieve  efficient  labelling.  (Important  quality  characteristics  of  a  radiolabelling  precursor necessary for efficient radiolabelling  should  be  stated  in  the  SPC  and  package  leaflet  of  the  carrier product.) Medicinal product no longer authorised

| TESTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | METHODS                                                                                                                                                               | SPECIFICATIONS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Characters of the solution Radioactive concentration (at calibration date) Chloride identification Acidity Radionuclidic identification Radionuclidic purity (at calibration date) : 90 Sr content γ radionuclidic impurity Radiochemical purity of yttrium chloride solution Metal impurities : Cd Cu Fe Pb Zn Sterility Bacterial endotoxins Medicinal | Visual inspection Ionisation chamber Precipitation Acidimetric assay Liquid scintillation Liquid scintillation γ spectrometry TLC Polarography Direct inoculation LAL | Clear, colourless solution, free of particulate matter 1665 ≤ MBq/ml ≤ 2035 Complies with the test 0.035 ≤ M ≤ 0.045 Complies with the test ≤ 0.74 MBq 90 Sr / 37 GBq 90 Y ≤ 0.001% ≥ 97.0% ≤ 1 µg/ml ≤ 1 µg/ml ≤ 10 µg/ml ≤ 5 µg/ml ≤ 5 µg/ml Sterile ≤ 25 IU/ml |

A labelling procedure for a monoclonal antibody is described. This resulted in a radiochemical

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

purity of ≥ 95% (six batches of yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride were tested). Hence, it is demonstrated that the product  at  issue  is  indeed  capable  of  labelling  carriers  with  sufficient  efficiency,  with  acceptable radiochemical purity.

## Stability of the Product

The  calibration  date  is  three  days  after  manufacture  and  the  proposed  shelf  life  is  four  days  after calibration  date  (seven  days  after  manufacture).  No  special  storage  conditions  are  required.  Batch testing has been performed at the dates of manufacture, calibration and expiry. All release parameters were  investigated,  though  radionuclidic  identity  and  purity  were  only  investigated  at  release.  In addition to the release parameters the radiochemical purity of a radiolabelled antibody preparation has been investigated.

In  addition  to  the  standard  requirements  laid  down  in  the  EU  legislation  which  apply  to  all  the medicinal products, some specific provisions for radiopharmaceuticals are set out in Council Directive 89/343/EEC of 3 May 1989. Moreover, the assessment of application dossiers for radiopharmaceuticals  must  take  into  account  the  specific  information  relevant  to  these  products. Concerning  the  toxicological  and  pharmacological  tests  (as  defined  in  part  3  of  the  annex  to  the Council Directive 75/318/EEC of 20 May 1975):

Results comply with the end of shelf-life specification and the proposed shelf life of four days after calibration is acceptable. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects This is an unusual medicinal product, as it has no specific indication alone and must not be injected directly  to  the  patient.  It  is  a  'precursor'  to  be  used  solely  for in  vitro radiolabelling  of  carrier molecules  which  themselves  will  ultimately  decide  the  target  and clinical indication for the radiolabelled  molecule.  However,  this  product  must  (and  does)  comply  with  the  usual  quality requirements relating to parenterals as defined in the Ph Eur. In addition, it is important to define the quality  characteristics,  which  will  ensure  efficient  radiolabelling,  and  these  have  been  defined  and controlled  in  this  case  (e.g.  radiochemical  purity,  radionuclidic  purity,  freedom  from  trace  metal contaminants which may interfere with labelling, etc.). Considering  the  short  half-life  of 90 Y  and  the  resulting  time  constraints  during  manufacture,  some important  tests  are  performed  'retrospectively',  e.g.  radionuclide  purity,  sterility  and  pyrogens, although this is unavoidable in this case and is normal for such products in general. Again, considering the  time  constraints  and  short  half-life,  stability  issues  are  perhaps  not  as  important  as  for  other products intended to be stored for long periods of time. The chemical-pharmaceutical information is well documented and describes adequately the quality of the active substance and the finished product and the manufacturing of the finished product. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride [YCl3] sterile solution CIS bio international is a precursor solution for the in vitro radiolabelling of other radiopharmaceuticals, which may be indicated for targeted radiotherapy. As precursor, Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride sterile solution has no intended clinical usage as such. Yttrium [ 90 Y]  is  a  sterile  solution,  which  contains  a  maximum  of  3.7  GBq  (100 mCi)  of  Yttrium  chloride [ 90 YCl3] at a reference time. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -GLP compliant studies would be preferred, however, bibliographic evidence may be accepted provided that studies were conducted to GLP-like quality standards or that any issues arising from regulatory review can be adequately dealt with by reference to the original bibliographic information provided.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Questions  related  to  poor  labelling  efficiency  and in  vivo dissociation  of  the  radiolabelled immunoconjugate  must  be  addressed.  The  effects  that  may  be  produced  by  the  potential circulation of free Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride in the body must be addressed. Information relating to single  and  repeated  dose  toxicity  must  be  provided.  Information  on  chemical  toxicity  and disposition of the 'cold' (i.e. non-radioactive) product may be relevant.
- -Mutagenicity studies (performed with the radioisotope) on are considered not to be useful since the results will confirm effects that are known and expected.

## Internal radiation dosimetry

|         | no   |
|---------|------|
| product |      |

Dosimetry of the labelled radiopharmaceutical will depend on the pharmacokinetics of the carrier to be labelled. The applicant has submitted an evaluation of the internal radiation resulting from the free 90 Yttrium ( 90 Y 3+ ) that could be administered unconjugated or released from the protein conjugates. No definitive conclusion can be drawn regarding the safety of high and low Yttrium doses toward the offspring. For both embryo-foetal and perinatal toxicity, if Yttrium follows the pattern of the other rare earth  elements,  a  risk  is  probably  implied  but  the  very  low  doses  of  Yttrium  administered  in radioimmunotherapeutic applications should balance the effective concerns. The calculation was effected in agreement with MIRD/ICRP 60 recommendations. For  this  product,  the  effective  dose  resulting  from  an  intravenously  injected  activity  of  1GBq  is 700 mSv for a 57 Kg female adult and 650 mSv for a 70 Kg male adult. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pharmacodynamics

Yttrium  [ 90 Y]  chloride  [ 90 YCl3]  is  not  intended  to  be  directly  administered  to  the  patient  and  no pharmacodynamic  effect  is  sought  neither  for  the  radionuclide  (unconjugated)  nor  for  the  (cold) Yttrium  chloride  itself.  Some  bibliographic  data  concerning  the  pharmacodynamic  effect  of  cold Yttrium  [ 89 Y]  are  available.  From  these  data  no  primary  or  secondary  pharmacodynamic  effects  of Yttrium chloride are expected from the use of Yttrium chloride.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- In vitro studies

No original in vitro studies have been performed.

- In vivo studies

A  few  pharmacodynamic  studies  deal  with  doses  of  Yttrium  chloride  several  orders  of  magnitude larger than the maximal dose (20 to 200 ng) which could theoretically be administered to the patients. They  demonstrate  that  any  pharmacodynamic  effect  can  be  excluded  from  the  release  of  (cold) Yttrium chloride at therapeutic dosages of conjugates.

Histological studies When administered to rats, Yttrium chloride accumulates in the liver in the spleen and in the bones. At 50 mg/kg administered intravenously, but not at 10 mg/kg, it induces a spleen granuloma in rats, but not in the liver (Nakamura et  al .  1991).  A  study (Hirano et  al .  1993)  confirmed these findings; the intravenous  injection  of  cold  Yttrium  chloride  (YCl3)  at  doses  higher  than  200 µ g/rat  induced  the formation  of  a  colloidal  material  composed  of  proteins  and  some  minerals.  Phagocytic  cells  in  the liver and in the spleen take up this colloid. Yttrium chloride is deposited in lysosomal inclusions of Kupffer cells and macrophages; the half time of the hepatic clearance is approximately equals to 144 days. At a dose of 1 mg /rat, a large amount of calcium is deposited in the liver (representing more than 10 times the amount of calcium normally present in this organ) and spleen (over 100 times) and a slight increase is observed in the lung and kidney (less than 1.5 times). Biochemical studies Yttrium chloride administered intravenously increased the calcium concentration of liver, spleen and lung in rats; the distribution of calcium matched the distribution of Yttrium chloride in liver, but not in lung  and  spleen  (Nakamura et  al .  1993;  Hirano et  al .  1996).  In  the  same  studies  Yttrium  chloride (YCl3) transitorily increased blood calcium concentration probably through bone resorption (Hirano et al . 1996). No apparent changes were observed in magnesium and phosphorus (Nakamura et al . 1993). In  a  study  (Nakamura et  al .  1993)  a  slight  effect  of  Yttrium  (Y 3+ )  on  serum  levels  of  aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) following the administration of 10 mg/kg Yttrium chloride intravenously to rats 24 and 72 h after the injection was observed. In a second study (Hirano et al . 1996) both aminotransferases were dramatically increased following the administration of  1 mg  of  Yttrium  chloride  per  rat  intravenously.  These  effects  may  be  explained  by  the  colloidal form  of  Yttrium  chloride  in  the  blood  that  triggers  the  activity  of  phagocyte  cells  in  the  liver  and spleen. The significance of the observed effects has apparently not been fully interpreted by the authors of the studies. The calcium mobilisation occurs rapidly after Yttrium chloride administration. The Yttrium chloride under its colloidal form accumulates preferentially in phagocytic cells in the liver and spleen. The transitory increase of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase and the accumulation of calcium in the liver and spleen may indicate that these organs are primary targets for high doses of Yttrium chloride administered intravenously (corresponding approximately to 10 5 times the dose administered during a radioimmunotherapy treatment). It is unknown whether or not Yttrium (Y 3+ ) is in a colloidal form when used at low concentrations (e.g. radioimmunotherapy). · Pharmacodynamic drug interactions Medicinal product no longer authorised

No information regarding interaction of Yttrium chloride with other medicinal products was available. Free Yttrium (Y 3+ ) could complex chelating agents such as EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid) which may modify its in vivo behaviour, leading to rapid renal elimination.

## · General and safety pharmacology programme

For  the  reasons  mentioned  above  no  original  general  and  safety  pharmacology  programme  was performed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

The  pharmacokinetics  properties  (i.e.  the  distribution)  of  Yttrium  depend  on  the  dose  of  product administered  (Nakamura et  al. 1991).  Several  pharmacokinetic  studies  using  high  doses  of  (cold) 89 Yttrium  chloride  or  low  doses  of  either  radioactive  [ 90 Y]  or  non-radioactive 89 Yttrium  have  been published. The studies performed with low doses of radioactive Yttrium chloride are the most relevant to  characterise  the  disposition  of  the  Yttrium  [ 90 Y]  released  after  an in  vivo dissociation  of  the radiolabelled immunoconjugate.

The pharmaco-toxicological interpretation of pharmacokinetic data is made difficult by the influence of injected compounds particle sizes and chemical form (chelated or unchelated) on the biodistribution. Depending  on  Yttrium  [ 90 Y]  chloride  serum  concentration  colloids  of  varying  particle  sizes  are formed,  which  may  explain  marked  differences  in  term  of  biodistribution.  Ramsden et  al. 1961 described  that  solutions  of  colloidal  Yttrium  chloride  over  a  range  of  particle  sizes  prepared  by varying the citrate/Yttrium chloride ratio had different biodistributions after intravenous injection in rabbits.  The  large  particles cleared  rapidly  and  distribute  mainly  to  the  liver  and  to  the  spleen.  The smaller  particles  clear  slowly  and  distribute  to  the  bone  and  to  the  bone  marrow.  The  particles  of intermediate size concentrate approximately after 18 hours equally in bone and liver.  The concentration increases with the time in bone and decreases in other organs. Some Yttrium chloride remains at the site of injection (The exact particle sizes are not stated). These observations are difficult to extrapolate to the extremely low dosages used in radionuclide therapy. At the concentrations used for  radiolabelling  purposes, the  amount of radiocolloid formed as complex salts through interaction with plasma or blood proteins is likely to be extremely low. · Pharmacokinetics after a single dose -Pharmacokinetics properties of Yttrium administered at high doses A study (Nakamura et al. 1991) explored the pharmacokinetic properties of Yttrium chloride at high doses (10 and 50 mg/kg) administered intravenously to rats. Similar doses of some rare earth elements Europium (EuCl3), Dysprosium (DyCl3) and Ytterbium (YbCl3) were also given intravenously and the pharmacokinetic properties of these elements were compared to those of Yttrium chloride. At these concentrations Yttrium chloride accumulates mainly in the liver, the spleen and in the bone. The excretion of Yttrium chloride and the rare earth elements occurs gradually in the faeces over a period of 7 days. No Yttrium chloride or rare earth elements are detected in the urine. A small quantity of Yttrium chloride is found in the kidney, in the pancreas and in the heart. Yttrium chloride disappeared from whole blood within 4 hours. The distribution in the liver was the highest  between  8  hours  and  2  days  after  the  administration.  The  fraction  of  the  dose  of  Yttrium chloride found in the spleen was higher than for the other rare earth elements and increased over the time of the experiment. The distribution of Yttrium chloride in the bone increased gradually as well over the time of the experiment. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Nakamura et  al. 1993  determined  that  following  an  intravenous  administration  of  10  mg/Kg  of Yttrium to rats the half-life of Yttrium in the whole blood was 0.427 hours and 19.3 days in the liver (the concentration of Yttrium in the whole blood and the liver decreased exponentially over the time period between 8 hours to 4 days following administration of Yttrium chloride).

The  tissue  distribution  and  the  subcellular  localisation  of  Yttrium  chloride  were  studied  in  rats (Hirano et al. 1993). Yttrium chloride was been administered at different dosages ranging from 0.1 to 2 mg/rat. The animals were sacrificed 1 hour after the injection. The control groups received 0.2 ml saline intravenously. The animals were sacrificed 1h, 14, 28, 91 and 182 days after the injection. At 1 mg/rat, the blood Yttrium chloride content decreased rapidly within 3 hours; about 75 % of the dose

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

was  accumulated  in  the  liver  and  20  %  of  the  dose  in  the  spleen  at  7  hours  post  injection.  The concentrations of Yttrium chloride in the liver decreased slowly with a halftime of 144 days. At the concentration  tested  most  of  Yttrium  in  blood  plasma  was  found  in  the  colloids  which  are  rapidly cleared and distributed as such in tissues.

All three studies show that, at high dose, Yttrium injected by intravenous route accumulates primary in the liver and spleen. After an intravenous injection Yttrium chloride at high doses leads to formation of  a  dose  dependent  colloidal  material  in  the  blood,  composed  of  proteins  and  other  minerals (Calcium,  Strontium,  Sulfur,  Iron,  Phosphorus).  Kupffer  cells  and  macrophages  in  the  spleen subsequently take up this colloidal material.

In  rabbits  and  dogs,  Yttrium  concentrated  on  bone  surfaces  (Jowsey et al. 1955).  Yttrium  was  not found in either osteoid tissue  or  in  areas  of  active  calcification.  In  another  study  twenty-four  hours after an intraperitoneal injection of 500 pCi/kg of 91 Yttrium chloride to puppies, (Jowsey et al. 1958) 91 Yttrium chloride accumulated on bone surfaces, which are mineralised, and mostly in the epiphyseal bone.  Yttrium  was  taken  up  in  the  skeleton  and  appeared  on  non-growing  highly  calcified  bone surfaces. Yttrium was taken up by bone mineral and localised on the available resorbing and inactive surfaces of bone tissue.

Different  elimination  half-lives  (from  the  liver)  has  been  published  by  Nakamura et  al. 1993  and Hirano et  al. 1993.  They  are  equal  respectively  to  192  and  144  days.  This  might  be  explained  by differences  between  injected  doses  (10  mg  and  1  mg)  leading  to  the  formation  of  dose-dependent colloid  materials,  with  different  particle  sizes  and  then  different  elimination  patterns.  Taking  these elements into consideration, it can be assumed that after the administration of 90 Yttrium (even at low doses) the decay into zirconium occurs before the first elimination half-life in the liver elapses [the emission half-life of 90 Yttrium is equal to 64 hours]. In conclusion, Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride injected intravenously is present in plasma as a colloid and is then taken up by the liver, spleen and bone within a few hours. Yttrium chloride is found in the liver and spleen in higher quantities than in other organs. Considering increased activity of the phagocyte cells  in  these  organs  respectively  75%  and  20%  of  free  Yttrium  chloride  accumulated  there,  seven hours after the administration. In the prospect of the use of 90 Yttrium as a conjugate for radioimmunotherapy the quantity and activity of Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride, which will distribute in the body will be determined by its conjugation with the ligand and the therapeutic indication(s). -Pharmacokinetics properties of Yttrium administered at low doses In a study performed by Durbin et al. 1960 a small amount of 91 Yttrium chloride (the exact dose is not stated in the publication) was administered intramuscularly to rats [Note: 91 Yttrium is a beta emitting isotope  of  Yttrium  with  half-life  equal  to  58.51  days].  Four  days  after  the  administration 91 Yttrium chloride distributed mainly in the bones (55.6 % of the initial dose) and in the liver (12.1 % of the initial dose). The  study  of  the  distribution  of 88 Yttrium  (0.5 mCi/mouse)  administrated  intravenously  in  mice (Gansow 1991) showed that at 24, 48 and 168 hours this isotope of Yttrium mainly accumulates in vertebrae, pelvis, femur, kidney and liver. The amount of 91 Yttrium in bones is stable between 24 and 168 hours and is approximately equal to 20% of the injected dose per gram of bone in mice. Further kinetic studies indicated that 90 Yttrium  is quickly located in  the  femurs  (80%  of  the dose administered),  the  elimination  half-time  was  62  hours  (this  is  close  to  the  emission  half-life  of  the isotope 90 Yttrium  which  is  equal  to  64  hours).  The  uptake  of  Yttrium  in  the  femoral  marrow  and muscle  is  small.  Only  2  %  and  1  %  of  the  activity  of  the  femoral  bone  are  found  in  the  femoral marrow and in the muscle respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The literature results consistently show that Yttrium is intensively fixed on bones when administered at low doses, the bone uptake of radioactive Yttrium [as 90 Yttrium chloride] may secondarily induce a myelosuppression.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Watanabe et  al. 1999  investigated  the  use  of  disodium  calcium  edetate  (CaNa2EDTA)  in  case  of 90 Yttrium poisoning [note: disodium calcium edetate is a salt of EDTA and a chelating agent used in therapeutics]  to  prevent  or  treat  any  radiomyelosuppression.  In  this  study  disodium  calcium  edetate was  not  able  to  complex 90 Yttrium  once  fixed  on  the  bones  but  chelated 90 Yttrium  before  its deposition.

## -Conclusions on Pharmacokinetics after the administration of a single dose of Yttrium

In conclusion, administered by intramuscular, intraperitoneal or intravenous injection at low dose in carrier-free form to experimental animals radioactive Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride accumulates mainly in the bones and is retained. At low concentrations Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride seems to be mainly adsorbed on the  mineral  parts  of  bones  and/or  is  bound  by  strong  electrostatic  forces  to  carbamyl  and  sulfate groups of the bone tissue. However, mechanisms of retention are still unclear. There are conflicting opinions about the formation of colloid at these low concentrations.

The uptake of 90 Yttrium in the muscle and femoral marrow is small, achieving maximum activities per gram that is only about 1 % and 2% of the activity per gram in the femoral bone, respectively. There are no data in the literature about Yttrium elimination in faeces or urine at these concentrations, with the exception of a study (Jowsey et al. 1956). This study describes a total urine and faeces (combined) elimination of 8 to 10 % of the injected dose (rabbits, dogs, 500 à 1000 µ Ci/kg of 91 Yttrium). Pre-injection  of  chelators  increase  the  elimination  rate  of 90 Yttrium  in  the  urine.  Since  Yttrium  is intensively fixed on bones when administered at low doses, the bone uptake of radioactive Yttrium [as 90 Yttrium chloride] may secondarily induce a myelosuppression. · Pharmacokinetics at repeated doses A repeated  dose  study  confirmed  the  pharmacokinetic  properties  of  Yttrium.  Yttrium  chloride  was given to rats in the peritoneum at 60 mg/kg every two days for 5 months. The level of Yttrium in the femur was at the maximum equal to 100 times the uptake of strontium given at a similar dose. In case of repeated doses, one issue is the fate of 90 Zirconium produced by the decay of 90 Yttrium (maximum 1 µ g).  Zirconium  is  found  in  the  alimentation  (notably   vegetables).  A  standard  diet  is  estimated  to provide 3.5 mg of zirconium daily. Zirconium can be detected in several organs such as the brain, the kidney, the liver, the lungs, muscles, in fat tissues and in lymph nodes. Zirconium is concentrated in erythrocytes. In the whole blood zirconium levels are between 0.012 and 1.25 µ g/g (Berman 1980). These  endogenous  levels  of  Zirconium  are  extremely  high  in  comparison  with  the  possible concentrations resulting from the decay of 90Yttrium chloride. Overall the repeated administration of Yttrium chloride could possibly induce an accumulation of Yttrium in the bone marrow. The literature data  suggest  that  repeated  administrations  lead  to  accumulation  of  Yttrium  in  the  bone  but  this accumulation is subject to a limitation. The quantities of Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride administered during a treatment by radioimmunotherapy are such that any interference of previous injections are unlikely, except for the radiobiological effects at the bone marrow levels which may be cumulative. However, this risk may be balanced by the fact that in  a  standard  radioimmunotherapy  the  subsequent  doses  of 90 Yttrium  are  generally  given  after  the complete decay of the previous injection of 90 Yttrium. Toxicology Medicinal product no longer authorised

No original single dose or repeated dose toxicity studies were submitted. The published single dose and repeated dose toxicity studies have been performed with cold (i.e. non radioactive) Yttrium.

## · Dose extrapolation

It is expected that a patient will be exposed to an activity of 1.850 GBq (50 mCi), which corresponds approximately to 1.8 ng/kg for a person of 50 kg. According to product specification, 1 ml of 90 Yttrium chloride solution contains 1.850 GBq (50 mCi) of 90 Yttrium chloride.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Radioactive Yttrium is usually linked to a carrier. Assuming a standard situation with a radioincorporation rate for 90 Yttrium of 90%, therefore 0.18 ng/kg of free 90 Yttrium might be present in the formulation. This is substantially lower than the toxic dose levels reported in the literature (10 and 50 mg/kg of Yttrium chloride in rats).

## · Single dose toxicity

Hirano et al. 1993 conducted single dose intravenous toxicity studies in rats. One milligram of Yttrium and 0.1, 0.2, 0.5 or 2 mg of Yttrium have been administered to rats. Following administration, Yttrium was predominantly distributed to plasma in the blood. At doses superior to 0.2-mg Yttrium/rat, most plasma Yttrium appeared to be in the colloidal material, which was composed of proteins and some minerals. Electron microscopic analyses revealed that phagocytes in the liver and spleen took up the colloidal material. The liver Yttrium was slowly cleared with a half-life of 144 days at a dose of 1-mg yttrium/rat (see Pharmacokinetics above). Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  activities in plasma were increased with a peak 20 hour after the administration  of  1  mg  Yttrium/rat  and  returned  to  their  control  values  at  170  hour  after  the administration.  Nakamura et  al. 1993  found  a  slight  effect  of  the  administration  of  Yttrium  on glutamic-oxaloacetic and glutamic-pyruvate-transaminase serum activities 24 and 72 hours following the  administration  to  rats  of  10-mg  Yttrium/kg  intravenously.  This  confirms  previous  findings  of Hirano et  al. 1993.  Hirano et  al. 1993  reports  that  at  a  dose  of  1  mg  Yttrium/rat,  a  significant  and tremendous amount of Calcium was deposited in the liver (over 10-fold) and spleen (over 100-fold). Yttrium chloride given intravenous to rats increased calcium concentration in liver, spleen and lung. Yttrium  chloride  transitorily  increased  blood  calcium  concentration  but  no  obvious  changes  were observed in magnesium and phosphorus (Nakamura et al . 1993, Nakamura et al . 1996, and Hirano et al . 1993). The lethal doses 50 (LD50) values published for Yttrium in the literature were in the range of 45 to 515  mg/kg,  depending  on  the  administration  mode,  animal  model  and  chemical  form  of  the  metal. Further studies performed with Yttrium nitrate found that the lethal doses 50 (LD50) were 350 mg/kg (in  frogs  after  a  subcutaneous  administration),  1660 mg/kg  (in  mice  following  a  subcutaneous administration), 20 - 30 mg/kg (in rat after an intravenous administration) and 500 mg/kg (in rabbits after an intravenous administration, Haley 1965). In rats and mice, after receiving 12.5, 25, 37.5, 50, 75, 150 and 300 mg/kg Yttrium, Kyker et al . 1957 found a LD50 for Yttrium of 45 ± 2.1 mg/kg (in rats) and 88 ± 11.7 mg/kg (in mice), this observation was made 10 days after the administration of the product. The LD50 for Yttrium after an intravenous administration to rabbits was 515 mg/kg. The published LD50 for Zirconium ranges from 63 to 4100 mg/kg. Other animal studies also indicate a low order of toxicity, whether administered orally or injected (Berman, 1980). Cochran et al. 1950  found  that  the  lethal  dose  50  (LD50)  for  Yttrium  and  Zirconium  after intraperitoneal administration to rats ranged from 117 to 395 mg/kg and 63 to 393 mg/kg, respectively. Orally administered Zirconium showed LD50 ranged from 853-2290 mg/kg. · Repeated dose toxicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

The applicant has submitted only bibliographic data.

Yttrium chloride was administered at the dosage of 60 mg/kg every 2 days up to 5 months via the intraperitoneal route to rats. In this study the animals did not experience any sign of systemic toxicity. A further study in rabbits shows that intraperitoneal administration of Yttrium chloride for more than 5 months  produced  only  intestinal  adhesions  and  no  effect  on  growth  (Haley,  1965).  Intratracheal administration  of  Yttrium,  Neodymium  and  Ytterbium  oxides  to  rats  resulted  in  the  production  of granulomas after 8 months (Haley, 1965).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One article from 1980 (Berman, 1980) published a review on the toxicity of Zirconium. Zirconium sulphate was administered to mice (5 ppm in water) appeared to have little effect upon growth and did not  prove  to  be  carcinogenic.  Its  incorporation  in  deodorants  preparations  and  in  lotions  has  been documented  to  induce  allergic  reactions  that  can  lead  to  axillary  granuloma  and  hypersensitivity reactions. Exposure of rabbits to zirconium lactate mists induced pulmonary granulomata. Zirconium salts can act in vitro as lymphocyte mitogens and augment the functional responsiveness of immune cells,  which  may  explain  the  delayed  hypersensitivity  and  immunological  granulomas  (Price  and Skilleter, 1986).

Since 90 Yttrium  will  be  given  at  very  low  concentrations  the  absence  of  original  repeated  toxicity studies  may  be  justified.  However,  the  toxic  effects  of  high  dose  of  free  Yttrium,  the  effect  of  its colloidal form on the accumulation in the liver and spleen, and the toxicity of the high doses of stable Zirconium  should  be  considered.  When  high  doses  of  Yttrium  have  been  administered  to  rats granuloma formation in the spleen has been observed (Nakamura et al. 1991). Zirconium  [resulting  from  the  decay  of 90 Yttrium]  could  lead  to  the  immunology  response  of  the phagocytic cells in the liver and spleen. In an in vitro study using lymphocytes, Zirconium salts were found  to  be  mitogenic.  The  liver,  spleen  and  bone  can  be  considered  as  primary  target  organs  for Yttrium chloride. The presence of phagocyte cells in the liver and the spleen suggest that an aspecific immunological reaction occurs after an administration of Yttrium. This may be due to the presence of the colloidal form of Yttrium chloride in the blood. Finally, since a potent chelating agent is present in the preparation to be administered to patients, only a very little amount of Yttrium should be present in the organs. At the dose recommended for human no systemic toxicity linked to the Yttrium (as a non radioactive product) is expected. However, in the event  that  free  radioactive 90 Yttrium  is  released  the  expected  toxicity  should  be  linked  to  its radiobiological effects. · Genotoxicity No specific studies have been performed to evaluate the mutagenic potential of Yttrium. Although the mutagenicity of the metal is still unknown, the mutagenic potential of 90 Y 3+ relates to the effects of radiations. From the biodistribution studies, it seems that the spleen, the liver and especially the bone marrow are the target organs for unconjugated 90 Y 3+ . Some studies performed with 90 Y citrate administered intravenously in mice induced DNA damage in bone marrow erythroblastoid cells that could  be  measured  by  subsequent  scoring  of  micronuclei  in  peripheral  blood  reticulocytes.  A treatment of mice with 370 and 1,110 kBq (these doses are close to the doses administered in humans) induced  the  formation  of  1.33  %  and  2.28  %  of  micronuclei  in  peripheral  blood  reticulocytes (MnRETs)  2  to  4  days  after  administration  (Lenarczyk et al. 2001). 90 Yttrium  also  induced micronuclei in human peripheral blood lymphocytes (Mill et al. 1996). In mice, the survival of bone marrow  granulocyte-macrophage  colony-forming  cells  (GM-CFC)  was  reduced  by  intravenous administration of 90 Yttrium citrate (Goddu et al. 1998). · Carcinogenicity In accordance with the current requirements for radiopharmaceuticals, no carcinogenicity studies were performed with 90 Yttrium chloride. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Reproduction toxicity

## -Fertility and early embryonic development

No  data  are  available  on  the  chemical  toxicity  of  yttrium  toward  the  reproductive  function.  The radiotoxicity is the most relevant risk with regard to the reproductive function.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The biodistribution study performed by the applicant indicates that the uptake of Yttrium in the testes is very low.

A low fraction of orally administered Zirconium (dose, 0.23 g/kg/day in mice) is selectively fixed in the ovaries, inducing hypervascularisation one month after the end of treatment (Delongeas et al. 1983). This observation is not relevant to the Zirconium resulting from the decay of Yttrium, which is expected to be located mainly in bones.

The  lack  of  further  studies  is  reflected  in  the  proposed  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  for Yttrium.

-Embryo-foetal development A few studies on animals demonstrated the transfer of certain radioactive rare earth elements (REEs) from mother to offspring via the placenta. -Perinatal development A few studies on animals demonstrated the transfer of certain radioactive rare earth elements (REEs) from mother to offspring via the milk. · Local tolerance The applicant has not provided any information on local tolerance. · Ecotoxicity/Environmental risk assessment The applicant has submitted an assessment of environmental risks. The use of 90 Yttrium chloride is not considered  to  be  associated  with  unacceptable  environmental  risks  provided  that  the  regulations concerning the handling and disposal of radiopharmaceuticals are adhered to (see paragraph below). -Occupational Hazards Radiopharmaceuticals  should  be  received,  used  and  administered  only  by  authorised  persons  in designated clinical settings and receipt, storage, use, transfer and disposal are subject to the regulations and appropriate licences of the competent authorities. The user should prepare radiopharmaceuticals in a manner, which satisfies both radiation safety and pharmaceutical quality requirements. Appropriate aseptic  precautions  should  be  taken,  and  sterility  should  be  maintained  throughout  the  labelling procedures.  The  application  has  proposed  information  in  the  summary  of  product  characteristics section 4.4 Special warnings and special precautions for use. Discussion on toxico-pharmacological aspects 90 Yttrium is a precursor (to be used for radiolabelling purposes) for combination with other medicinal products  consisting  of  a  suitable  linker  (chelator)  and  a  disease-specific  carrier.  The 90 Yttrium precursor is not to be given directly to patients. No information was provided as GLP compliant studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Due  to  the  low  systemic  exposure  of 90 Yttrium  chloride  primary  or  secondary  pharmacodynamic effects  are  not  considered  likely  or  relevant  for  the  application.  Appropriate  information  on  the therapeutic use should be included in the dossier of any carrier/linker using 90 Yttrium as radiolabel.

In animals, Yttrium administered intravenously was present in plasma as colloid and it was taken up in few  hours  by  bone  with  a  greater  binding  than  calcium.  It  can  be  found  in  relatively  moderate quantities also in liver and spleen. There was almost no biological clearance from bones.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Dosimetry  data  on 90 Yttrium  have  been  provided  in  the  application  in  order  to  evaluate  the contribution of non-conjugated 'free' 90 Yttrium to the radiation dose following the administration of 90 Yttrium-labelled medicinal products, or following accidental administration of the precursor. These calculations  were  done  according  to  the  MIRD/ICRP  60  recommendations  based  on  studies  using male rats. As no real alternative is presently available for the estimation of radiation dose, the use of the  MIRD  approach  remains  acceptable.  The  biodistribution  studies  are  in  accordance  with  the literature  data,  and  they  show  a  relatively  high  and  stable  uptake  by  the  bones  with  high-absorbed doses to the  red  marrow  and the bone surface. Because of high Weighting Factor - indicating high radiosensitivity  -  relatively  high  values  of  the  Effective  Dose  highlights  the  importance  to  prevent presence of 'free' 90 Yttrium in conjunction with therapeutic administration of the labelled medicinal product.

Concerning  the  clinical  documentation  (as  defined  in  part  4  of  the  annex  to  the  Council  Directive 75/318/EEC  of  20  May  1975):  In  the  specific  case  and  only  in  that  case  of  precursors  for radiolabelling purposes (such as Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride) the clinical documentation is considered not to be relevant since the precursor itself is not administered as such to the patients.

Single  dose  intravenous  distribution  and  toxicology  studies  indicate  that  Yttrium  will  be  rapidly cleared from plasma and it will mainly locate in bone mineral. High dose target organ toxicity might include the liver and the spleen. No  supplementary  animal  studies  are  needed  because  1)  relevant  safety  issues  can  adequately  be evaluated from the literature, 2) animal welfare reasons, and 3) the fact that single and repeated dose toxicity studies will be provided for the carrier medicinal products using the 90 Yttrium radiolabel. Mutagenicity and carcinogenicity studies are not relevant for this product. An  environmental  risk  assessment  report  has  been  submitted.  Potential  environmental  risks  are acceptable. The information on occupational hazards will be included in section 4.4 Special warnings and  special  precautions  for  use  in  the  summary  of  product  characteristics,  which  appears  to  be appropriate for a radiopharmaceutical precursor. Non-clinical  data  show  that  unconjugated 90 Yttrium  accumulates  in  bones  and  radiation-induced myelo-suppression is likely to be the most important toxicity (and dose limiting factor) to be observed in the clinical situation. 4. Clinical aspects Nuclear medicine therapy (radionuclide therapy) uses radioactive sources for the selective delivery of radiation to target organs or tumours. The therapeutic use of radioisotopes has been developed in the mid 20th century following the discovery of methods of production of artificial radionuclides. In that respect  131Iodine  has  been  used  for  the  treatment  of  differentiated  papillary  or  follicular  thyroid carcinoma and 32Phosphorus-orthophosphate has been used for the treatment of polycythaemia vera. Potential  new  applications  of  radionuclide  therapy  (particularly  in  the  field  of  oncology)  reflect advances in antibody engineering (radioimmunotherapy), the identification of tumour antigen targets or the synthesis of peptide analogues (peptide therapy). These compounds are subsequently complexed with β -  (or α -)  emitting  radionuclides  in  order  to  achieve  an  appropriate  treatment  through  the delivery  of  a  cytotoxic  absorbed  radiation  dose  to  the  desired  target  and  prevent  or  minimise  the toxicity for normal tissues. Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride is a β -emitting radionuclide radiopharmaceutical. It is a precursor intended to be used for in vitro labelling of appropriate carriers for subsequent radionuclide therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- -The precursor itself is not the medicinal product, which is administered to the patient, and there is  no  clinical  indication  for  the  precursor  per  se  which  needs  to  be  justified  with  clinical information.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Other parallel exists, e.g. new excipients, where the competent authority would expect to see toxicology data but not necessary clinical trials focussed specifically on the clinical performance of the new excipient alone.
- -There  may  be  ethical  reasons  why  clinical  studies  on  the  precursor  alone  should  not  be performed or required.
- -In any case, relevant part III &amp; part IV information relating to the clinical use of the labelled product will be available in the dossier of the carrier.

Since Yttrium (Y-90) Chloride Sterile Solution CIS bio international will be exclusively used for the in vitro radiolabelling of pharmaceutical substances, such as monoclonal antibodies, peptides or other substrates  with  the  view  to  radiotherapeutical  applications, Yttrium  [ 90 Y]  chloride  should  not  be administered directly to patients .

Clinical pharmacology No original clinical pharmacology studies were submitted in the application. · Pharmacokinetics The biodistribution of 90 Yttrium will be specific to the carrier to be radiolabelled. In vivo presence of unconjugated 90 Yttrium may be observed in vivo due to poor chelation, product gradient or protein or peptide digestion releasing unconjugated 90 Yttrium. Clinical efficacy No original clinical efficacy studies were submitted in the application. In fact, information relating to clinical  efficacy  obtained  from  the  precursor alone is  considered  not  to  be  relevant,  in  this  specific case. However, sufficient information to support an indication as a radiolabelling agent has been included in this dossier, and this will be further supplemented by the results of relevant clinical efficacy and safety trials in the dossier of any carrier/linker molecule which proposes to use 90 Yttrium as a radiolabel. The indication proposed is in line with the conclusions of a CPMP ad hoc group of experts meeting on radiopharmaceutical precursors, held in April 2001. Clinical safety No original clinical safety studies were submitted in the application. The  safety  of  this  product  as  a  radiolabelling  agent  will  be  further  supplemented  by  the  results  of relevant clinical efficacy and safety trials in the dossier of any carrier/linker molecule which proposes to use 90 Yttrium as a radiolabel. In vivo presence of unconjugated 90 Yttrium may be observed due to poor chelation, product gradient or protein or peptide digestion releasing unconjugated 90 Yttrium. Unconjugated 90 Yttrium accumulates in bones and radiation-induced myelo-suppression is likely to be the most important toxicity (and dose limiting factor) to be observed in the clinical situation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

As for all the radioactive products, the radiation dose resulting from therapeutic exposure may result in higher incidence of cancer and mutations. In all cases, it is necessary to ensure that the risks of the radiation are less than from the disease itself.

- Safety in special populations

Usual  radiochemical  precautions  should  be  exercised  with  regards  to  use  of 90 Yttrium  chloride  in women of childbearing potential, pregnancy, and in children. Women of childbearing potential should use effective contraceptive means during treatment with an 90 Yttrium chloride medicinal product and for  at  least  2  months  afterwards  (20  times  the  half-life  of  Y-90).  The  same  applies  for  lactating

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mothers, as excretion of the product in breast milk cannot be excluded. During treatment and at least for  2  month  after  termination  of  treatment,  women  should  be  advised  to  discontinue  nursing.  Even though distribution  of 90 Yttrium chloride to testes is  low  (in  rats),  radiation-induced  sperm  damage cannot be fully excluded, and male patients should be recommended to use contraceptive measures during treatment and for 12 months following treatment (20 times the half-life of 90 Yttrium chloride plus 3 spermatogenesis cycles, 3x100 days). These later recommendations would appear appropriate to include in the summary of product characteristics of the carrier medicinal product.

The summary  of  product characteristics for Yttrium indicates that the use of 90 Yttrium is contraindicated  in  case  of  established  or  suspected  pregnancy  or  when  pregnancy  has  not  been excluded.

Dosimetry  data  on 90 Yttrium  have  been  provided  in  the  application  in  order  to  evaluate  the contribution of non-conjugated 'free' 90 Yttrium to the radiation dose following the administration of 90 Yttrium-labelled medicinal products, or following accidental administration of the precursor. These calculations  were  done  according  to  the  MIRD/ICRP  60  recommendations  based  on  studies  using male rats. As no real alternative is presently available for the estimation of radiation dose, the use of the  MIRD  approach  remains  acceptable.  The  biodistribution  studies  are  in  accordance  with  the literature  data,  and  they  show  a  relatively  high  and  stable  uptake  by  the  bones  with  high-absorbed doses to the  red  marrow  and the bone surface. Because of high Weighting Factor - indicating high radiosensitivity  -  relatively  high  values  of  the  Effective  Dose  highlights  the  importance  to  prevent presence of 'free' 90 Yttrium in conjunction with therapeutic administration of the labelled medicinal product.

· Overdose Appropriate information has been included in the summary of product characteristics for Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride CIS bio international and should be included in the summary of product characteristics of the carrier medicinal product on the drug-drug interaction potential regarding chelating agents. Chelators like  Ca-DTPA  or  Ca-EDTA  must  be  available  in  medical  institutions  which  use 90 Yttrium  for radiolabelling of carrier molecules. These chelators may be used immediately (i.e. within 1 hour) as an antidote in case that the 90 Yttrium chloride precursor is erroneously given to patients. 5. Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The important quality characteristics of Yttrium ( 90 Y) chloride are well defined and controlled, and the product  is  formulated,  manufactured  and  controlled  in  a  way  that  is  characteristic  of  a  solution  for injection.  The  specifications  and  batch  analytical  results  indicate  a  consistent  product  that  should result  in  uniform  radiolabelling  performance  from  batch  to  batch.  There  are  no  outstanding  quality issues which have a negative impact on the benefit/risk balance. Preclinical pharmacology and toxicology Due  to  the  low  systemic  exposure  of 90 Yttrium  chloride  primary  or  secondary  pharmacodynamic effects  are  not  considered  likely  or  relevant  for  the  application.  Appropriate  information  on  the therapeutic use should be included in the dossier of any carrier/linker using 90 Yttrium as radiolabel. In animals, Yttrium administered intravenously was present in plasma as colloid and it was taken up in few  hours  by  bone  with  a  greater  binding  than  calcium.  It  can  be  found  in  relatively  moderate quantities also in liver and spleen. There was almost no biological clearance from bones. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Single  dose  intravenous  distribution  and  toxicology  studies  indicate  that  Yttrium  will  be  rapidly cleared from plasma and it will mainly locate in bone mineral. High dose target organ toxicity might include the liver and the spleen.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No  supplementary  animal  studies  are  needed  because  1)  relevant  safety  issues  can  adequately  be evaluated from the literature, 2) animal welfare reasons, and 3) the fact that single and repeated dose toxicity studies will be provided for the carrier medicinal products using the 90 Yttrium radiolabel.

Mutagenicity and carcinogencity studies are not relevant for this product.

An  environmental  risk  assessment  report  has  been  submitted.  Potential  environmental  risks  are acceptable. The information on occupational hazards will be included in section 4.4 Special warnings and  special  precautions  for  use  in  the  summary  of  product  characteristics,  which  appears  to  be appropriate for a radiopharmaceutical precursor.

Based on the CPMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CPMP considered by concensus that the benefit/risk profile of Ytracis indicated for the radiolabelling of carrier molecules which have been specifically developed and authorised for radiolabelling with this radionuclide (Radiopharmaceutical precursor - Not intended for direct application to patients.) was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation.

Non-clinical  data  show  that  unconjugated 90 Yttrium  accumulates  in  bones  and  radiation-induced myelo-suppression is likely to be the most important toxicity (and dose limiting factor) to be observed in the clinical situation. Efficacy 90 Yttrium is a precursor (to be used for radiolabelling purposes) for combination with other medicinal products  consisting  of  a  suitable  linker  (chelator)  and  a  disease-specific  carrier. The 90 Yttrium precursor is not to be given directly to patients. For  this  reason,  concerning  the  clinical  documentation  (as  defined  in  part  4  of  the  annex  to  the Directive 2001/83/EC of 6 November 2001): In the specific case and only in that case of precursors for  radiolabelling purposes (such as Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride) information relating to clinical efficacy obtained from the precursor alone is considered not to be relevant. Appropriate information to support an indication as a radiolabelling agent has been included in this dossier,  and  this  will  be  further  supplemented  by  the results  of  relevant  clinical  efficacy  and  safety trials in the dossier of any carrier/linker molecule, which proposes to use 90 Yttrium as radiolabel. Safety No original clinical safety studies were submitted in the application. The  safety  of  this  product  as  a  radiolabelling  agent  will  be  further  supplemented  by  the  results  of relevant clinical efficacy and safety trials in the dossier of any carrier/linker molecule which proposes to use 90Yttrium as a radiolabel. Appropriate information has been included in the summary of product characteristics for Yttrium [ 90 Y] chloride  and  should  be  included  in  the  summary  of  product  characteristics  of  the  carrier  medicinal product on the drug-drug interaction potential regarding chelating agents. EDTA may be used as an antidote in case that the 90 Yttrium chloride precursor is erroneously given to patients. Recommendation Medicinal product no longer authorised