---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:45:33
document_pages: 16
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/zenapax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: zenapax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 6.3553162
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 11:56:49.825175
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Zenapax. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 November 2003. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1. Introduction Zenapax (INN: daclizumab) is a new active substance intended for immunosuppressive therapy. The approved therapeutic indication is 'prophylaxis of acute organ rejection in de novo allogeneic renal transplantation. It is used concomitantly with an immunosuppressive regimen including cyclosporine and corticosteroids in patients who are not highly immunised'. This indication, initially approved for adult patients, has been then extended to paediatric patients through a type II variation. Daclizumab, the active ingredient in Zenapax, is a recombinant monoclonal antibody expressed in the NSO myeloma cell line. The antibody is directed against the high affinity interleukin-2 (IL-2R) receptor, which is an important mediator of lymphocyte activation, and consequently of graft rejection. The high-affinity IL-2 receptor is composed of three noncovalently bound chains, a 55-kD alpha chain (also referred to as CD25 or Tac), a 75-kD beta chain, and a 64-kD gamma chain.  It is present on all alloactivated T cells, but usually not on resting lymphoid cells. Interaction of IL-2 with this receptor is required  for  the  clonal  expansion  and  continued  viability  of  activated  T-cells.  By  blocking  IL-2R daclizumab  inhibits  proliferation  of  lymphoid  cells,  lymphocyte  activation  is  suppressed,  and  graft rejection is less likely. The  recommended  dose  for  Zenapax  in  adult  and  paediatric  patients  is  1  mg/kg.  The  medicinal product should initially be given within 24 hours before transplantation. The next and each subsequent dose should be given at intervals of fourteen days for a total of five doses. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical, and biological aspects Since the marketing authorisation was granted, the overview under section part II, only the chapter 'Stability'  has  been  revised.    As  the  quality  variations  submitted  since  the  marketing  authorisation was granted had no major impact on the safety/efficacy of Zenapax, the quality scientific discussion below  reflects,  with  the  exception  of  the  shelf  life,  the  data  submitted  in  support  of  the  initial marketing  authorisation.  See  module    \"Steps  taken  after  granting  the  Marketing  Authorisation\"  for information on quality variations in a format of a line listing. Zenapax  is  presented  as  concentrate  for  solution  for  infusion.  The  volume  of  Zenapax  containing  the appropriate  dose  is  added  to  50  ml  of  sterile  0.9%  saline  solution  in  order  to  be  administered intravenously. Daclizumab  is  engineered  in  a  murine  myeloma  cell  line  expressing  heavy  and  light  chain  genes. Material for use in the clinical trials was prepared from cell line SP2/0 using a CMV enhancer promoter system. Due to limited production yields, the antibody was re-expressed in a murine GS-NSO myeloma cell line. The main issue identified during the evaluation of the Part II of the dossier was the establishment of the equivalence between the products derived from these two cell lines.

Extensive biochemical studies indicate that the product derived from the production cell line has similar activity  to  the  original  molecule,  but  with  some  differences,  notably  in  the  amount  of  incompletely processed  N  terminus    (3%  to  40%)  and  the  presence  of  the  135KD  band  in  the  GS-NSO  product. Bioequivalence studies in healthy volunteers were conducted to establish the identity of the SP2/0 and GS-NSO materials (see clinical details Part IV).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Composition

One vial with a withdrawable volume of 5 ml concentrate for infusion contains:

25  mg  daclizumab,  polysorbate  80,  sodium  chloride,  sodium  phosphate  monobasic,  sodium  phosphate dibasic, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, water for injection.

The formulation used in the clinical studies was identical to the proposed market formulation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The container is a type I flint glass vial (Ph. Eur.) with butyl rubber stopper (Ph. Eur.). Development pharmaceutics Studies  were  conducted  for  justification  of  the  pH,  concentration  of  stabiliser,  buffer  type  and  ionic strength used for formulation of the product. Photolytic stability studies were also performed. Both of the stoppers used during development are found compatible with the product. Compatibility with the devices recommended for administration was investigated. Method of preparation The manufacturing formula for a batch of 20 l is given. The size of a production batch may range from 20 to 200 l. The preparation of the formulated bulk solution is performed in nine steps, starting with the manufacture  of  the  PBS  buffer.  Part  of  the  PBS  buffer  is  then  added  to  polysorbate  80  and  mixed. Bulk  substance  in  PBS  buffer  is  added  to  a  separate  vessel  in  amounts  equivalent  to  the  theoretical amounts of protein. The bulk solution is weight adjusted with PBS buffer to approximately 85 % of the final batch volume and mixed. The polysorbate solution is added to the main batch. After mixing, the pH is verified to be 6.9 + 0.1. A final weight adjustment with PBS buffer is performed. The final solution is additionally mixed and subjected to filtration through a sterile 0.2 µ m membrane filter into a sterilised receiver vessel. The filtered formulated bulk solution is transferred from the receiver vessel to liquid filler via a presterilised 0.2 µ m membrane filter. 5.4 ml of the sterile filtered formulated bulk is dispensed into sterilised and depyrogenated vials. Prior to stoppering of vials, each vial is passed through the nitrogen manifold with filtered nitrogen. Sealed vials undergo inspection performed by visual or automatic control. An extended in-process testing was performed during production of up to three batches in the production scale. Under the conditions used, acceptable product homogeneity was obtained and only minor protein loss was seen during filtration and filling pump purge. The percent antibody monomer remained constant throughout the process. Steam  sterilisation  is  used  for  sterilisable  machine  parts,  filter  housing  with  membrane  filter,  surge systems,  rubber  components  including  stoppers  and  receiver  vessels  made  of  glass,  glass-lined,  or stainless steel. Vials are subject to dry-heat sterilisation and depyrogenation at 350º C for ≥ 10 minutes. The container/closure integrity has been satisfactorily validated. Media fills for validation of the aseptic processing are performed in accordance with GMP. Control of starting materials Specifications and routine tests The specifications for release cover all tests commonly applied to purify protein solutions. The physical tests for clarity, pH and osmolality represent simple consistency controls of the last step of the purification procedure. The identity is assured by several methods: peptide map, isoelectric focusing, SDS PAGE under reducing and  non-reducing  conditions  with  silver  staining,  Western  blotting,  size  exclusion  chromatography, N-terminal sequence analysis, IL-2 receptor binding assay and the bioassay.

At the same time the above-mentioned methods give evidence of the high purity of the product regarding related proteins, as well as clipped or aggregated molecules. Tests for other impurities, which originate from the cell culture and purification process such as host cell DNA and proteins, are performed.

The test for bioburden requires that the purified bulk solution is close to sterility and the limit for bacterial endotoxins  of  max.  2.5  EU/mg  represents  an  appropriate  safety  margin  in  relation  to  the  generally tolerated  amount  of  max.  5  EU  administered  intravenously  per  kg  and  hour.  In  addition  tests  on mycoplasma and virus are performed as in-process controls.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Protein concentration is determined by UV measurement.

The  IL-2  receptor  binding  assay  measures  the  concentration  of  daclizumab-IL-2  receptor  complex  by ELISA using horseradish peroxidase labelled goat anti-human IgG as the labelling antibody.

In  the  bioassay  the  overall  function  of  the  antibody  is  tested,  i.e.  the  inhibition  of  activated  T  cell proliferation  by  daclizumab  in  the  presence  of  IL-2.  The  cell  line  used  in  the  assay  requires  IL-2  for cellular proliferation. Daclizumab also binds to the IL-2 receptors of the cells and therefore serves as a competitive inhibitor  for  IL-2.  Inhibition  of  DNA  synthesis,  used  as  a  measure  of  cell  proliferation,  is determined by 3H-thymidine uptake.

The different steps of the purification procedure are: Concentrated broth → Q-Sepharose Chromatography (flow-through collected) → S-Sepharose Chromatography → pH treatment for viral inactivation  (pH 3.6 3.8, 30 to 35 minutes) → Concentration/Diafiltration → DV50  Filtration for virus  removal → Q-Sepharose  II  Chromatography  (flow-through  collected) → -  Viresolve  Filtration  for  virus  removal → Concentration  by  ultrafiltration → S-300  Gel  Filtration  Chromatography → Concentration  by ultrafiltration → Aseptic filling.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Development genetics An 8-week female BALB/c mouse was immunised i.v. with human T cells derived from peripheral blood T-cells  from  a  patient  with  mycosis  fungoides.  Fusion  of  spleen  cells  isolated  from  the  immunised BALB/c  mouse  to  the  NS-1  mouse  myeloma  cell  line  followed  by  isolation  of  hybridoma  cells  was performed using conventional techniques. From among the positive clones, a single clone was picked and propagated in murine ascites. The ascites derived mouse monoclonal antibody has been extensively characterised. It was shown to be of the IgG2a subclass. It specifically binds to the 55-kDa subunit of the IL-2 receptor and is reactive with activated human T cells or allogeneic cells. To reduce the risk for an immune response against the murine sequences, the monoclonal antibody was transformed into a chimeric molecule. A humanised antibody was constructed by combining the complementary-determining regions (CDRs) of the mouse monoclonal with human framework and constant regions. To maximise homology, a computer model of the mouse antibody was used and amino acids outside the CDRs, which are likely to interact with the CDRs or the antigen, were retained in the humanised antibody. The variable regions of the heavy and light chains were constructed entirely synthetically and cloned in the appropriate vector construct. After transfection and establishment  of  a  stable  SP2/0  cell  line  producing  the  'humanised'  anti-Tac  antibody,  the  nucleotide sequence of integrated DNA for both the light and DNA sequencing of the corresponding cDNA verified the  heavy  chain  sequence.  The  determined  sequences  agreed  completely  with  the  expected  DNA sequences. The variable regions of the heavy and light chains were constructed entirely synthetically and cloned in the appropriate vector construct. After transfection and establishment of a stable SP2/0 cell line producing the  'humanised'  anti-Tac  antibody,  the  nucleotide  sequence  of  integrated  DNA  for  both  the  light  and DNA sequencing of the corresponding cDNA verified the heavy chain sequence. Cell bank system The Master  Cell  Bank  (MCB)  was  established  from  one  frozen  ampoule  of  the  pre-seed  stock  (PSS). A single  vial  of  the  MCB  was  used  to  prepare  the  200  ampoules  of  the  Working  Cell  Bank  (WCB). The current WCB is expected to last 10 years. New WCBs will be prepared according to an approved Standard Operating Procedure. Fermentation and harvesting The fermentation process is started by the thaw of one out of three WCB vials and inoculum in a tissue culture flask. Cells are expanded in progressively larger spinner flasks until reaching the size of 1 l. At this stage, cells may be continuously cultured back into a 1l spinner for a maximum of 80 days. Three to six 1l spinner flasks are pooled and used as inoculum for the 30 l bioreactor.  The cell culture is successively scaled up from the 30 l via a 80 l and a 400 l bioreactor before seeded into the 2000 l bioreactor used for production. In-process control tests are applied at different steps to monitor glucose, lactate, osmolarity, mycoplasma, bioburden, virus contamination and daclizumab titer. Purification

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

All steps except aseptic filling are performed at 2º - 8º C. The fill is performed at ambient temperature. Details  are  provided  on  the  equipment  as  well  as  on  the  operating  conditions  including  bed  volumes, loading, washing and elution conditions flow rates, regeneration, rinsing and storage of the columns and membranes.

## Characterisation

Medicinal product no longer authorised Daclizumab is composed of two identical heavy chain sub-units and two identical light chain subunits linked by disulfide bridges. MS techniques were used for determination of the primary structure and for studies of the heterogeneity of the humanised antibody. Analysis of the amino acid sequence revealed a partial removal of the C-terminal lysine in the heavy chain. In the analysis, no signal could be obtained from the heavy chain N-terminal peptide. This could later be confirmed to be due to the conversion of the glutamine  residue  to  pyroglutamic  acid.  No  modification  of  the  light  chain  was  detected.  A  single glycosylation site was identified in the heavy chain at Asp296. Analytical Development Validation reports for most routine as well as non-routine analyses are provided. The methods used for determination of the osmolarity, protein content, identity by tryptic map ,  as  well as contamination with BSA and DNA are satisfactorily validated. Analysis of pI by isoelectric focusing is used to test for identity. The method used for determination of the N-terminal amino acid sequence is satisfactorily validated for specificity and sensitivity. The HPLC-SEC method applied for determination of the monomer form of the antibody is well validated. The ELISA used for quantification of daclizumab is satisfactorily validated for accuracy, linearity, reproducibility and limit of quantification. The cell-based bioassay used to measure the antiproliferative effect of daclizumab shows rather high intra- and inter-assay variability. Process validation Data for validation of the consistency of the current process were collected from five production batches via in-process and release testing. Analytical evaluation of three lots has been completed. Results from inprocess  control  testing  during  fermentation  are  only  shown  graphically.  Growth  characteristics  for  all batches appear to be fairly consistent. Analytical evaluation for this batch has not been completed and, thus, it is impossible to conclude whether the deviations seen are acceptable.  Titres of 10 8 FFU/ml for retrovirus-like particles are seen in the pre-harvest medium. Removal/inactivation of virus is addressed in section IIV. The consistency of the purification process was studied by analysis of daclizumab yield and purity, endotoxin content, bioburden as well as contamination with DNA and BSA in the different steps. Control tests on the finished product The specifications for release are the following: The  physical  tests  for  clarity,  colour,  pH  and  osmolality  represent  simple  consistency  controls  of  the composition of the product. Both visible and sub-visible particles are tested. The identity is assured by isoelectric focusing and the activity measured in the bioassay. The purity with regard to aggregation and fragmentation is routinely controlled by SE-HPLC and SDS PAGE analyses. The protein concentration is measured by UV determination. Potency is controlled by the bioassay described for the bulk drug solution. Because the principle of the IL2  receptor-binding  assay  is  also  part  of  the  bioassay  the  IL-2  receptor-binding  assay  is  not  part  of  the routine release analysis. In addition bacterial endotoxins and sterility are tested. Stability

The specifications for the active substance stored under the recommended conditions are the same as for batch  release.  In  addition  to  the  tests  and  specifications  fixed  for  release  analysis,  the  IL-2  receptorbinding assay is performed in stability studies for finished product.

The proposed shelf life of 18 months is considered acceptable.

The shelf life was extended to 24 months in July 2000 following submission of additional data through a variation to the Marketing Authorisation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Virus validation

Viral validation studies are performed in accordance with the appropriate ICH guidelines.

Since the cell line used for production contains endogenous retroviruses (X-MuLV), it is important that the production process efficiently and reproducibly removes or inactivates these viruses. The steps that contribute to viral clearance and inactivation are S- Sepharose, Q-Sepharose II, low pH inactivation, DV50 filtration and Viresolve filtration. Viral clearance studies were performed in order to study the effect of different processing steps to the virus elimination. Down - scaling data is also presented.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The overall viral safety of Zenapax has been demonstrated. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Zenapax (daclizumab) is a monoclonal antibody that specifically binds to the alpha sub-unit of the IL-2 receptor  (IL-2R)  complex (also  called  Tac)  and  inhibits  the  binding  and  biological  activity  of  IL-2  on activated lymphocytes. Interleukin-2 plays an important role in allotransplant rejection thus daclizumab is likely to be effective for the prophylaxis of acute transplant rejection in patients receiving allogeneic renal transplants.  It  should  be  administered  in  combination  with  an  immunosuppressive  regimen  including cyclosporine and corticosteroids. The purpose of constructing a recombinant anti-Tac immunoglobin of the human IgG1 isotype derived from a murine anti-Tac IgG2a monoclonal antibody (humanised antibody) is to reduce the immunogenicity  of  the  antibody  and  improve  its  pharmacokinetic  properties  compared  with  a  murine antibody.  From  pharmacological  and  toxicological  point  of  view,  the  primate  seems  to  be  the  only appropriate species to assess efficacy and safety studies of daclizumab. Daclizumab  used  for  the  pre-clinical/clinical  studies  was  prepared  from  cell  line  SP2/0  using  a  CMV enhancer system whereas the product intended to be marketed is derived from GS-NSO myeloma cell line.  The  equivalence  between  these  two  formulations  with  respect  to  binding  to  IL-2R α and  also  to pharmacokinetics after a single dose has been demonstrated. Pharmacodynamics In vitro the IC50 of 125I-IL2 lymphoblast binding was 3.3 x 10 -9 M; and the maximum inhibition of IL-2 stimulated lymphocyte proliferation was 51%.  There was little or no uptake of murine anti-Tac by human cells.  DAC  unlike  murine  derived  anti-Tac,  had  positive  effects  on  antibody  dependent  cell  mediated cytotoxicity? In  vivo studies  of  cardiac  allograft  transplantation  in  cynomolgus  monkeys  demonstrated  statistically significant  advantage  against  placebo  and  against  murine  anti-IL2R.    A  study  of  renal  allograft transplantation  in  the  cynomolgus  monkey  gave  equivocal  results  against  placebo,  possibly  due  to experimental design and technical problems. In animal models of inflammation positive effects of DAC were shown on autoimmune uveoretinitis and collagen induced arthritis. No  studies  have  been  conducted  to  explore  the  secondary  pharmacodynamics  of  DAC  other  than  its immunogenic potential;  several  experiments  demonstrate  that  anti-Tac  antibodies  of  murine  origin  are more immunogenic in primates than 'humanised' antibodies. Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic  studies  were  performed  in  both  rats  and  primates,  which  were  also  used  in  the toxicological  evaluation  of  daclizumab.  Representative  results  from  pharmacokinetic  studies  in  the monkey are tabulated below, with results from human pharmacokinetic studies for comparison.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Cynomolgus monkey                                                                                  | AUC hr.µg/ml                                                                                       | T½ hr                                                                                              | Cl ml/kg/hr                                                                                        | Vdss ml/kg                                                                                         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.5 mg/kg                                                                                          | 7005                                                                                               | 166                                                                                                | 0.26                                                                                               | 60.8                                                                                               |
| Expected values in man based on data from renal transplant patients receiving five 1.0 mg/kg doses | Expected values in man based on data from renal transplant patients receiving five 1.0 mg/kg doses | Expected values in man based on data from renal transplant patients receiving five 1.0 mg/kg doses | Expected values in man based on data from renal transplant patients receiving five 1.0 mg/kg doses | Expected values in man based on data from renal transplant patients receiving five 1.0 mg/kg doses |
| 80 kg Maged 45                                                                                     | 5298                                                                                               | 480                                                                                                | 15.1                                                                                               | 2.5/3.4*                                                                                           |
| 50 kg F aged 25                                                                                    | 6504                                                                                               | 409                                                                                                | 7.7                                                                                                | 1.5/1.9*                                                                                           |

Medicinal product no longer authorised *central/peripheral volume In the cynomolgus monkey male animals had an AUC of 1.5 - 2.2 times that of females, this is likely to be due to the greater clearance in females, amounting to approximately twice that of males. In the male rat tissue distribution to heart, kidney, liver, and lung was low, with an apparent Volume of Distribution  of  130  ml/kg. 125 [I]-DAC  uptake  by  the  thyroid  was  46-48  fold  that  of  the  simultaneous plasma concentration at 96-192 hours. Knowledge of metabolism is limited to single dose administration in three male rats.  As with metabolism knowledge of the route of elimination of DAC is very limited and seems to rest on the single dose rat study in which 29% of radiolabel was eliminated in urine and 3% in faeces. Toxicology Single dose toxicity Single  dose  studies  in  mice  and  rabbits  disclosed  no  toxic  effects.  In  a  toxicokinetic  study  to  GLP standards  cynomolgus  monkeys  received  0,  1.5,  5.0,  15.0  mg/Kg  of  daclizumab  for  28  days.    Three animals  died,  one  from  anaesthesia/cannula  implantation,  and  two  from  pulmonary  inflammation, possibly due to pneumonia. There were no consistent abnormal physical findings; laboratory abnormalities found were reductions in platelet and leukocyte counts and an increase in serum glucose in males. Repeated dose toxicity A  repeat  dose  toxicity  study  was  performed  in  a  clinically  relevant  cynomolgus  monkey  model (3/sex/dose). Daclizumab  was  administered  by  the  clinical route (i.v.) at doses of 1.5, 5.0 or 15 mg/kg/day for 28 days. Control monkeys received daclizumab-vehicle only. Daclizumab displayed a toxicological profile similar to that, which might be expected of an immunoglobulin. Reproduction studies No reproductive toxicity studies have been carried out. Given that daclizumab has a very long half-life, that  there  is  no  knowledge  of  similar  compounds  and  that  there  is  a  six  month  'risk'  period  post transplantation,  it  is  stated  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  that  women  of  childbearing potential should use contraception to prevent the risk of pregnancy and continue its use for an additional 4 months after the last dose of Zenapax. Genotoxicity No increase in the  mutant  frequency was  observed in  the  Ames test  for  any  of  the  tested  strains  after treatment of 11.4 to 1140 µ g/plate of daclizumab. Daclizumab at concentrations of 496-1984 µ l/ml did not induce structural chromosome aberrations either in the presence or the absence of metabolic activation. Carcinogenicity

The applicant has submitted no studies with respect to the carcinogenic potential. The lack of such studies is  accepted  because  of  the  limited  duration  of  the  clinical  treatment  period  and  the  immunogenic properties of the drug, making conventional carcinogenicity studies inappropriate.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Local tolerance

A venous irritation in rabbits was presented. In this study, daclizumab was well tolerated.

## Immunotoxicity

The immunogenicity of daclizumab was evaluated both in vitro and in vivo . For the in vitro evaluation a immunisation  culture  system  with  human  peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells  (PBMCs)  was  used. There  was  no  significant  difference  in  the  in  vitro  antibody  formation  to  daclizumab  compared  to  the negative  control.  The in  vivo immunogenicity  of  daclizumab  was  examined  in  monkeys.  Two  of  six monkeys in the intermediate  dose  group  displayed anti-daclizumab  antibodies  at  the  end  of  a  28  days study at concentrations of 260 and 1504 ng/ml, respectively. Furthermore, in a single dose pharmacokinetic monkey study, administration of 1.5 or 15 mg/kg daclizumab did not stimulate antibody development. In conclusion, in these studies it has been demonstrated that the 'humanisation process' of the murine antibody was effective in producing an immunoglobulin less immunogenic in primates than the original murine protein.

The paediatric Study NO15318 was a Phase I/II open pharmacokinetic and safety study conducted at seven centres in the US. Patients who were less than eighteen years old and receiving renal transplants from living related donors were eligible for inclusion. It was planned to recruit twenty patients from three age groups; five years old or younger, aged six to twelve, and aged thirteen to seventeen years. Patients who had previously been exposed to an IL-2 directed monoclonal antibody were excluded, as were those with lymphocytotoxic cross matches and those with other significant disease or infection. Daclizumab was given as add-on therapy to patients who were receiving 'conventional' immunosuppressant regimens, however these were not specified or standardised.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 4. Clinical aspects The importance of IL-2 in mediating allograft rejection is undisputed, and the benefit of blocking this pathway has been documented in the literature.  Monoclonal antibodies directed against the alpha chain (IL-2R α ),  which  is  the  most  restricted  and  selective  of  the  three  IL-2  receptor  chains  on  activated lymphocytes, have been used in animals and humans.  Success was limited by the immune response of the host to the mouse protein, which resulted in accelerated clearance of the administered substance and loss of efficacy. Daclizumab was constructed as a recombinant humanised monoclonal antibody, containing 90% human IgG1  sequences  and  10%  murine  anti-Tac  immunoglobulin  sequences,  the  latter  constituting  the complementarity determining region of the antibody.  The expectation for such a humanised monoclonal antibody would be improved pharmacokinetic properties, as well as decreased immunogenicity, compared with the original murine antibody. The recommended dose for daclizumab is 1 mg/kg administered intravenously (i.v.)  over  a  15-minute period. The initial dose should be given within a 24-hour period before transplantation and then every 14 days thereafter for a total of five doses. The initial SPC, issued at the time of the marketing authorisation, referred to an ongoing study in children and indicated that very limited pharmacokinetic data were available. The study in question was completed and  the  results  were  submitted  in  support  of  an  extension  of  the  indication  to  children  aged  five  to seventeen years. Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetic data initially presented were derived from three trials conducted in the target renal transplant  adult  patient  population  (Protocols  NO14392,  NO14874  and  NO14393),  using  a  sparse sampling  strategy  and  subsequent  population  based  analysis  by  nonlinear  mixed  effect  modelling. A  population  analysis  of  daclizumab  in  bone  marrow  transplant  patients  was  also  included  in  the submission (analysis of Protocols N3681 and NO14348).

Daclizumab  was  given  every  fourteen  days  for  a  total  of  five  doses  starting  immediately  before transplantation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Following the PK/PD phase of the study, patients were followed for one year to collect safety and efficacy data. The study was closed when the last patient had completed the extension phase.

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of patients in the trial.

| Age category                |                  | 5 and under   | 5-12     | 13-17    |
|-----------------------------|------------------|---------------|----------|----------|
| No. of patients             | m/f              | 10/8          | 12/6     | 15/10    |
| Age in years:               | mean (sem)       | 3 (0.4)       | 9 (0.4)  | 15 (0.3) |
| Weight in kilograms:        | mean (sem)       | 12 (0.7)      | 29 (2.3) | 52 (2.9) |
| Cold ischemia time in hour: | mean (sem)       | 5 (2.4)       | 9 (2.6)  | 15 (2.6) |
| Donor                       | living/cadaveric | 15/3          | 10/8     | 16/9     |
| No. receiving five doses    |                  | 14            | 17       | 22       |

|          |   Clearance (l/h) |   V1 (l) |   V2 (l) |   t1/2 (h) |
|----------|-------------------|----------|----------|------------|
| Children |              0.01 |     1.94 |     1.36 |        313 |
| Adults   |              0.15 |     2.49 |     3.43 |        480 |

The  uptake  of  the  antibody  2A3,  which  recognises  CD25  exhibited  on  activated  T-Cells,  was measured  at  various  time  points.  Uptake  of  the  monoclonal  7G7/B6  (which  is  not  blocked  by daclizumab) served to measure non-specific changes.  Group mean changes in 2A3 binding are shown in Figure 1.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Population  pharmacokinetic  methods  were  used  to  derive  pharmacokinetic  indices  for  an  average paediatric patient. The results, with historical adult values, are shown in Table 2. The inter-individual variability  in  children  is  said  to  compare  favorably  with  that  in  adults.  However,  the  various comparators suggest a variability of up to twice that in adults. Table 2.  PK indices for adults and children V1 =vascular; V2 = extra-vascular On request of the CPMP, individual data were provided, together with details of the methods used to derive the pharmacokinetic indices.  Daclizumab levels were measured in 542 blood samples from 124 patients. The data were analysed using the NONMEM (non-linear mixed effect model) computer programme, which uses an iterative process to derive 'best fit' variables for the data. The resulting model  is  then  tested  for  predictive  function  against  observed  data  from  some  patients,  which  have been reserved prior to the model development. Similar methods were used for the paediatric study. The factors found to influence plasma clearance were increasing body weight, and age, black patients and those with proteinuria were found to have lower plasma clearance. Pharmacodynamics By using fluorescence-labelled antibodies that recognise different epitopes of the receptor complex and fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis, it was determined that daclizumab bound to the alpha chain  (Tac)  of  the  IL-2  receptor  on  peripheral  blood  lymphocytes  (PBL)  and  that  these  cells  are  not eliminated from the circulation, nor loose the Tac receptor from the cell surface. Adults Studies were performed in renal transplant patients who received multiple doses of daclizumab, either 0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg once a week or once every other week for a total of five doses in a phase I study (Protocol NO14392), or 1.0 mg/kg once every other week for a total of five doses in the triple-therapy phase III study  (Protocol  NO14393)  in  which  10  daclizumab-treated  patients  were  compared  with  10  placebotreated  patients.  The  Tac  receptor  remained  saturated  for  as  long  as  2  months  after  the  last  dose  of daclizumab.  The return to baseline levels of CD25+ cells occurs after four months. Children

Minor reductions and quite a different pattern with time were seen for 7G7/B6.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Fig. 1 Plasma binding of 2A3 antibody by age group and study day. Daclizumab treatment ended on day 56.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Twenty of 58 (34%) evaluable patients were considered to be positive for anti-daclizumab antibodies. Although no temporal relationship was observed between the onset of acute rejection episodes and the measurement  of  positive antibody levels, the low  rate of acute rejections during the study (17%) limited the ability to assess this relationship.

Medicinal product no longer authorised An idea  of  the  scatter  of  individual  and  age  group  responses  can  be  gained  from  Figure  2,  which shows the CD25 expression before and at the end of five treatments with daclizumab, i.e. the expected nadir. The reduction in expression is generally impressive and no age related differences are evident. Fig. 2 Percentage expression of CD25 on peripheral blood mononuclear cells, by patient and age group, at baseline (taken as Day -1 or 0) and end of treatment ~ Day 56. Dotted line is line of identity. Anti-daclizumab antibodies

A significantly higher rate of anti-daclizumab antibodies in children (~ 34%) compared to the rates in the  adult  studies  (~  9%)  provided  in  support  of  the  marketing  authorisation  holder  application  was observed.   While this  might  be  related  to  different  patterns  of  steroid  use  no  facts  are  advanced  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

support this hypothesis. The antibody development has not been shown to have any clinically relevant effects.

## Efficacy

## Adults

## Dose selection

|                                         | Study NO14874   | Study NO14874      | Study NO14393   | Study NO14393      |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|-----------------|--------------------|
|                                         | Placebo (N=134) | Daclizumab (N=141) | Placebo (N=134) | Daclizumab (N=126) |
| Number of patients with acute rejection | 63 (47%)        | 39 (28%)           | 47 (35%)        | 28 (22%)           |
| P value*                                | 0.001           | 0.001              | 0.03            | 0.03               |

Medicinal product no longer authorised All patients were to receive a total of five doses of 1.0 mg/kg of daclizumab or placebo administered as a 15-minute intravenous infusion.  The first dose was given immediately before transplantation. Subsequent doses were given every 14 days, and patients were to complete the course of treatment even if rejection occurred. 80-83% of randomised patients received all five doses. The dosage regimen was based on the following considerations: · In trial NO 14392, no rejection episodes were observed at a dose of 1 mg/kg · Pharmacokinetic  modelling  using  data  from  renal  transplant  patients  showed  that  a  dose  of 1 mg/kg given every 2 weeks would maintain serum trough concentrations above 5 mg/ml for the first 70 days post-transplant. · In vitro IL-2 receptor binding and IL-2-dependent lymphoblast proliferation assays indicated that a concentration of 5 to 10 mg/ml was sufficient to saturate the alpha chain of the IL-2 receptor and eliminate IL-2 stimulated proliferation of T-lymphocytes. · No dose-limiting toxicity was observed either pre-clinically or clinically in the phase I studies. Efficacy endpoints In  Study  No.14393  daclizumab  was  added  to  background  immunosuppression  with  cyclosporin, prednisolone, azathioprine. In  Study No.14874 daclizumab was added to background immunosuppression with cyclosporin and prednisolone. For  both  phase  III  studies,  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint  was  the  proportion  of  patients  experiencing biopsy-proven acute rejection in the first 6 months post-transplant. This endpoint has been frequently used in transplantation studies and is generally accepted, although, its validity as a surrogate marker for longterm graft survival may be incomplete. The incidence of biopsy-proven rejection at 12 months and three years was evaluated secondarily.  Other secondary efficacy endpoints included: · Time to biopsy-proven acute rejection · Number of acute rejection episodes per patient · Graft survival at six months, 12 months and three years · Patient survival at six months, 12 months and three years · Cumulative dose of corticosteroids and use of antilymphocyte therapy for rejection · Incidence of delayed graft function · Graft function at six months · CMV infections during the first six months Acute rejection Daclizumab reduced the incidence of biopsy proven-acute rejection in the first 6 months post-transplant from  47%  to  28%  in  NO14874  (double  therapy)  and  from  35%  to  22%  in  NO14393  (triple  therapy) (Table 3). Table 3. Biopsy-Proven Acute Rejection at 6 Months Post-transplant

*Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified by centre

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The time to biopsy-proven acute rejection was significantly longer in daclizumab-treated patients than in placebo-treated patients in both studies.

Graft survival at 6 months post-transplant was numerically improved in the daclizumab group compared with the placebo group in both trials, and the difference was statistically significant in the triple-therapy study  (Table  4).  The  most  common  cause  of  graft  loss  in  the  first  6  months  post-transplant  in  the daclizumab group was technical surgical complications (7 of 13 daclizumab patients in NO14874 and 2 of 3  daclizumab patients in  NO14393).  The most common cause of graft loss in the placebo group was death  with  a  functioning  graft  (5  of  19  placebo  patients  in  NO14874  and  4  of  12  placebo  patients  in NO14393).

|                                        | Study NO14874     | Study NO14874        | Study NO14393     | Study NO14393        |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|-------------------|----------------------|
|                                        | Placebo (N = 134) | Daclizumab (N = 141) | Placebo (N = 134) | Daclizumab (N = 126) |
| 6 Months Post-transplant               |                   |                      |                   |                      |
| No. of patients with functioning graft | 115 (86%)         | 128 (91%)            | 122 (91%)         | 123 (98%)            |
| P value                                | 0.22*             | 0.22*                | 0.023[            | 0.023[               |
| 1 Year Post-transplant                 |                   |                      |                   |                      |
| No. of patients with                   | 111 (83%)         | 124 (88%)            | 121 (90%)         | 120 (95%)            |
| functioning graft P value              | 0.300*            | 0.300*               | 0.078*            | 0.078*               |

|                          | Study NO14874     | Study NO14874        | Study NO14393     | Study NO14393        |
|--------------------------|-------------------|----------------------|-------------------|----------------------|
|                          | Placebo (N = 134) | Daclizumab (N = 141) | Placebo (N = 134) | Daclizumab (N = 126) |
| 6 Months Post-transplant |                   |                      |                   |                      |
| No. of patients alive    | 128 (95.5%)       | 141 (100%)           | 130 (97.0%)       | 125 (99.2%)          |
| P value*                 |                   | 0.01                 |                   | 0.19                 |
| 1 Year Post-transplant   |                   |                      |                   |                      |
| No. of patients alive    | 126 (94%)         | 140 (99%)            | 129 (96%)         | 123 (98%)            |
| P value*                 |                   | 0.013                |                   | 0.512                |

The trend to improvement in patient survival in daclizumab patients was maintained at one year posttransplant in both studies, and the difference between the two treatment arms in the double-therapy study remained statistically significant (p = 0.013). A total of four daclizumab patients and 13 placebo patients had died by 1 year post-transplant. Causes of death are dealt within the safety section.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Table 4. Graft Survival at 6 Months and 1 Year  Post-transplant *Stratified logrank test, [Unstratified logrank test. A trend  to  improvement  in  graft  survival  in  daclizumab  patients  compared  with  placebo  patients  was maintained at one year post-transplant.  Numerically more graft losses from acute or chronic rejection were seen in the placebo group than in the daclizumab group in both studies. Graft loss was defined as return  to  chronic  dialysis,  transplant  nephrectomy,  retransplantation,  or  death.  Technical  complications were mainly renal artery and/or vein thrombosis. Patient survival at 6 months post-transplant was numerically better in patients treated with daclizumab, compared with those treated with placebo in both studies; the difference was statistically significant in the double-therapy study (Table 5).  No daclizumab-treated patients died of infection in the first six months post-transplant, while seven placebo patients died as a result of infection in the first six months. Table 5. Patient Survival at 6 Months and 1-Year Post-transplant

## Additional Secondary Analyses

The  cumulative  dose  of  corticosteroids  during  the  first  6  months  post-transplant  was  lower  in  the daclizumab group than in the placebo group in both studies (3132 vs. 3622 mg in NO14874 and 4314 vs.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

4184 mg in NO14393), but the difference was statistically significant only in the double-therapy study (p = 0.01). A smaller proportion of patients in the daclizumab group required additional antilymphocyte therapy  to  treat  rejection  than  in  the  placebo  group  in  both  studies.    The  difference  was  statistically significant in the double-therapy trial (8% vs. 16%, p = 0.02). Graft function at 6 months post-transplant was significantly better in the daclizumab group than in the placebo group in the double-therapy study and equivalent in the daclizumab and placebo groups in the triple-therapy study.  At 1 year post-transplant, no difference was seen in renal function between the daclizumab group and placebo group in either study with the exception of serum creatinine levels, which were significantly lower in the daclizumab group than in the placebo group in the double-therapy study. The occurrence of CMV infections was used as a marker for detecting the potential for overimmunosuppression.  The incidence of CMV infections was lower in the triple-therapy study than in the double-therapy study, correlating with the requirement in the triple-therapy protocol for CMV prophylaxis.

| Study NO14393 ( + triple immunosuppression)       | Study NO14393 ( + triple immunosuppression)       | Study NO14393 ( + triple immunosuppression)       |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| survival                                          | Placebo n = 134                                   | Daclizumab n = 126                                |
| Patient Graft survival                            | 126 (94.0%) 111 (83%)                             | 116 (92.0%) 106 (84%)                             |
| Median and range GFR (ml/min)                     | 43 (15 - 117)                                     | 48 (12-91)                                        |
| Biopsy proven chronic rejection*                  | 8 of 11                                           | 12 of 19                                          |
| Lymphoproliferative disorders or other neoplasm   | 9 (6.7%)                                          | 10 (7.9%)                                         |
| longer Study NO14874 (+ double immunosuppression) | longer Study NO14874 (+ double immunosuppression) | longer Study NO14874 (+ double immunosuppression) |
|                                                   | no Placebo n = 134                                | Daclizumab n = 141                                |
| Patient survival                                  | 118 (88.1%)                                       | 135 (95.7%)                                       |
| Graft survival Median and range GFR (ml/min)      | 105 (78%) 53 (15 - 99)                            | 116 (82%) 54 (22 -112)                            |
| Biopsy proven chronic rejection*                  | 10 of 22                                          | 6 of 16                                           |
| Lymphoproliferative disorders or other neoplasm   | 12 (9%)                                           | 7 (5%)                                            |

<!-- image -->

The  analysis  set  out  very  clearly  the  one  and  three  year  results  of  the  two  studies  and  the  pooled outcome. Some patients on triple immunosuppression were titrated downward to double immunosuppression  and  some  on  double  immunosuppression  had  the  components  changed  e.g. swapping mycophenolate for azathioprine. It was considered that double or triple immunosuppressant regimens could be regarded as standard in the EU. Therefore, the CPMP considered that the pooled analysis was a reasonable reflection of the long-term 'real life' experience of daclizumab. The author of this publication commented that, given the efficacy of daclizumab, the trials were not powered to

Medicinal product no longer authorised Long term patient survival and graft survival rates Table 6. Principal outcomes of the Phase III studies at three years post transplant Study NO14874 (+ double immunosuppression) *biopsies were optional and therefore infrequent In Study No.14393, the three-year patient survival rate was 92% for daclizumab and 94% for placebo (table 6); the equivalent graft survival rates were 84% and 83%. Neither difference from placebo is statistically significant. In Study No.14874, the three year patient survival rate was 96% for daclizumab and 88% for placebo (p  =  0.017),  showing  a  statistically  significant  advantage  in  patient  survival;  the  equivalent  graft survival rates were 82% and 78%, showing a non statistically significant difference between placebo and daclizumab in this triple immunosuppressant trial (table 6). A  pooled  analysis  of  graft  survival  from  both  studies  (Bumgardner  et  al.,  Transplantation  2001 72:839-45) showed a non-significant advantage for graft survival at three years (p = 0.3).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

show a difference at three years; the authors' power calculation suggests a trial of 1,200 patients per treatment might have been necessary.

## Children

## Acute rejection

Medicinal product no longer authorised Five out of sixty (8.3%) transplanted patients had a biopsy-proven acute rejection during the first six months after transplantation, and a total of ten (17%) in the first twelve months (one patient had two episodes). An additional patient experienced a presumed acute rejection episode. The acute rejection episodes were evenly distributed among the three age groups. Six rejection episodes were classified on biopsy as mild. Two episodes were classified as moderate; one episode was classified as borderline change and one was classified as acute rejection with no grade specified. For reference the six-month rejection rates in the two adult Phase III studies were 22% and 28% (it is unclear if this is all rejections or biopsy proven rejections.) Delayed graft function Three patients experienced delayed graft function; two had improved renal function by one week and the third by two weeks post-transplant. Graft Failure Two patients experienced graft loss; one due to renal vein thrombosis, the other due to focal segmental glomerular sclerosis. Safety Adults The daclizumab safety database contained data on 518 patients at the time of the Marketed Authorisation, who received at least one dose of daclizumab in studies conducted in three different indications: renal transplantation,  bone  marrow transplantation, and Tac-bearing tumours. The assessment focuses on the pooled data from the four renal transplant studies, which included 336 patients who received daclizumab and 293 patients who received placebo. More than 80% of the patients in the four renal transplant studies received all five doses of study drug. Patients who received less than five doses of study drug were considered to have not completed the study and  were  classified  as  prematurely  withdrawn.    The  rates  of  premature  withdrawal  in  the  daclizumab group and the placebo group were similar. The number of daclizumab-treated patients who died during the first year post-transplant was significantly less than the number of placebo patients who died (5 of 336 daclizumab patients vs. 13 of 293 placebo patients, p = 0.03). All but one death occurred in the pivotal trials. None of the deaths in the daclizumab groups were assessed as related to study drug.  Infection was the most common cause of death in the placebo groups and was responsible for 6 of the 13 fatalities. The addition of daclizumab to double or triple therapy did not increase the overall incidence of serious adverse events or change the type of serious adverse events reported.  Infections were the most frequent serious adverse events considered possibly or probably related to study drug and were reported in 2.4% of the patients in the daclizumab group and 4.1% of the patients in the placebo group. Table 7. Overview of Serious Adverse Events

|                                                               | Placebo (N = 293)   | Daclizumab (N = 336)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------|
| All Serious Adverse Events (Including Unrelated)              |                     |                        |
| Total No. of patients with one or more serious adverse events | 130 (44.4%)         | 134 (39.9%)            |
| Total No. of serious adverse events                           | 237                 | 240                    |
| Possibly or Probably Related Serious Adverse Events           |                     |                        |
| Total No. of patients with one or more serious adverse events | 22 ( 7.5%)          | 14 (4.2%)              |
| Total No. of serious adverse events                           | 28                  | 17                     |

Note:  Infections and laboratory abnormalities are included as adverse events.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Infections

Most patients experienced infections, but no difference was seen between daclizumab-treated patients and placebo  patients  with  respect  to  either  the  incidence  of  infections  or  the  types  of  infection,  except  for cellulitis  and  wound  infections,  which  were  more  frequent  with  daclizumab.    One  daclizumab-treated patient died of infection, compared with seven in the placebo groups.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Lymphoma and other malignancies At one year post-transplant, two daclizumab-treated patients (0.7%) and two placebo patients (0.7%) had developed a lymphoma. Both daclizumab patients were from the triple-therapy study, and one of these patients had received only one dose of drug before being withdrawn from the study.  One placebo patient in each study developed lymphoma.  At 1 year post-transplant, a total of four daclizumab-treated patients and five placebo patients had developed non-melanoma skin tumours. Hypersensitivity reactions Two cases of severe hypersensitivity reactions following administration of Zenapax have been reported. Long-term safety Review of the causes of death from the three-year results of studies No14393 (placebo group: n = 134; daclizumab  group:  n  =  126)  and  No14874  (placebo  group:  n  =  134;  daclizumab  group:  n  =  141) showed that in the placebo group three patients died from brain haemorrhage, one from hypoglycaemia, and seven from sepsis/malignancy.  In the daclizumab group there were no deaths due to brain haemorrhage and four patients died due to sepsis/malignancy. Safety of the concomitant use of Zenapax with another antilymphocyte antibody therapy Study  NR15880, an  ongoing  multi-centre  (initiated  in  August  1999),  randomised,  double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in patients receiving a first cardiac transplant, assesses the effect on acute graft rejection of the addition of daclizumab to immunosuppressive therapy which includes mycofenolate mofetil  (3  g/day),  cyclosporin,  and  steroids.  Daclizumab  was  administered  as  a  1-mg/kg  infusion within twelve hours of transplantation and repeated at 14-day intervals for a total of five doses. Table  8  below  shows  the  number  of  patients  dying,  experiencing  graft  rejection,  and  the  general classification of cause of death. It is apparent that although less patients experienced acute rejection episodes in the active treatment arm there were more deaths. Table 8. : Patients dying and experiencing graft rejection at twelve months Nine patients in the daclizumab group and none in the placebo group had an infection that was directly implicated  in  the  cause  of  death.    In  addition,  there  were  five  other  daclizumab  patients  and  four placebo patients who had an active infection at the time of death but in whom the infection did not seem to be directly implicated in the death of the patient.

|                                          | Daclizumab (n= 216)   | Placebo (n=218)   |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------|
| Mortality at 12 months                   | 21 (9.7%)             | 12 (5.5%)         |
| Graft rejection at 12 months             | 97 (44.8%)            | 116 (53.4%)       |
| Death from infection                     | 10                    | 0                 |
| Death from shock and multi-organ failure | 2                     | 4                 |
| Cardiac death                            | 2                     | 5                 |
| Other cause of death                     | 7                     | 3                 |

Risk factors associated with mortality and infection

The  daclizumab  and  placebo  patients  were  well  matched  for  most  baseline  characteristics  and preoperative conditions. However, there was some imbalance with regard to the proportion of diabetic

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients in the two groups: for the daclizumab group 35 (16%) were diabetic; 20 (10%) of placebo patients were diabetic.

The  use  of  maintenance  immunosuppression  was  similar  in  both  groups.  The  frequency  of  antilymphocyte therapy (OKT3, ATG, ATGAM) use was also similar in both groups. However, eight of forty  patients  receiving  daclizumab  and  anti-lymphocyte  therapy  eight  died,  whereas  two  of  thirtyseven patient receiving anti-lymphocyte therapies died.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Higher cumulative doses of steroids were used to treat rejection during 91 to 180 days and 181 to 365 days in patients receiving Daclizumab compared to that used in the placebo group (Table 9). The population  used to  determine the  role  of  infection  and  study  drug  in  a  patient's  death  was  the safety population and not the intent to treat population, i.e. patients who received at least one dose of study  drug  and  who  had  at  least  one  observation  post  randomization.  Using  these  numbers  and excluding patients who died more than 90 days after receiving the last dose of daclizumab, 10/216 (4.6%)  of  daclizumab  patients  died  with  an  infection  in  which  daclizumab  could  possibly  be implicated, compared to 4/207 (1.9%) of patients receiving only placebo. The  imbalance  between  placebo  and  daclizumab  deaths  with  respect  to  concomitant  use  of antilymphocyte therapy seems more likely to be a chance finding due to small numbers rather than a true interaction. Children Ninety-eight percent of patients entered into the study NO15318 received five doses of daclizumab; four patients received six doses.  No patients died during the study. Study withdrawals due to adverse events Two patients withdrew from the study due to adverse events. A four-year-old girl experienced renal vein  thrombosis  on  the  second  day  after  transplantation.  A  thirteen-year-old  boy  experienced  poor renal function post transplantation due to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Serious adverse events Serious adverse events resulted in discontinuation of daclizumab in two cases. None of the remaining 49  serious  adverse  events  required  adjustment  in  daclizumab  dosage  or  administration.  Of  the 51 serious adverse events, 49 (96%) resolved with no sequelae, one resulted in graft loss and one was considered unresolved (asthma). Review of the nature of the serious adverse events shows that they are highly likely to be related to transplantation surgery and not to treatment with daclizumab. There are no evident differences in the patterns  between  age  groups.  However  if  there  were  differences,  in  reality,  it  is  unlikely  that  they would show up between small groups studied. Adverse events Adverse  events  were  experienced  by  98.4%  of  patients  (i.e.  one  patient  did  not  have  any  adverse events). Given the severity of the underlying disease, the major surgical intervention, the concomitant immunosuppression, the lack of a placebo or an alternate dosage group, and the relatively small size of the study, the CPMP has considered that no meaningful information can be drawn from the analysis, at least in regard to a causative association with daclizumab treatment. Laboratory abnormalities

The nature and frequency of those experienced, including those related to renal function is as might be expected.

## Risk/benefit assessment

Daclizumab  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  providing  enhanced  immunosuppressive  efficacy  without appreciably increasing the risk of complications due to overimmunosuppression. Although only recipients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

of  cadaveric grafts were included in the Phase III trials, the data from Phase I/II trials and the general mechanism of action  of  daclizumab  support  extrapolation  of  the  findings  to  recipients  of  living  donor kidney allografts. The data demonstrated a good safety profile of Zenapax during the three years followup period.

The  overall  benefit/risk  ratio  of  daclizumab  in  the  indications  applied  for  has  been  considered  as favourable.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The marketing authorisation has been therefore recommended. 5. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment On the basis of the assessment of the dossier as described in this report, as well as the type II variation submitted  to  extend  the  therapeutic  indication  to  include  paediatric  patients,  and  the  type  II  variation submitted to include the long term follow-up data from the two pivotal trials in the product information, the  CPMP  has  evaluated  in  depth  the  risk/benefit  balance  and  amended  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics in order to ensure that all considerations were properly reflected. A positive opinion was adopted for Zenapax for the following indication in adult and paediatric patients: 'Zenapax  is  indicated  for the prophylaxis  of acute organ  rejection in de  novo allogenic renal transplantation  and  is  to  be  used  concomitantly  with  an  immunosuppressive  regimen,  including cyclosporine and corticosteroids in patients who are not highly immunised'.

<!-- image -->