---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:10:49
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/zerit-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: zerit-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.825321
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 18:11:39.783277
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

This module reflects the initial scientific discussion for the approval of Zerit. This scientific discussion has been updated until 1 September 2005. For information on changes after this date please refer to module 8B.

## 1. Introduction Zerit  contains  the  active  substance  stavudine,  a  antiviral  agent,  which  inhibits  the  replication  of the Human  Immunodeficiency  Virus (HIV) in human  cells in vitro . Stavudine is a thymidine 2'-deoxynucleoside analogue. It is structurally similar to three other drugs which had been previously approved for the treatment of HIV disease: ZDV (zidovudine), ddC (zalcitabine) and ddI (didanosine). All of these compounds act as inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase and of viral DNA synthesis. Zerit is presented either as a capsule in four strengths or as a powder for oral solution. Zerit capsules are supplied in strengths containing 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg and 40 mg of stavudine. The composition  of  the  capsules  is  virtually  identical,  differing  only  with  respect  to  the  capsule  shell colour  by  use  of  iron  oxide  dyes  (red,  yellow  and/or  black)  and  titanium  dioxide.  Capsules  are packaged in white high-density polyethylene bottles with a child resistant screw cap (60 capsules per bottle) or in blister pack with 14 capsules per strip and 4 strips (56 capsules) per carton. Zerit powder for oral solution is supplied in one strength, which provides 1 mg of stavudine per ml of  reconstituted  solution  (200  ml  per  bottle).  The  container  consists  of  a  high-density  polyethylene bottle  with  a  child  resistant  screw  cap,  and  a  fill  mark  (200  ml  of  solution  after  reconstitution). A 30 ml measuring cup is supplied in the cardboard carton. Zerit 37.5 mg, 50 mg, 75 mg and 100 mg prolonged release hard capsules were approved in November 2002.  In  February  2005,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  requested  to  withdraw  the  marketing authorisation of Zerit prolonged-release hard capsules for manufactoring reasons. Zerit is indicated in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products for the treatment of HIV infected patients. 2. Chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects Stavudine  is  a  chiral  molecule  with  four  possible  stereoisomers  of  which  the  one  used  has  the 1' R ,  4'S configuration at the two stereogenic centres. This is equivalent to the ß-D-configuration of the anomeric carbon of the sugar moiety. The synthesis of stavudine involves four steps starting from ß-D-thymidine, for which one of the three stereogenic centres is removed during synthesis. The enantiomeric purity of the active substance is dependent on the  purity of the starting material, thymidine. The specifications for thymidine only contain tests for specific rotation and it is not known whether  these  methods  are  appropriate  to  detect  enantiomeric  impurities.  Therefore  the  applicant provided additional information on the methods  and specifications applied in assessing the enantiomeric  purity  of  the  active  substance.  The  routine  controls  of  thymidine  and  stavudine themselves were considered insufficient to ensure enantiomeric purity to accommodate future changes of  sources  of  thymidine.  To  resolve  this  issue,  the  vendors  of  the  starting  material  committed themselves to the applicant that he will be kept abreast of eventual manufacturing changes introduced. In addition, in the event of a change in the process for a new vendor (ß-D-thymidine), the applicant will  perform  a  full  qualification,  including  enantiomeric  purity,  of  this  new  ß-D-thymidine.  Further data from the applicant have shown that the manufacturing process produces stavudine exclusively. The hydrolytic degradation of stavudine has also caused some concerns, as it is the main degradation pathway during the synthesis, purification, formulation and product shelf-life. Clarification was requested regarding the mass balance of the hydrolysis of stavudine in the solid state, also to avoid an overestimation of the purity of the stavudine reference standard. Regarding the carbohydrate mass balance upon degradation of stavudine, the lack of data has been accepted considering the complicated chemistry involved and the efforts made to elucidate it. Alternative methods used to confirm the purity of the reference standard were considered relevant although the applicant was asked to present at the hearing details on these methods and results obtained. Data obtained from 400 MHz Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy have demonstrated the validity of the assignment of the edicinal product no longer authori

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

purity of the reference standard by HPLC. Therefore the purity of the reference standard would make it possible to detect significant amount of the carbohydrate degradants.

During  discussion  following  the  hearing,  the  applicant  agreed  on  a  tightening  of  the  release specifications for thymine.

Data showing in  vitro and in  vivo development of resistance using different HIV-strains, substrains and  host  cells,  and  the  induction  of  an  eventual  cross-resistance  with  other  potential  therapeutic nucleosides were sparse.

Since the use of wet granulation resulted in hydrolytic degradation on storage at elevated temperatures, Zerit  capsules are  manufactured  using  standard  excipients  and  a  dry  granulation process (slugging or roller-compaction) and then milling, followed by encapsulation. It  has  been  demonstrated  that  capsules  containing  5  mg,  10  mg,  20  mg  and  40  mg  exhibited  an equivalent in vitro dissolution profile. Although  capsules used in clinical trials differed in composition,  the  bioavailability  is  considered  unlikely  to  be  affected  because  of  the  high  water solubility of stavudine (&gt;83 mg/ml). Zerit powder for oral solution is  manufactured according to a conventional manufacturing process for this pharmaceutical form. During the assessment procedure of the application, the applicant was requested to confirm the uniformity of individual doses delivered by the dosing device to be used with the reconstituted oral solution. The results submitted showed a satisfactory deviation of no more than 2% of the deliverable volume from any of the markings on the cup. During discussion following the hearing,  the  applicant  agreed  on  the  specifications  (at  release  and  shelf-life)  of  both  preservatives (methylparaben and isopropylparaben) in this formulation. Concerning  the  Spray-Dried  Cherry  Flavour  (FMC  20194),  the  further  documentation  submitted describing  the  chromatographic  method  used  for  the  identification  of  the  main  constituents  is satisfactory. For both pharmaceutical forms, results of stability  data, the proposed shelf life and storage conditions as stated in the SPC are acceptable. 3. Toxico-pharmacological aspects Stavudine, a thymidine nucleoside analogue, in  vitro exhibits  an  anti-retroviral  activity  against  both HIV-1 and HIV-2. Stavudine is phosphorylated by cellular kinases to stavudine triphosphate which exerts  antiviral  activity.  Stavudine  triphosphate  inhibits  HIV  replication  by  the  two  following mechanisms: · It  inhibits  HIV  reverse  transcriptase  (RT)  by  competing  with  the  natural  substrate,  thymidine triphosphate. · It inhibits viral DNA synthesis by causing DNA chain termination. In addition, stavudine triphosphate may inhibit cellular DNA polymerases, particularly mitochondrial DNA polymerase γ . The concentration required for 50% inhibition of HIV-1 or HIV-2 in vitro ranged between 0.009 to 0.3 µM. Antiviral activity of stavudine towards other viruses such as human hepatitis B appeared to be low.  A  consequence  of  stavudine's  ability  to  inhibit  mitochondrial  DNA  polymerase γ may  be  the induction of peripheral neuropathy, which is the main dose-limiting effect in patients. This effect has also  been  reported  with  the  other  nucleoside  analogues.  This  phenomenon  is  reflected in  vitro by decreased  viability  of  neurones  and  undifferentiated  cells  as  well  as  morphological  alterations,  but cannot be reproduced in vivo in experimental animal models. Pharmacodynamics Studies  on  pharmacodynamic  effects  with  respect  to  the  proposed  indication  consisted  almost exclusively of bibliographic data and referred to in vitro experimental models. No studies have been conducted in animal models of HIV-infection. Studies  intended  to  investigate  potential  secondary  pharmacological  effects  revealed  no  unexpected effects. edicinal product no longer authori

## Pharmacokinetics

The pharmacokinetic profile of stavudine was determined in several animal species and included distribution and elimination studies. Concerning the metabolism of stavudine, data and theoretical

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

considerations support the metabolism of the pyrimidine moiety via endogenous pathways. During the assessment procedure of Zerit, the lack of data related to the metabolic fate of stavudine with respect of the sugar moiety was pointed out. The applicant submitted further data on the elimination of radiolabelled stavudine studies performed in rat and monkey to further investigate the fate of the sugar moiety. These data showed that the kidneys excrete the sugar moiety in one of three forms, as yet not identified further. This deficiency was accepted on the basis of the wide safety margin obtained in the repeat-dose toxicity studies.

## 4. Clinical aspects

Toxicology Single  oral  doses of  stavudine  (up  to  approximately  500  times  the  recommended  human  dose)  in animals did not reveal severe toxicities. The repeat-dose toxicity of  stavudine  was  studied  in  adequately  designed  studies in  animals.  Two effects of long-term administration of stavudine, erythroid (decreased red blood cell count, sometimes accompanied by decreased haemoglobin and haematocrit) and hepatic alterations (liver enlargement with centrilobular hepatocellular hypertrophy), are clearly indicated. Two additional possible targets, for  which  there  is  much  weaker  evidence  of  toxicity,  are  leukopoiesis  and  the  lymphatic  system. Safety margins calculated on the basis of systemic exposure are very wide. The dose limiting clinical toxicity  of  stavudine,  peripheral  neuropathy  is  not  evident  in  repeat-dose  toxicity  studies,  or  in investigations specifically directed towards the study of this particular effect. Likewise, increases in serum transaminases, a phenomenon associated with the clinical use of stavudine, are inconsistent and sporadic. Some concerns were raised related to the increase in liver weight as result of cellular hypertrophy and endoplasmic reticulum proliferation. As stavudine has no inducing effect on cytochromes P450, the increase in liver weight is likely due to induction of some other protein or enzyme system. Reproductive toxicity studies performed in  animals,  with  high  doses  of  stavudine  were  associated with  decreased  implantation  efficiency.  Maternal  and/or  foetal  toxicity  was  not  observed  at  doses giving  significantly  higher  exposure  than  during  clinical  therapy.  Until  additional  data  become available, stavudine should only be given during pregnancy after special consideration. Stavudine was excreted in the milk of lactating rats. The data available on stavudine excretion into human breast milk are insufficient to assess the risk to the infant. Therefore, mothers should be instructed to discontinue breast-feeding prior to receiving Zerit. It  is  recommended  that  HIV-infected  women  should  not  breast-feed  their  infants  under  any circumstances to avoid transmission of HIV. Genotoxic  potential has  been  shown  for  stavudine.  It  is genotoxic  in in  vitro tests  in  human lymphocytes possessing triphosphorylating activity (in which no no-effect-level was established), in mouse  fibroblasts  and  in  an in  vivo test  for  chromosomal  aberrations.  Similar  effects  have  been observed with other nucleoside analogues. Whether a threshold for the genotoxicity exists is difficult to assess, as well as its clinical relevance. Carcinogenicity studies over 24 months have been performed in mice and rats. On the basis of the results  from  both  studies,  the  liver  was  identified  as  the  main  target  organ  for  the  development  of neoplasm lesions. The carcinogenic potential of stavudine is of limited relevance to the therapeutic use of Zerit, as indicated by the high safety margins (40 to 170) to clinical exposures. Studies conducted in mice and in a non-rodent species revealed no alteration of immune functions and no delayed type of hypersensitivity reaction respectively. An  environmental  risk assessment  for  stavudine  has  been  performed.  With  regards  to  the  results obtained from Phase I trials, stavudine is not expected to have any significant environmental impact. edicinal product no longer authori

The clinical development programme for stavudine consisted of three non-randomised Phase I trials in adults  and  one  in  children,  two  randomised  Phase  II  trials  in  adults  and  one  in  children  and  two

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

randomised double-blind Phase III studies. None of the studies involving children were designated to demonstrate the clinical benefit of Zerit in this population.

Zerit was initially proposed for the treatment of HIV-infected patients in whom zidovudine is not or is no  longer  appropriate . Efficacy  as  measured  by  clinical  endpoints  was  shown  in  patients  after prolonged prior zidovudine monotherapy.

Zerit is intended to be administered orally twice a day at a dose of 40 mgin adults weighing 60 kg or more and at a dose of 30 mg in adults weighing less than 60 kg and children with a weight of 30 kg and more. The recommended starting dose in children with a weight below 30 kg is 1 mg/kg twice daily (every twelve hours). From birth to 13 days old the recommended dose is 0.5 mg/kg twice daily (every 12 hours). This reduced posology is based on average study data and may not correspond to individual variation in kidney maturation. Pharmacodynamics and Pharmacokinetics The pharmacodynamic studies consisted  of  three  non-randomised,  dose-ranging  studies  involving 107 patients. From these studies, maximum tolerated dose was determinated to be 2 mg/kg/day and the dose-limiting effect observed was peripheral neuropathy. All doses of stavudine revealed immunological and virological activity. Preliminary  efficacy  was  assessed  in  terms  of  changes  in  biological  markers  (CD4  cells  count  and viral load) in a randomised, open-label study, administering three different stavudine doses (0.1, 0.5 and 2 mg/kg/day three times daily (tid)). This study included 152 HIV patients with CD4 cells counts ≤ 500  cells/mm 3 . The  overall results suggest a correlation between  efficacy and dose, the 0.1  mg/kg/day dose being less active than the higher doses 0.5 and 2  mg/kg/day, but no consistent difference  was  observed  between  the  0.5  mg  and  the  2  mg  dosage  groups.  As  for  this  study  the administration was tid, a concern was raised about the absence of clinical data to support the proposed twice daily administration of Zerit. Nevertheless, it has been accepted that the intracellular half-life (3.5 hours) of decay of stavudine in its active form justified a frequency of administration of every twelve hours. In vivo anti-retroviral activity, as measured by reduced viral-load, has, however, not been demonstrated specifically in patients clinically failing first-line ZDV therapy. Supportive evidence of maintained activity in case of zidovudine resistance may be derived from in vitro data.  Eleven  zidovudine-resistant  clinical  isolates  have  been  evaluated.  Only  one  displayed  a significant decrease in stavudine sensitivity, although the apparent cross-resistance was not confirmed when the reverse transcriptase gene of this isolate was placed into a recombinant virus. The pharmacokinetic behaviour of  stavudine has  been  established in HIV subjects with CD4 cell counts ranging up to 500 cells/mm 3 . Additional pharmacokinetic data have been obtained from special patient groups including those with renal and hepatic impairment and children. The pharmacokinetics was proportional to dose and independent of time. Stavudine is rapidly and well absorbed after oral administration, and the absolute bioavailability has been defined to be 86 % -18 %. The apparent volume of distribution of stavudine at steady state is 46 -15 l and stavudine has been shown to be distributed into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), with a mean CSF/ plasma ratio equivalent to 40% of the corresponding plasma concentration four hours after oral administration. Stavudine binding to plasma proteins in  vivo has  not  been  investigated. However, it is known from preclinical studies that stavudine does not bind to plasma proteins. The  metabolism  of  stavudine  has  not  been  elucidated  in  humans.  Stavudine  is  mainly  eliminated through the kidneys where an active secretion pathway is involved. After i.v. administration, 42 -7 % of dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. The corresponding values after oral single and multiple dose administration are 34 -5  % and 40 -12 %. Therefore, potential interactions with other drugs that  are  eliminated  by  active  secretion  through  the  kidneys  could  not  be  ruled  out.  It  has  been demonstrated  in  animals  that  the  non-renal  routes  of  elimination  include  intracellular  recapture (approximately 20%) and cleavage to thymine and ribose (approximately 30%). However, the enzyme responsible for the eventual cleavage of stavudine has not been identified. edicinal product no longer authori

The terminal plasma elimination half-life is 1.3 -0.2  hours after administration of a single dose of stavudine, 1.4 -0.2 hours after multiple doses and is independent of dose. The intracellular half-life of stavudine triphosphate when estimated in vitro is 3.5 hours.

Total clearance of stavudine is 600 -90 ml/min and renal clearance is 240 -50 ml/min.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Pharmacokinetic  studies  have  also  been  carried  out  in  special  patient  groups.  In  renally  impaired subjects,  there  was  evidence  of  accumulation  of  stavudine.  Dose  adjustments  proposed  by  the applicant  in  line  with  creatinine  clearance  rate  have  been  considered  as  acceptable.  Results  from  a pharmacokinetic  study  involving  end-stage  renal  disease  patients,  haemodialysis  dependent,  who received  a  single  dose  of  40  mg  of  stavudine  2  hours  before  haemodialysis  and  on  a  day  between haemodialysis,  showed  no  difference  in  total  exposure  between  the  two  arms.  Results  allowed  to conclude that subjects with a CrCl less than 10 ml/min, including those dependent on haemodialysis, can  receive  Zerit  at  the  same  dose  as  patients  with  severe  renal  impairment  (CrCl  10-25  ml/min). Exposure was similar to what was observed in patients with CrCl of 10-20 ml/min and who were not on haemodialysis.

A  Phase  III  main  therapeutic  study  (study  AI455-019) ,  involving  822  subjects  with  moderately advanced disease, was designed as a multicentre, randomised, double-blind trial of stavudine (40 mg bid or 30 mg bid if weight &lt; 60 kg) compared to zidovudine (ZDV 200 mg three times daily). Patients included  had  baseline  CD4  counts  between  50-500  cells/mm 3 (median  235  cells / mm 3 )  and had received at least 6 months of ZDV therapy (median 22 months). The median duration of treatment was 79 weeks in the stavudine arm and 53 weeks in the ZDV arm. Fourteen percent of patients recruited for this study had an AIDS diagnosis at baseline, while 50% had symptomatic HIV infection and 36% were asymptomatic. Initially, the primary endpoint included death, occurrence of AIDS defining event and  &gt;  50%  decline  from  baseline  CD4  count.  However  as  the  trial  progressed,  the  follow-up  was extended reflecting the current uncertainty surrounding the prognostic significance of the CD4 cells count, such that primary analyses were redefined to include only AIDS events and death. Secondary endpoints included changes in CD4  cells count, p24 antigen levels, quantitative virology, haematological parameters, β -2 microglobulin levels, body weight and Quality of Life measurements. All  randomised  patients  were  included  in  the  intent-to-treat  statistical  analysis.  A  statistically significant  difference  (p  =  0.007)  in  favour  of  stavudine  was  demonstrated  with  respect  to  time  to multiple AIDS events and death. However, in a conventional time to first event analysis, a statistically

Stavudine  was  shown  to  be  cleared  by  haemodialysis  at  an  average  rate  of  120  ml/min.  The contribution  of  this  haemodialysis  clearance  to  the  total  elimination  of  stavudine  in  an  overdose situation is unknown. In patients with hepatic impairment and biopsy-proven cirrhosis, the pharmacokinetic profile was not different compared to patients with normal hepatic function. The  pharmacokinetic  profile  of  stavudine  was  evaluated  in  25  HIV-infected  children  (age  ranging from 5 weeks to 15 years, with a median baseline CD4 count of 298 cells/mm 3 ) following single IV and oral doses of 0.25, 1, 2 and 4 mg/kg and following multiple oral dosing (twice daily) of 0.25, 1, 2 and 4 mg/kg/day. Most of the children had received prior ZDV treatment for a median duration of 104 weeks.  The  median  duration  of  the  therapy  for  all  subjects  was  84  weeks.  Results  from  this  study showed that the overall mean absolute bioavailability was somewhat lower in children compared to adults  (77  %  versus  86  %  respectively).  When  normalised  for  body  weight  and  surface  area,  the clearance and volume of distribution were age-independent. Cmax and AUC0-∞ increased linearly with dose. After 12 weeks of oral dosing, the CSF/plasma ratio of stavudine was found to range from 16 % to 125 %, 2 to 3 hours after dose. The terminal half-life after oral and IV administration of stavudine was approximately 1 hour. Given the same dose/kg, children reached about half the Cmax and AUC of adult patients. On this basis, it was recommended to give to children the double dose/kg compared to adults. The impact of food on the absorption of stavudine has been studied. It has been demonstrated that  when  stavudine  is  taken  in  combination  with  high-fat  meal,  t max increased  (from  0.65  to  1.73 hours),  Cmax  decreased  (from  1.44  to  0.76 µ g/ml)  but  AUC 0-∞ remained  unaffected.  The  clinical relevance of these findings is not established. In the study ACTG 240 carried out in children, Zerit was administered  without  regards  to  meals.  Taking  into  account  the  results  of  this  study,  the  expanded access programme which allowed the mixture of the content of the capsules with food for children who could not swallow and the current clinical practice with regards to drug therapy in HIV disease, the possibility to take Zerit with a light meal, if necessary, was considered to be acceptable. The oral solution of stavudine was shown to be bioequivalent to the 40 mg capsule formulation of stavudine by means of a cross-over study involving 16  healthy  adults.  Although  clinical  studies  were  performed with slightly different capsules in terms of quantitative composition and method of manufacture, the bioavailability is not likely to be affected due to the high solubility of stavudine. Therapeutic efficacy edicinal product no longer authori

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

significant  difference  was  not  found  (p  =  0.11).  If  results  are  presented  as  relative  risk,  the  overall pattern seems, however, rather consistent (see table 1).

Table 1: Main results (study AI455-019)

· Adjusted for covariates predictive of outcome of HIV disease With regard to the statistical analysis, the use of a multiple event analysis for the primary endpoint clinical progression was specified prior to any data analysis, or unblinding. The method (AndersenGill)  used  in  the  original  submission  requires  an  assumption  of  independence  between  multiple endpoints within patients. The validity of this assumption must be questioned. However, an alternative analysis  (Wei-Lin-Weissfeld)  in  which  no  assumption  of  independence  is  necessary  confirms  the results of analysis according to Andersen-Gill (p = 0.03). Subgroup efficacy analyses for the following groups identifiable at baseline (CD4 cells count &lt; 100, between 100 - 300, &gt; 300 cells/ µ l; AIDS or symptomatic/asymptomatic patients; time of prior ZDV therapy &lt; 24 months, &gt; 24 months, &lt; 9 months) also revealed consistent results. Recognising the consistency of the results irrespective of designated endpoints, subgroup of patients analysed and statistical method, the efficacy of stavudine compared to ZDV was considered as being demonstrated even if the primary outcome analysis (Andersen-Gill) time to multiple events, may be statistically  questionable.  This  conclusion  was  further  supported  by  CD4  counts  improvement (sustained difference in CD4 count was about 40-50 cells/ µ l between stavudine and zidovudine), p24 antigen level reduction, change in body weight and haematological parameters. Only preliminary data on viral load (PBMC HIV titres) are available, indicating an approximately 50% decrease during the first months of therapy. In summary, the study is considered well designed and well conducted. Results appear to be robust and  consistent  and  demonstrate  a  clinical  benefit,  about  20%  risk  reduction  for  progression, corresponding to a delay of approximately 16 weeks. With  respect  to  pneumocystis,  results  indicate  that  more Pneumocystis  carinii pneumonia  (PCP) events were encountered while on stavudine therapy. In order to define whether failure of a specific agent was responsible for the difference between stavudine and ZDV, the data were further tabulated according to the prophylactic agent administered immediately prior to the PCP episode (sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim,  aerosolised  pentamidine,  dapsone  or  no  prophylactic  agent).  PCP seemed less effectively prevented among stavudine treated patients as compared to zidovudine treated group when patients received aerosolised  pentamidine,  dapsone  or  no  prophylactic  agent.  Although several  methodological  limitations  precluded  assessing  the  relationship  between  stavudine  and  PCP prophylaxis, the use of sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim was recommended as the agent of choice when PCP prophylaxis is warranted. edicinal product no longer authori

|                                                         |   Relative Risk (RR Stavudine/ZDV) | Confidence Intervals 95%   |   RR after stratified adjusted analyses* |
|---------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Death                                                   |                               0.74 | 0.54 - 1.03                |                                     0.78 |
| Clinical progression (first AIDS event, death)          |                               0.82 | 0.64 - 1.05                |                                     0.77 |
| Clinical progression (AIDS events, death)               |                               0.78 | 0.65 - 0.94                |                                     0.77 |
| Treatment failure (combined CD4 È , AIDS events, death) |                               0.81 | 0.71 - 0.93                |                                     0.8  |
| Treatment failure (first CD4 È , AIDS event, death)     |                               0.71 | 0.59 - 0.85                |                                     0.68 |
| Premature discontinuation of assigned therapy           |                               0.69 | 0.58 - 0.81                |                                     0.68 |

The stavudine Parallel Track Program (study AI455-900) was an expanded access program which was  conducted  as  a  multicentre,  randomised,  double-blinded  comparative  trial  of  two  doses  of stavudine, 20 and 40 mg bid (15 and 30 mg bid if body weight &lt; 60 kg; 10 and 20 mg bid if &lt; 40 kg).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  trial  was  initiated  to  assess  the  safety  and  efficacy,  using  biological  markers  and  survival,  of stavudine when used in a community setting for the treatment of HIV-infected subjects throughout the United  States  and  Puerto  Rico.  The  study  was  carried  out  in  13299  subjects  who  had  either  failed therapy  or  were  intolerant  to  alternative  anti-retroviral  therapy  (ZDV,  ddI  and  ddC).  Amongst  the enrolled  subjects  aged  from  12  to  85  there  was  a  definite  dominance  of  males  (95%)  and  15%  of recruited subjects were non-white. The median duration of treatment was respectively 22 weeks for high dose and 23 weeks for low dose. With respect to efficacy as measured by survival, no difference was  found  between  treatment  groups.  Survival  curves  were  almost  identical,  also  in  patients  with baseline CD4 count below and above 50 cells/mm 3 . However, a tendency towards shortened survival was observed in women treated with 40 mg bid (RR 1.36; 95% CI 0.93 - 2.00) as well as in non-white subjects (RR 1.16; 95% CI 0.94 - 1.43). This finding justified the performance of an additional safety analysis with respect to severe events in women treated with 40 mg stavudine.

| Study                                                              | Percent of patients with HIV RNA < 400 copies/ml Treatment response (%) a product   | Percent of patients with HIV RNA < 50 copies/ml Treatment response (%) a no   | HIV RNA Mean Change from Baseline (log 10 copies/ml)   | CD4 Mean change from Baseline (cells/mm 3 )   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| AI455-099 (48 weeks)                                               |                                                                                     |                                                                               |                                                        |                                               |
| Zerit prolonged-release capsule + lamivudine + efavirenz (n = 392) | 78                                                                                  | 54                                                                            | -2.86                                                  | +202                                          |
| Zerit immediate-release + lamivudine + efavirenz (n = 391)         | 73                                                                                  | 55                                                                            | -2.83                                                  | +182                                          |
| AI455-096 (48 weeks)                                               |                                                                                     |                                                                               |                                                        |                                               |
| Zerit prolonged-release capsule + lamivudine + efavirenz (n = 74)  | 70                                                                                  | 41                                                                            | -2.74                                                  | +232                                          |
| Zerit immediate-release + lamivudine + efavirenz (n = 76)          | 66                                                                                  | 38                                                                            | -2.64                                                  | +195                                          |

More recent data on the efficacy of stavudine in combination antiretroviral therapy is provided from the studies of  immediate release (IR) versus prolonged release (PR) formulations of stavudine, AI455099  and  AI455-096.  Both  these  studies  were  48  weeks,  randomised  and  double  blind,  comparing stavudine IR with PR in combination with lamivudine and efavirenz in 783 treatment-naive patients (median CD4 cell count of 277 cells/mm 3 and median plasma HIV-1 RNA of 4.80 log10 copies/ml at baseline) in AI455-099 and in 150 treatment-naive patients (median CD4 cell count of 285 cells/mm 3 and a median plasma HIV-1 RNA of 4.65 log10 copies/ml  at baseline) in AI455-096. The results of these two studies are presented in table 2. Table 2: Results of the studies AI455-099 and AI455-096 a Percent of patients who have HIV RNA &lt; 400 c/ml or &lt; 50 c/ml and do not meet any criteria for treatment failure including the occurrence of a new AIDS-defining diagnosis. In  February  2005,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  requested  to  withdraw  the  marketing authorisation of Zerit prolonged-release hard capsules for manufactoring reasons. Safety The initial safety profile of stavudine was established based on experience with over 13,000 subjects in clinical trials, with a median therapy duration of about 23 weeks. edicinal product no longer authori

In  all  clinical  trials,  the  majority  of  clinical  adverse  events  reported  represented  symptoms  and complications of the underlying disease of HIV infection.

The major clinical toxicity observed with stavudine is dose-related reversible peripheral neuropathy. It is more commonly encountered in patients with advanced disease or in those with pre-existing signs of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

neuropathy.  Due  to  this  risk,  for  some  patients  involved  in  the  trials  stavudine  therapy  had  to  be discontinued or modified in terms of dose.

Asymptomatic  elevations  of  hepatic  transaminases  which  did  not  interfere  with  dosing  were  also observed.

Following  evaluation  of  data  submitted  by  all  MAHs  of  antiretroviral  medicinal  products,  a  class labelling,  which  harmonises  the  information  on  lipodystrophy  for  all  three  classes  of  antiretroviral products, has been agreed and implemented in the product information for all antiretroviral medicinal products. The wording presents as much as possible of the presently available knowledge; it gives a description  of  the  condition  (although  there  is  at  present  no  clear  definition  of  lipodystrophy), information about causality and surveillance measures. The higher risk of developing lipodystrophy

Pancreatitis,  a  well-known  common  side-effect  associated  with  the  other  nucleoside  analogues, appeared with an overall low frequency. In the main efficacy study, the same incidence (1 %) was found in the stavudine and zidovudine groups. In the expanded access study, the incidence was higher (2 %), and so especially in patients with a prior history of pancreatitis (5 %, n = 1500). No overall dose/event relationship was observable. In women, however, slightly more events were reported in the 40 mg bid stavudine group than in the 20 mg bid stavudine group (3.7 % versus 2 %, p = 0.24). There were no other notable findings in the safety analysis in women. Other  common  adverse  events  are  diarrhea,  nausea,  abdominal  pain,  dyspepsia,  fatigue,  headache, insomnia, depression, rash and pruritus. Most adverse events were reported with similar frequencies in both  treatment  groups.  However  anaemia,  leucopenia  and  neutropenia  were  less  frequent  with stavudine when compared to ZDV. In  the  original  submission,  safety  data  were  reported  from  38  HIV  paediatric  patients  with  doses ranging  from  0.125  mg/kg/day  to  1.0  mg/kg/day.  Additional  results  obtained  from  51  children, including 6 under 24 months and 7 above 12 years, with median treatment of 6 months with stavudine (most  at  a  dose  of  2  mg/kg)  in  an  open-label  compassionate  use  protocol  in  the  U.S.  have  been presented. Serious adverse events observed in children included ASAT/ALAT  elevations, infections, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, chills/fever, neuropathy and other disease-related complications.  'Dose  limiting'  liver  enzyme  elevation  (higher  than  5  x  Upper  Limit  Normal)  was observed in a substantial number of patients (40-50 %), but peripheral neuropathy was seemingly less of a clinical problem. Given the limited documentation on the use of stavudine in children, licensing of  stavudine  for  children  below  the  age  of  12  years  was  not  considered  justified  at  the  time  of  the original CPMP opinion. It is noted also that there were no safety data available from elderly patients. Rare cases of hepatic steatosis and lactic acidosis, some of which have been fatal, have been reported during  the  post-marketing  phase.  Considering  that  similar  cases  have  been  reported  with  other antiretroviral  nucleosides,  as  monotherapy  or  combination  therapy,  it  was  agreed  to  include  a harmonised statement into their SPC to reflect this potential class effect. The statement mentions the most common risk factors identified which include obesity, treatment with combination antiretroviral nucleoside  therapy  and  female  gender.  A  further  revision  of  the  class  labelling  in  September  2000 included  respiratory  and  neurological  symptoms  which  might  be  indicative  of  lactic  acidosis development. In addition, it informs that severe cases of lactic acidosis, sometimes with fatal outcome, were  associated  with  pancreatitis,  liver  failure/hepatic  steatosis,  renal  failure  and  higher  levels  of serum lactate.  It  also  states  that  lactic  acidosis  generally  occurred  after  a  few  months  of  treatment. Further  revisions  introduced  a  'box  warning'  and  restructured  the  paragraph  in  order  to  improve readability and to focus the reader on early symptoms. The main reason for this change was severity of the condition and a frequent delay between early symptoms and diagnosis. Treatment  with  a  combination  of  at  least  three  antiretroviral  drugs  can  induce  a  characteristic syndrome  termed  lipodystrophy  or  fat  redistribution  syndrome  containing  peripheral  fat  wasting (including  accentuation  of  facial  folds)  and  central  adiposity.  Metabolic  disturbances  such  as hyperlipidaemia and insulin resistance also often appear. PIs were originally believed to be the causal agents.  NRTIs  have  also  been  implicated.  In  addition,  lipodystrophy  has  also  been  observed  with protease-inhibitor-sparing  regimens.  The  emerging  picture  is  that  of  a  connection  between  visceral lipomatosis  and  protease  inhibitors  and  lipoatrophy  and  NRTIs  correlating  with  different  possible mechanisms e.g. effects on lipoprotein production and adipocyte differentiation. Non-drug factors are also of importance e.g. increasing age, duration and severity of HIV infection. edicinal product no longer authori

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with  long-term  therapy  as  well  as  importance  of  factors  such  as  age  and  disease  related  factors  is mentioned.

Further to the discussions held by the Ad-hoc Group of Experts on Anti-HIV medicinal products in November 2001, the CPMP agreed that liver impairment was of increasing concern in HIV positive patients both in the form of adverse hepatic effects in patients with normal liver function prior ART and as regards patients with chronic liver disease treated with ART.

In  study  AI455-094  (performed  in  South-Africa,  362  mother-infant  pairs  were  included  in  a prevention of mother-to-child-transmission study), the safety follow-up period was restricted to only six months, which may be insufficient to capture long-term data on neurological adverse events and mitochondrial toxicity. Relevant grade 3-4 laboratory abnormalities in the 91 stavudine treated infants were low neutrophils in 7%, low hemoglobin in 1%, ALT increase in 1% and no lipase abnormality. No  notable  differences  in  the  frequency  of  adverse  drug  reactions  were  seen  between  treatment

In January 2002 the CPMP requested the MAH for all authorised anti-retroviral medicinal products to conduct a retrospective review  of  clinical  trials  and  post-marketing  data  relating  to  the  use  of  their product(s) in patients with hepatic impairment and/or HBV/HCV co-infection. Following review of the submitted responses and discussions held during the CPMP meeting and the Pharmacovigilance Working Party meeting in October 2002, the CPMP adopted a list of questions (including general, product  specific  and  SPC  wording  recommendations).  The  review  of  the  MAHs'  responses  has essentially  confirmed  that  co-infected  patients  and  patients  with  underlying  liver  disorders  are  at increased risk for adverse events, essentially confined to liver events. Following the review of responses submitted by all MAHs of antiretroviral medicinal products, a class labelling  on  'liver  disease'  has  been  agreed  and  implemented  in  the  product  information  for  all antiretroviral medicinal products. To further support the safe use of NRTIs the CPMP adopted a class labelling on mitochondrial toxicity in  children  with  in  utero/  post-natal  exposure  to  Nucleotide/Nucleoside  Reverse  Transcriptase Inhibitors.  The  main  adverse  events  reported  are  haematological  disorders  (anaemia,  neutropenia), metabolic disorders (hyperlactatemia, hyperlipasemia). These events are often transitory. Some lateonset  neurological  disorders  have  been  reported  (hypertonia,  convulsion,  abnormal  behaviour). Whether  the  neurological  disorders  are  transient  or  permanent  is  currently  unknown.  Any  child exposed in  utero to  nucleoside  and  nucleotide  analogues,  even  HIV-negative  children,  should  have clinical  and  laboratory  follow-up  and  should  be  fully  investigated  for  possible  mitochondrial dysfunction in case of relevant signs or symptoms. The CHMP adopted in November 2004 a class labelling on immune reactivation syndrome. In HIVinfected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of institution of combination antiretroviral therapy (CART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic pathogens may arise and cause serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms. Typically, such reactions have been observed within the  first  few  weeks  or  months  of  initiation  of  CART.  Relevant  examples  are cytomegalovirus retinitis, generalised and/or focal mycobacterial infections, and Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.  Any  inflammatory  symptoms  should  be  evaluated  and  treatment  instituted  when necessary. With regard to all the available data, it was considered that stavudine was rather well tolerated and that the  principal  dose-limiting  toxicity,  peripheral  neuropathy,  was  reversible  after  discontinuation  of treatment. If  symptoms  of  peripheral  neuropathy  develop  (usually  characterised  by  persistent numbness, tingling, or pain in the feet and/or hands), switching the patient to an alternate treatment regimen should be considered. In the rare cases when this is inappropriate, treatment with Zerit may be continued at 50% of the previous dosage while the symptoms of peripheral neuropathy are under close monitoring. The safety profile of stavudine in adolescents, children and infants was established based on different studies.  Undesirable  effects  and  serious  laboratory  abnormalities  reported  to  occur  in  paediatric patients ranging in age from birth through adolescence who received stavudine in clinical studies were generally  similar  in  type  and  frequency  to  those  seen  in  adults.  However,  clinically  significant peripheral neuropathy is less frequent. These studies include ACTG 240, where 105 paediatric patients ages 3 month to 6 years received Zerit 2 mg/kg/day for a median of 6.4 months; a controlled clinical trial where 185 newborns received Zerit 2 mg/kg/day either alone or in combination with didanosine from birth through 6 weeks of age; and a clinical trial where 8 newborns received Zerit 2 mg/kg/day in combination with didanosine and nelfinavir from birth through 4 weeks of age. edicinal product no longer authori

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

groups.  There  was,  however,  an  increased  infant  mortality  in  the  stavudine  +  didanosine  (10%) treatment group compared to the stavudine (2%), didanosine (3%) or zidovudine (6%) groups, with a higher incidence of stillbirths in the stavudine + didanosine group.

Benefit/risk assessment Stavudine is a well established component of various combination antiretroviral therapy regimes and has  been  used  in  a  large  number  of  patients  since  it  became  available.  There  is  good  evidence supporting  the  effectiveness  of  stavudine  in  combination  therapy  in  the  treatment  of  antiretroviralnaïve  adults  with  HIV  infection  as  assessed  by  viral  load  and  CD4  counts,  the  standard  efficacy endpoints  for  antiretroviral  treatment.  Stavudine  has  also  been  beneficial  as  part  of  triple  (or quadruple) therapy in antiretroviral-experienced patients. There are limited but positive data regarding its  use  in  antiretroviral-naïve  and  resistant  or  experienced  children  with  HIV  infection.  High  level resistance  to  stavudine  is  uncommon,  making  it  a  useful  agent  in  combination  therapy,  although resistance  mutations  conferring  resistance  to  multiple  NRTIs  (including  stavudine)  have  been described. The safety profile of stavudine is quite well established. 5. Conclusion The chemical and pharmaceutical data of both stavudine oral formulations, capsules and oral solution, were  adequate  to  support  the  quality  and  the  shelf  life  of  Zerit.  The  preclinical  data  showed  that stavudine  has  a  genotoxic  potential  similar  to  the  other  nucleoside  analogues.  In  overall  the toxicological  profile  of  this  anti-retroviral  has  been  considered  well  characterised.  The  clinical efficacy and safety of stavudine has been established on the basis of changes in biological markers and clinical endpoints in proper randomised, controlled clinical trials. The CHMP considered during the initial review process and the subsequent variations postauthorisation that, with regards to the data provided, the overall benefit/risk ratio for Zerit is favourable in combination with other antiretroviral medicinal products for the treatment of HIV infected patients edicinal product no longer authori