---
document_datetime: 2025-06-11 09:21:14
document_pages: 29
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion/zostavax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
document_name: zostavax-epar-scientific-discussion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 10.3858625
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 18:37:17.024548
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
## 1 Introduction

ZOSTAVAX is a live attenuated vaccine. It is manufactured from the same virus strain and by the same process used to produce VARIVAX, a live varicellazoster virus (VZV) vaccine for prevention of chickenpox. The Drug substance (DS) is equivalent to that in the approved monovalent VZV vaccine, VARIVAX, and the VZV component in the tetravalent vaccine, ProQuad. However, ZOSTAVAX is manufactured at a higher virus titre than VARIVAX and ProQuad. Infection  with  varicellazoster  virus  (VZV),  an  alpha  herpesvirus,  is  associated  with  two  distinct diseases;  varicella  and  herpes  zoster.  Primary  infection  results  in  chickenpox  (varicella)  a  generally mild,  self-limiting  illness  usually  acquired  in  childhood  or  adolescence  and  affecting  almost  all individuals. Following initial primary infection with VZV, the virus remains latent in the dorsal root ganglia.  It  is  assumed  that  latent  virus  may  frequently  reactivate  and  replicate  subclinically.  These episodes of transient subclinical viremia lead to repeated antigenic stimulation of immunity without clinical  manifestations  of  disease.  In  some  individuals,  however,  reactivation  and  replication  of  the latent  virus  result  in  the  clinical  manifestation  of  herpes  zoster  (HZ),  which  is  often  referred  to  as shingles. HZ  is  characterized  by  a  unilateral,  vesicular  rash  with  a  dermatomal  distribution  that  generally corresponds to the area of skin innervated by a single spinal or cranial sensory ganglion. Typically, the vesicles crust over in 7 to 10 days, but may take up to a month to heal. One of the most significant clinical  manifestations  of  HZ  is  pain,  which  is  considered  to  be  due  to  VZV  induced  neuronal destruction and inflammation. HZ-related pain may occur during 3 time periods: -prior to onset of the cutaneous eruption (prodromal pain, typically beginning 3 to 5 days prior to the appearance of skin lesions): -during  the  period  of  the  acute  rash  (acute  neuritis),  and  following  healing  of  the  acute  skin lesions; -beyond cutaneous healing for a prolonged period of time (postherpetic neuralgia, PHN). PHN,  the  most  severe  sequelae  of  HZ,  occurs  in  10-20%  of  HZ  patients  and  is  described  by characteristic patterns of pain with the majority of patients experiencing the following patterns -constant pain described as burning, throbbing or aching pain; -intermittent sharp, stabbing, shooting, lancinating pain; -stimulus-evoked pain as allodynia that usually lasts well beyond the duration of the stimulus. Allodynia, which is present in at least 90% of PHN patients, is typically described as the most distressing and debilitating component of HZ The  mechanisms  leading  to  HZ  are  not  well  understood,  however,  one  predisposing  factor  in developing  HZ  in  immunocompetent  persons  is  advancing  age.  The  incidence  and  severity  of  HZ increase from 2.5 per 1000 person-years in adults aged 20-50 years to 7.8 per 1000 person-years in those  aged  &gt;60  years.  Furthermore,  complications  such  as  PHN,  which  are  relatively  infrequent  in otherwise  healthy  children  and  younger  adults,  occur  in  almost  one-half  of  older  individuals.  It  is postulated that the age-related increase in the risk of HZ among otherwise healthy elderly subjects is attributed  to  immunosenescence and has been correlated with a diminished cell-mediated immunity (CMI),  but  not  with  the  level  of  circulating  VZV  specific  serum  antibodies.  However,  studies conducted in immunocompromised patients indicate, that low or absent CMI represents a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for the occurrence of HZ. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2 Quality aspects

## Introduction

The finished product is presented as a powder and solvent for suspension for subcutaneous injection in a single 0.65 ml dose. The lyophilised powder is presented in a vial (Type 1 glass) with a butyl rubber stopper and flip-off aluminium seal. The finished product contains the following excipients: sucrose, hydrolysed porcine gelatin, sodium chloride, monosodium L-glutamate, anhydrous disodium phosphate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate, potassium chloride, and sodium hydroxide (pH adjustment).

Before use, each vial is to be reconstituted with water for injections supplied in either a vial (Type 1 glass) with a butyl rubber stopper or in a prefilled syringe (Type 1 glass) with plunger stopper and tip cap (chlorobutyl rubber). The lyophilised vaccine must be stored frozen at -15ºC or colder, whereas the diluent should be stored refrigerated or at room temperature. Therefore, the product is shipped using a styrofoam box allowing packing the frozen component and the non-frozen component together. This polystyrene container is composed of two compartments. The frozen component is placed in the lower compartment where dry ice is used as the refrigerant. The non-frozen component is placed in the receptacle compartment in the lid, so it is not exposed to the freezing conditions of the dry ice. After reconstitution, one dose (0.65 ml) contains: Varicella-zoster virus 1 Oka/Merck strain (live, attenuated)................... not less than 19400 PFU* * plaque-forming units ( 1 ) Produced in human diploid (MRC-5) cells. Active substance Seed lot system The Oka strain of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) was isolated from fluid taken from the vesicles of a 3-year-old boy with a case of chicken pox. The virus was isolated in primary human, embryonic lung cells  (HEL)  and  was  passaged  11  times.  The  strain  was  further  passaged  12  times  in  guinea  pig embryo fibroblasts (GPE) to attenuate the strain and once in human diploid cells (WI-38) to passage 24.  One vial of frozen infected cells of the passage 24 Oka VZV strain was received by Merck on March  1984  from  Osaka  University.  Although  no  clinical  studies  with  ZOSTAVAX  have  been conducted using VZV from the passage levels intended for commercial production, varicella-zoster vaccine  at  the  passage  level  for  production  was  developed  and  evaluated  in  the  setting  of  the applicant's monovalent varicella vaccine, VARIVAX. The preparation of master seed and stock seed lot are appropriately described in the dossier. Human diploid fibroblast cells (MRC-5) as cell substrate MRC-5 cells, a human, embryonic, lung, fibroblast cell line (diploid, male) originally isolated by J.P. Jacobs at the National Institute for Medical Research (London, England) and deposited at approximately population doubling level (PDL) 7 at the National Institute for Biologicals Standards and Controls (NIBSC). Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Manufacture of varicella harvested virus fluids (HVFs)

A vial  from  the  MWCB  is  thawed  and  planted  into  cell  factories.  Cells  are  trypsinized  and  finally planted into roller bottles for infection.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Based on appropriate criteria, the concentration of the working seed is adjusted. Each production roller bottle  is  planted  with  working  cell  suspension  and  incubated.  The  spent  medium  is  removed  and discarded, and each cell culture is rinsed. Stabilizer is added; the suspension is removed and stored with appropriates conditions.  A batch of HVF represents mechanically harvested, VZV MRC-5 cells.

## Manufacture of dispensed bulk

Batch analysis results have been provided for eleven batches of HVFs, and ten batches of dispensed bulk lots used in Zoster vaccine lots. Consistency of production was demonstrated and all lots met the pre-set specifications.

VZV dispensed  bulk  is  a  blend  of  HVF  lots.  The  cells  in  the  HVF  suspension  are  disrupted  and clarified.  The  dispensed  final  bulk  containers  (dispensed  bulk)  comprise  a  batch  of  the  active substance and are stored frozen. Control cell Cultures and Harvest Control Fluids (HCFs) Final harvested control fluids are tested for sterility, mycoplasms, and tissue culture safety, while cells are tested for hemadsorption. Controls of materials and critical steps / process validation The MRC-5 MCB and WCB are tested to ensure freedom from extraneous agents and to ensure that the cells behave normally through production use PDL. Release testing is described at appropriate process steps and will be performed in compliance with Ph. Eur 5.2.3. Release testing of the VZV master seed and stock seeds is performed in compliance with Ph. Eur. The applicant committed to consult the EMEA to discuss if test for monkey neurovirulence on any new VZV master seed is still required via the new Ph. Eur. Monograph on zoster vaccine. Within each manufacturing process step, goals, critical process parameters (CPPs), and critical quality attributes (CQAs) were determined, along with appropriate specifications and acceptance criteria. · Characterisation and specifications The complete sequence of the Oka/Merck strain and the wild-type Oka parent have been determined. Process-related impurities arising from the VZV vaccine bulk manufacturing processes are classified as cell-substrate or cell-culture derived. Cell-substrate-derived impurities may include proteins derived from the host cell line; cell-culture-derived impurities may include antibiotics (e.g., neomycin), serum, or  other  media  components.  VZV  process  uses  cell  growth  medium  containing  bovine  calf  serum. Serum protein clearance is provided by rinsing the cell layers to remove as much serum as possible prior to virus harvest. Each VZV final bulk is tested for BSA. Assays are performed at several stages of processing of vaccine bulks in order to confirm absence of extraneous  agents,  to  verify  potency  and  identity,  and  to  provide  a  measure  of  quality  and  process consistency. Assays involved in release testing of drug substance are performed according to approved control  procedures  that  describe  the  main  steps  in  a  procedure.  Most  assays  performed  on  VZV vaccine bulks and bulk intermediates are qualitative methods for which the experimental outcome is only: growth or no growth, absence or presence etc. In many of these cases, the assay specifications are compendial. For quantitative assays, the acceptance criterion is based on historical data. The validation was performed using the assay procedure that was in place at the time the assays were validated.  The  parameters  that  were  evaluated  as  part  of  the  method  validation  for  the  assays  were provided for each analytical procedure. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The reference material used for the VZV potency and antigen content is described appropriately. To generate an antigen reference standard lot, material from multiple VZV final bulk lots is pooled, filled, and lyophilized according to procedures applied in VARIVAX vaccine manufacture. Varicella antigen content  in  a  new  reference  standard  is  established  by  calibration  against  a  previously  qualified

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

reference  standard.  The  applicant  has  committed  to  revise  the  procedure  used  to  calibrate  the  VZV reference standards.

## · Stability

Formal stability studies with the VZV final bulk were initiated for three lots Stability results for these three lots of VZV final bulk are available. Finished product ZOSTAVAX is a sterile  lyophilized  vaccine  prepared  by  formulating  the  Oka/Merck  strain  of  the attenuated live VZV. Sterile water for injections is provided for reconstitution. The product is intended for single-dose administration and contains no preservative. · Pharmaceutical Development The  formulation  composition  of  ZOSTAVAX  is  based  on  the  formulation  compositions  of  the currently  licensed  frozen  formulation  of  the  monovalent  VZV  vaccine,  except  for  the  virus  titre. Consequently  the  virus  is  known  to  be  compatible  with  the  stabiliser.  The  excipients  and  their concentration in the filled container prior to lyophilisation are equivalent and the lyophilization cycle for ZOSTAVAX is comparable, to that used for the monovalent VZV vaccine. Several vaccine lots have been used in clinical trials with differences in the VZV titres and lot sizes. The manufacturing process for the DS changed in 1998, therefore DS batches from the so-called 19941995 process and 1998 process (current manufacturing process) have been used in the production of the lots used in clinical trials. The filling and lyophilisation is said to been carried out in a comparable way to the VARIVAX process. For all clinical protocols the target fill volume was 0.7 ml and the administered volume was 0.5 ml, except in study 009 where 0.7 ml or 1.0 ml was filled and 0.65 ml of the reconstituted vaccine was administered. For the study 004 the vaccine was aged in refrigerator to reduce the number of PFU to mimic the quality of the product at the end of the shelf-life . In addition to clinical lots, lots for use in stability studies and manufacturing process validation studies have  been  produced  with  the  current  DS  process.  In  1998  three  full-scale  process  validation  DP batches  were  produced  using  the  formulation  and  filling  processes  used  at  that  time.  In  2003  the formulation and filling  processes  were  modified.  Thereafter  three  pilot  scale  zoster  vaccine  batches were produced for stability studies. In addition, in 2004 three full-scale DP batches were produced to validate process and equipment improvements and pressure control during lyophilisation. Each vial is reconstituted with the entire volume of the provided diluent and the entire volume of the reconstituted  vaccine  is  administered  to  ensure  a  targeted  0.65  ml  dose.  Consequently  there  is  no actual overage. · Manufacture of the Product All manufacturing operations are performed at Merck &amp; Co., Inc, West Point, Pennsylvania, USA. The  starting  materials  for  zoster  vaccine  are  PGS  stabilizer  and  frozen  dispensed  bulk.  Prior  to thawing, the volume of each dispensed bulk to be added is determined by potency release testing of the final bulk. Immediately after thawing, the DS is blended with the PGS stabiliser solution in Class 100 conditions. The FFB is then sampled for sterility testing. CPPs are identified. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Automatic filling machines aseptically fill vials, and then the vials are lyophilized for an appropriate cycle time.

The vials are removed from the lyophilisation chamber and stored at appropriate temperature prior to sealing.  The  time  that  vaccine  is  held  at  room  temperature  during  sealing,  inspection,  labelling, packaging, and assembly operations  is  documented.  The  maximum  combined  time  at  room temperature after lyophilisation for all operations is constrained to ≤ 12 hours. Inspected sealed vials

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

are stored at ≤ -20°C (maximum 6 months) until they are packaged. After packaging, the vaccine may be  stored  at  -15°C  or  colder  for  a  maximum  of  18  months  as  stated  in  the  Summary  of  Product Characteristics.  CPPs  and  CQAs  of  the  filling  process  are  identified  and  include  filling  mass, formulated bulk temperature, maximum time in solution of the active substances, transfer time to the lyophilisation cabinet and lyophilisation cycle pressure, time and temperature

Qualified insulated containers have been designed specifically for frozen vaccine shipments. During transport to Europe a temperature below -20 ºC is maintained. Process  validation  for  ZOSTAVAX  was  successfully  performed  by  comparing  the  results  of  three validation  lots.  The  validation  results  demonstrate  that  the  predefined  specifications  for  CPPs  and CQAs were met. Both,  the  sterile  diluent  in  a  syringe  with  fixed-needle  and  the  diluent  in  a  syringe  without  needle syringe are manufactured by an outside vendor. The diluent in a vial is manufactured by Merck &amp; Co., Inc, West Point, Pennsylvania, USA. At the outside vendor, Water for Injections (WFI), manufactured by distillation of purified water, is filled  into  glass  syringes  and  sterilized.  Raw  materials  are  tested  according  to  standard  operating procedures or according to specifications and methods described in pharmacopoeias. Raw materials are in accordance with specifications. The manufacturing process is described in detail and all relevant information  regarding  quality  control,  validation  of  the  manufacturing  process  and  stability  of  the diluent have been provided by the applicant. At  Merck,  WFI,  manufactured  by  distillation  of  deionized  water,  is  filled  into  glass  vials  and terminally  sterilized.  The  manufacturing  process  is  described  in  detail  and  all  relevant  information regarding  quality  control,  validation  of  the  manufacturing  process  and  stability  of  the  diluent  have been provided by the applicant · Control of excipients Except for hydrolyzed porcine gelatin the stabilizers used are compliant with all existing compendial monographs. Gelatin is the only excipient of animal origin, and is derived from non-ruminant sources and therefore in compliance with Ph. Eur. Chapter 5.2.8. Adventitious agent testing for hydrolyzed gelatin is performed at Merck. · Product Specification The same tests are part of the release testing of VARIVAX and ProQuad batches. Tests are performed on the drug product to ensure safety, sterility, to confirm the identity and quantify the  potency  of  the  product,  and  to  provide  a  measure  of  process  consistency.  Assays  employed  in control  of  the  finished  product  lots  are  performed  according  to  approved  Control  Procedures  (CPs) that describe the main steps in a procedure. Each dose of the vaccine contains at the end of its shelf-life a minimum 19,400 plaque forming units (PFU) of VZV. The release specifications have been selected to ensure that, at expiry, each dose will contain the aforementioned minimum potency when the vaccine is reconstituted and stored at room temperature for 30 minutes. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Several assays performed on the finished product are qualitative methods for which there are only two experimental  outcomes  (growth  or  no  growth,  absence  or  presence,  etc.).  In  many  cases,  the  assay specifications are compendial.

The  potency  specifications  for  filled  container  have  been  derived  from  several  sources.  The  VZV release potency is described in the dossier.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The parameters that were evaluated as part of the method validation for the assays are listed for each analytical  procedure.  When  applicable,  the  assay  parameters  addressed  were  specificity,  inter-assay precision, limit of detection, limit of quantisation, linearity, range, ruggedness, and robustness.

Batch analysis was performed on pivotal clinical study lots, stability study lots and three full scale process validation lots. All results met the pre-defined specifications.

<!-- image -->

Because ZOSTAVAX is a live virus vaccine that contains varicella-zoster vaccine bulk, with a viral component that is strongly associated with the cell membrane, it is not a highly purified product. To provide a marker for removal of residuals from the cell culture process, a quantitative test for residual BSA is conducted on the vaccine bulks used for filling. The BSA content in the final containers is a calculated value that is derived from the input volumes and the measured BSA concentration of the individual VZV bulks along with the input volume of PGS stabiliser. A specification exists for BSA content in filled container ( ≤ 500 ng BSA per single human dose) as per the Ph. Eur. monograph 0648 for the pediatric Varicella vaccine even though filled container material is not directly tested. Because of the relatively high virus titre required for this vaccine it has been agreed that the specification for residual BSA deviates from the one of the monograph (650 ng per dose or 1 µ g/ml).  The applicant has proposed the development of a new Ph. Eur. Monograph for zoster vaccine. Two reference standards (house standards) have been used for potency assays of this product. . The Applicant has committed to monitor the stability of the standards. · Viral safety and TSE Adventitious Agents All raw materials used in vaccine manufacturing are tested for adventitious agents prior to release and use  in  manufacturing.  Validated  processing  steps  that  add  additional  levels  of  confidence  for  the absence of adventitious agents are filter sterilization and ultraviolet (UV) - or gamma -irradiation. TSE The manufacturing process for ZOSTAVAX was evaluated for the theoretical risk of transmission of infectivity  associated  with  BSE  prions,  with  the  conclusion  that  the  risk  of  BSE  transmission  in ZOSTAVAX  is  exceedingly  remote.  The  rationale  and  the  calculation  for  the  theoretical  risk  of transmission of infectivity associated with BSE prions were provided. Biological reagents used in the manufacture of the vaccine bulks or bulk intermediates include ironenriched  bovine  calf  serum  (BCS),  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS),  porcine  pancreatic  trypsin,  gelatin (porcine-derived hydrolyzed), and amino acids. Certificates of Suitability (CoS), which are granted by the  European  Directorate  for  the  Quality  of  Medicines  (EDQM),  and  the  measures  applied  (e.g. regular audits of vendor facilities, testing to ensure that the appropriate quality standards are met, etc.) ensure that the ruminant-derived raw materials currently used in manufacturing carry no TSE-related risk. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Stability of the Product

Stability  tests  have  been  designed  to  measure  product  performance  under  anticipated  handling  and storage  conditions  and  under  stressed  conditions  that  might  be  encountered  after  distribution.  The anticipated  conditions  following  lyophilisation  were  studied.  Upon  use,  the  vaccine  is  reconstituted and may be stored for up to 30 minutes at room temperature prior to injection.

The stability studies were conducted on formal stability study lots at various temperatures described in the dossier suitable to support the storage conditions of the vaccine. The virus undergoes a statistically significant  loss  of  potency  when  stored  at  2-8 ° C  or  higher,  which  underscores  the  importance  of frozen storage of the vaccine. The cumulative data from all stability studies performed indicate this vaccine to be satisfactorily stable for at least 18 months from the date of manufacture when stored at -15 ° C or colder (frost-free). The agreed shelf-life of 18 months includes up to 12 hours at room temperature for sealing, inspection, and packaging,  up  to  6  months  of  storage  at  -20 ° C  prior  to  packaging  and  up  to  30  minutes  at  room temperature following reconstitution immediately prior to use as stated in the SPC. Stability studies on the formal stability lots are on-going. Stability studies on the validation lots has also been initiated.  In addition, post-launch vaccine lots will be placed on stability on an annual basis for the purpose of routine monitoring. Full testing will be performed at initial and expiry intervals; a subset of the tests will be performed at each time interval as appropriate. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects During  the  evaluation  of  ZOSTAVAX,  no  major  objections  were  identified.  With  regards  to  other concerns,  the  applicant  was  asked  to  revise  the  upper  release  specification  according  to  reflect  the process capability. An upper limit was argued by the applicant to be required to compensate for titre losses,  associated  with  the  intended  up-scaling  of  the  process  and  subsequent  prolongation  of manufacturing process. Since this may cause inconsistency within and between production batches, this approach was regarded not acceptable. The  revised  upper  specification  per  dose  is  based  on  estimated  overall  variability,  known  liquid degradation rate, and current validated batch size. In addition, an alert limit per dose on last tray of the lyophilisation  process  will  trigger  testing  of  first  tray  to  ensure  that  the  upper  specification  is  not exceeded. The applicant also acknowledged the constraint to smaller batch sizes. The  applicant  also  indicated  that  this  target  final  formulated  bulk  potency  value  may  change  as additional experience with the formulation, filling and lyophilisation processes is gained. Therefore, the  applicant  committed  to  re-evaluate  the  final  formulated  bulk  target  potency  value  when  more experience on the lots and process is available. Regarding  the  stability  and  calibration  of  varicella  standards  used  for  varicella  potency  assays,  the issues are resolved, resulting in follow-up measures. The applicant committed to revise the procedure used for calibrating the varicella standard and to monitor the stability of the reference standards and report the results on a regular basis. Several  commitments  are  made  by  the  Applicant,  and  several  follow-up  measures  are  defined  to provide further information post-approval. In conclusion, all quality issues are resolved. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3 Non-clinical aspects

## Introduction

No non-clinical data were submitted for ZOSTAVAX. The applicant, referring to the CHMP Note for guidance on Preclinical Pharmacological and Toxicological testing of vaccines (CHMP/SWP/465/95) argued  such  studies  not  to  be  relevant  in  view  of  the  lack  of  relevant  animal  models  and  the  long historical experience with varicella live viral vaccines. This position is endorsed.

4

The contra-indication for pregnancy is based on the clinical experience in clinical infection with the wild-type  strain  (occurrence  of  congenital  varicella  syndrome  or  other  birth  defects)  but  is  is  not known whether ZOSTAVAX can cause foetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. Pharmacology Traditional pharmacodynamic studies have not been performed for ZOSTAVAX because of the lack of relevant animal models to study vaccine pharmacology. CPMP/SWP/465/95 guidance recognizes that  suitable  animal  models  are  not  always  available  and  that  standard  pharmacological  and toxicological testing may not be required for live virus vaccines, and such studies were not conducted previously for VARIVAX. Pharmacokinetics Absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, or conventional pharmacokinetic drug interactions of the active ingredients are not relevant for evaluation of live attenuated viral vaccines that induce the immune response as a consequence of virus replication. There  are  no  non-clinical  pharmacokinetic  drug  interaction  study  reports.  Drug  interaction  studies have not been performed because of the lack of relevant animal models to study viral vaccine antigen interactions. Toxicology Traditional toxicity studies have not been performed because of the lack of relevant animal models to study  toxicology  of  viral  vaccines  antigens.  CPMP/SWP/465/95  guidance  recognizes  that  suitable animal models are not always available and that standard pharmacological and toxicological testing may  not  be  required  for  live  virus  vaccines,  and  such  studies  were  not  conducted  previously  for VARIVAX. However, exhaustive  safety  testing  was  performed  for  the  absence  of  transmissible  or infective  viral  agents  according  to  requirements  listed  in  the  European  Pharmacopoeia,  Supplement 2002, Section 2.6.16, 'Tests for Extraneous Agents in Viral Vaccines for Human Use.' Ecotoxicity/environmental risk assessment It  is  anticipated  that  the  environmental  impact  of  zoster  vaccine  live  would  be  very  low  for  the following reasons: -Minimal viral shedding has been associated with attenuated viruses -Viral shedding in body fluids occurs at a much lower rate than that observed with wild viruses, and is not prolonged. -Viruses are rapidly inactivated outside the human host. -Excretion of vaccine virus has been rarely linked to disease transmission. -There is no proven animal reservoir capable of sustaining transmission of VZV. Neither a carrier state nor a vector has been identified. Clinical aspects Introduction Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The  clinical  development  program  of  ZOSTAVAX  consisted  mainly  in  8  protocols  in  which approximately  40,000  subjects  were  enrolled  and  vaccinated.  An  overview  of  main  clinical  trials performed to evaluate the efficacy, safety and immunogenicity is given in the table below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Efficacy  and  safety  of  the  zoster  vaccine  was  studied  in  one  pivotal  randomized,  double-blinded, placebo-controlled, multicenter study (protocol 004). In this study 38,546 subjects were enrolled and vaccinated. Out of them 19,270 received the zoster vaccine and 19,276 received placebo. In addition, two sub-studies were conducted to further evaluate adverse event and Cell Mediated Immunity (CMI). 6,616  subjects  were  enrolled  in  the  Adverse  Event  Monitoring  substudy  and  1395  subjects  were enrolled in the CMI substudy. The study was recently published (N Engl J Med 352:2271-84,2005).

<!-- image -->

| Protocol Number         | Study Title                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Design                                                                                                                                                            | Dosage Potency per Dose                                                                                              | Study population                                                                                                                     | Primary Study Objectives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 001 Phase I             | Pilot Dose-Ranging Study to Assess the Safety and Tolerability of Live, Attenuated (Oka/Merck) Varicella-Zoster Vaccine in Healthy, Seropositive Adults 60 Years of Age and Older                                                      | Randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study                                                                                                                | 1 dose s.c. 2,000 PFU 8,000 PFU 17,000 PFU 19,000 PFU 34,000 PFU 67,000 PFU Placebo longer                           | Total: 276 Age range: 60-92 years                                                                                                    | Safety and tolerability profile of the 6 vaccine lots with varying potencies.                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| 002 Phase IIb           | Dose-Selection Study Using Live Attenuated (Oka/Merck) Varicella- Zoster Vaccine in Healthy Adults and in Adults With Diabetes Mellitus or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 60 Years of Age and Older With a History of Varicella | For dose 1: randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study For dose 2: Open-label no                                                                          | 2 doses, s.c. 0, ~18 mos Dose 1: 34,000 PFU/dose 50,000 PFU/dose or Placebo Dose 2: All subjects received 50,000 PFU | Total: 398 Age range: 59-89 years                                                                                                    | The primary objective for the first dose (Protocol 002-01) was to select a vaccine potency formulation that was safe and well tolerated. The primary objective for the second dose (Protocol 002-02) was to assess the safety of the vaccine as a second vaccination.                |
| 003                     | Probe Study to Evaluate the Safety and Tolerability of High-Potency, Reformulated, Live, Attenuated Oka/Merck Varicella-Zoster Vaccine in Healthy Adults 30 Years of Age and Older product                                             | Phase 2b, design as randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled, study population should show 21 enrolled,                                                      | Dosage Potency 50,000 PFU                                                                                            | 1148 (screened) Age range 27- 69 years                                                                                               | (1) To investigate the safety and tolerability profile of a vaccine formulation in healthy subjects who have low VZV antibody titer (seropositive and 5 gpELISA units/mL) or undetectable VZV antibody (measured by gpELISA) 30 years of age and older.                              |
| 004 Phase III Medicinal | Trial of Varicella-Zoster Vaccine for the Prevention of Herpes Zoster and its Complications                                                                                                                                            | Randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study Subjects were expected to be followed for an average of 4.5 years. Two substudies: -AEM Substudy -CMI Substudy | 1 dose, s.c. 19,000 to 60,000 PFU or Placebo                                                                         | Total: 38,546 Age range: 59-99 years - 59 years: 1 - 60-69:years: 20,746 - ≥ 70 years 17,799 AEM substudy: Total: 6616 CMI Substudy: | Co-primary objectives: 1. To determine if immunization with zoster vaccine will reduce the incidence and/or severity of HZ and its complications, primarily PHN, in persons 60 years of age and older. 2. To determine if immunization with zoster vaccine will protect against PHN. |

Protocols 001 and 002 were dose-response studies, presenting both safety and immunogenicity data. Use of the zoster vaccine in populations with chronic diseases (such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and type II diabetes mellitus) was also evaluated in protocol 002. Safety and immunogenicity of zoster vaccine in VZV-seronegative adults were studied in protocol 003. Protocols 007, VARIVAX Protocol 049, and ProQuad Protocol 012 were safety and immunogenicity studies. Protocols 005 and 009 were safety studies. Summary of clinical studies conducted to evaluate efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of ZOSTAVAX Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                    |                                                           | Total: 1395              |                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 005 Phase IIb | Probe Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of a Process Upgrade Varicella-Zoster Vaccine as a Booster Dose in Previously Vaccinated Adults 60 Years of Age and Older   | Uncontrolled, open-label study                     | 1 dose, s.c. 50,000 PFU                                   | Total 196 61-89 years    | Safety of PUVV given to subjects who have previously received 1 or 2 dose(s) of varicella vaccine.                                                                                 |
| 007 Phase IIa | A Double-Blind, Placebo- Controlled, Randomized Study to Evaluate Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity After 1 and 2 Doses of Zoster Vaccine                                                 | Randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled study | 2 dose s.c. 0, 42 d 10,000-20,000 PFU                     | Total 209 58-90 years    | To compare the VZV IFN- γ ELISPOT response ~6 weeks after 1 and 2 doses of zoster vaccine with the VZV IFN- γ ELISPOT response ~6 weeks after 1 and 2 doses of placebo. authorised |
| 009 Phase III | Evaluation of the Safety and Tolerability of a Higher Potency Dose of Varicella Zoster Virus Vaccine Live (Oka/Merck) Among Adults 50 Years of Age and Older                                     | Randomized, double-blind, active- controlled study | 1 dose s.c. 207,000 PFU 58,000 PFU longer                 | Total 695 50-90 years    | To compare the safety and tolerability profile of a higher potency zoster vaccine with that of the zoster vaccine at a lower potency.                                              |
| VARIVAX ™049  | Multi-center, Randomized, Double-Blind Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of a 2-Dose Regimen of High-Titered (~50,000 PFU/0.5mL) PUVV in Subjects ≥ 13 Years of Age | Randomized, double-blind no                        | 2 doses ~50,000 PFU/dose of PUVV 5400 PFU/dose of VARIVAX | Total 1366 13 - 69 years | (1) To determine if PUVV will yield a similar immune response as VARIVAX™ 6 weeks after the second dose. (2) To assess the safety and tolerability of PUVV after Doses 1 and 2.    |

The pharmacodynamic principles of vaccines can be described as the induction of a qualitative and quantitative  acceptable  immune  response  within  an  acceptable  time  frame  suitable  to  protect  from infection with the wild-type antigen or in the case of the zoster vaccine to prevent clinical relapse of VZV  infection  leading  to  HZ.  Successful  achievement  of  an  anamnestic  immune  response  is controlled  by  measuring  surrogate  parameters  present  in  the  serum  of  vaccinees  like  antibody concentrations (=antibody titers) or cell mediated immune responses. Consequently, no conventional pharmacodynamic studies were performed.

GCP The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP as claimed by the applicant. The  applicant  has  provided  a  statement  to  the  effect  that  clinical  trials  conducted  outside  the community were carried out in accordance with the ethical standards of Directive 2001/20/EC. Pharmacokinetics No  pharmacokinetic  studies  were  performed.  As  stated  in  Section  3.2.1  on  the  CHMP  'Note  for Guidance  on  Clinical  Evaluation  of  New  Vaccines'  (CPMP/EWP/463/97  dated  19  May  1999), pharmacokinetic studies are generally not required for injectable vaccines because they do not provide information useful for establishing adequate dosing recommendations. Pharmacodynamics Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Immunogenicity

Pharmacodynamic  evaluations  assessing  humoral  response  to  varicella-zoster  virus  (VZV),  using  a glycoprotein  enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay  (gpELISA)  and  cellular  response,  using  several assays  including  a  VZV  IFNγ enzyme-linked  immunospot  (ELISPOT)  assay,  to  the  virus  were assessed in Phase II and III studies.

The primary endpoints for the evaluation of the VZV immune response for the second dose were (1) IFNγ production  (measured  by  ELISPOT  and  RT-PCR,  if  sufficient  sample)  summarised  by geometric  mean  counts  (GMCs)  and  fold  rises  from  pre-dose  2  to  6  weeks  post-dose  2;  and  (2) Responder  cell  frequency  (RCF)  responses  summarized  by  geometric  mean  values  (GMVs)  and geometric mean fold rises from pre-dose 2 to post-dose 2.

The  main  goal  in  the  development  of  zoster  vaccine  was  to  boost  the  VZV-  specific  (cellular) immunity in order to prevent the reactivation of the varicella virus. The key immunologic endpoints for clinical studies conducted in the zoster vaccine development program were the GeometricMeanTitres (GMT, measured by gpELISA) at 6 weeks post-vaccination, geometric mean counts  (GMCs)  (measured  by  VZV  IFNγ ELISPOT assay)  at  6  weeks  post-vaccination,  the  ratio (fold difference) of the immune responses of the zoster vaccine and placebo groups at 6 weeks postvaccination, and the geometric mean fold rise (GMFR) from baseline to 6 weeks post-vaccination for both assays. Results are described below for each individual study and discussed in the section on discussion of clinical efficacy. Clinical efficacy · Dose response studies In  dose  ranging  study  001  and  dose  selection  study  002  zoster  vaccine  lots  of  different  potencies ranging  from  2000  PFU/dose  to  67,000  PFU/dose  were  evaluated  with  respect  to  the  safety  and tolerability profile. Pilot  Dose-Ranging Study  001 assessed the immune  response  and  tolerability of attenuated (Oka/Merck) Varicella-Zoster Vaccine in 276 healthy, seropositive adults 60 years of age and older by using  several  doses  ranging  from  2000  PFU  to  67  000  PFU.  The  observed  IFNγ responses  were numerically higher in subjects who received the 19,000 PFU, 34,000 PFU, and 67,000 PFU potencies, compared with the placebo group and the lower potency groups. The IFNγ responses  appeared  to plateau among these 3 higher potency groups, as judged by the geometric mean fold rises (1.5, 1.9, 1.7, respectively) or by the percent of subjects with ≥ 4-fold rises (30.0%, 28.6%, 29.4%, respectively). There were no significant differences in tolerability between the selected doses. Study 002 was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study to select a zoster vaccine  potency  that  was  well  tolerated,  in  398  VZV-seropositive  adults ≥ 60  years  of  age  with  or without chronic illnesses such as COPD or DM. In the first phase, the study subjects received either placebo or a single dose of either 34 0000 or 50 000 PFU. A second dose (50 000 PFU) was given at month 18. The purpose of the second dose was to confirm the safety and immunogenicity of a higher potency zoster vaccine in subjects who were previously vaccinated with a similar or lower potency zoster vaccine or placebo. The primary endpoints for the evaluation of the VZV-specific immune response for the first dose were the IFNγ ELISA titer, VZV antibody level and Responder cell frequency (RCF) value at Day 0 and 6 weeks post-vaccination. Medicinal product no longer authorised

After the first dose, IFNγ ELISA and the VZV-specific ELISA demonstrated higher responses in the active  groups  compared  with  placebo  but  no  difference  between  themselves.  The  responses  were

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

comparable in healthy individuals as compared to patients with chronic illnesses. The responses were higher in individuals who were seropositive at baseline as compared to seronegative individuals. The immunological studies after the second dose failed for technical reasons.

Both the first  and  the  second  dose  of  the  high  potency  vaccine  were  well-tolerated  in  both  healthy individuals and in patients with chronic illnesses.

<!-- image -->

|                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Zoster vaccine (N=19)                             | Zoster vaccine (N=19)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Placebo (N=20)                                        | Placebo (N=20)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Endpoint                      | Time point                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | n                                                 | Observed Responses (95% CI)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | N                                                     | Observed Responses (95% CI)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| GMC Geometric mean rises pre- | Prevaccination 1 week postdose 1 2 weeks postdose 1 4 weeks postdose 1 6 weeks postdose 1 1 week postdose 2 2 weeks postdose 2 4 weeks postdose 2 6 weeks postdose 2 6 months postdose 2 1 week postdose 1 2 weeks postdose 1 4 weeks postdose 1 6 weeks postdose 1 1 week postdose 2 2 weeks postdose 2 4 weeks postdose 2 Medicinal | 19 16 15 17 17 11 15 14 8 13 16 15 17 17 11 15 14 | 21.4(9.2;49.6) 102.2(38.0;275.3) 26.7(7.8;91.8) 34.2(15.9;73.5) 55.3(28.3;108.3) 191.0(109.6;332.9) 87.1(31.9;237.9) 65.3(19.4;219.2) 100.3(37.1;270.9) 75.0(43.5;129.3) 4.0(1.2;13.8) 1.0(0.3;2.9) 1.4(0.4;5.0) 2.1(0.7;6.0) 5.7(1.6;19.7) 3.1(0.9;10.6) 2.2(0.5;10.0) 3.7(0.5;28.5) | 20 20 16 17 17 14 17 18 18 17 20 16 17 17 14 17 18 18 | 32.5(13.4;79.1) 30.0(13.4;67.0) 28.7(14.1;58.8) 30.8(14.1;67.1) 36.3(17.8;74.2) 48.2(26.3;88.5) 41.4(24.6;69.6) 36.4(20.1;65.7) 34.0(15.6;74.0) 46.9(23.2;95.1) 0.9(0.4;2.1) 0.7(0.3;1.4) 1.0(0.4;2.3) 1.2(0.6;2.5) 1.5(0.4;5.0) 1.3(0.4;3.9) 1.1(0.4;2.8) 1.0(0.4;2.8) |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         | 6 weeks postdose 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 8                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         | 6 months postdose 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 13                                                | 2.4(0.9;6.5)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 17                                                    | 1.1(0.4;2.6)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| fold from vaccination         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Overall , studies 001 and 002 showed that a potency range of ~22,000 to ~63,000 PFU per single dose of zoster vaccine is generally well tolerated. Considering that the humoral and cellular immune responses evoked by the different vaccine lots (2000 to 67,000 PFU per dose) indicated only a moderate dose-response relationship, an end of expiry potency of 19,000 PFU per dose was selected for the pivotal study 004. Immune response to the second vaccine dose All  together,  470  subjects  received  2  doses  of  zoster  vaccine.  The  interval  between  doses  varied  in each protocol (42 days in Protocol 007, ~18 months in Protocol 002, and several years in Protocol 005).  These  studies  did  not  reveal  a  clear  booster  effect  although  a  clear  immune  response  to  the second dose was demonstrated. The safety profile of the second dose was not different from the single dose regimen. Study  007 was  a  randomized,  controlled,  double-blind  (with  in-house  blinding  procedures),  multicentre study comparing the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity profiles of 1 and 2 doses of zoster vaccine with those of placebo when administered to healthy subjects ≥ 60 years of age. A second dose of HZ vaccine given at any time post dose 1, in principle, restores but not significantly exceeds cellmediated  immune  responses  observed  after  the  first  dose  as  measured  by  gpELISA.  In  contrast, another immunological parameter, the VZV IFNγ shows numerically higher values after the second dose, which could suggest a booster-like response, although the sample size and confidence intervals make interpretation difficult (see below). Zoster 2-dose safety and immunogenicity study 007 - Summary of VZV IFNγ ELISPOT responses by time point and vaccination group for the kinetics subset (per-protocol-population) Medicinal product no longer authorised

N = Number of subjects vaccinated at baseline (Day 0) in each vaccination group.

n = Number of subjects who had valid VZV IFNγ ELISPOT assay results at the respective time points in each vaccination group, or had valid results at both prevaccination and the respective postvaccination time point in the calculations of fold rise.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

CI = Confidence interval; GMC = Geometric mean count, in spot-forming cells per 10 6 peripheral blood mononuclear cells; IFNγ ELISPOT = Interferon-gamma enzyme-linked immunospot;

VZV = Varicella-zoster virus.

- Main study

STUDY  004 -  Trial  of  Varicella-Zoster  Vaccine  for  the  Prevention  of  Herpes  Zoster  and  its Complications - was the pivotal clinical study. Methods It was a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study (22 sites in the United States) to  determine  whether  vaccination  of  older  adults  with  zoster  vaccine  could  decrease  the  incidence and/or severity of HZ and its complications, in particular, PHN. The  safety  follow-up  lasted  through  Day  42  post  vaccination  and  subjects  were  expected  to  be followed for an average of 4.5 years. Two substudies were performed: -the Adverse Event Monitoring Substudy was designed to provide a detailed safety assessment of a subset of the main subject population, -and  the  Cell-Mediated  Immunity  Substudy  was  designed  to  assess  the  VZV-specific  immune responses of the vaccine recipients and to evaluate potential CMI correlates of protection against HZ and PHN. Study Participants The main inclusion criteria were: -History of varicella or long-term ( ≥ 30 years) residence in the continental USA; -60 years of age or older. The main exclusion criteria were: -Immunosuppression resulting from disease, corticosteroids, or other immunosuppressive/cytotoxic therapy; -Active neoplastic disease (except local skin cancer or other malignancies [e.g., prostate cancer] that was stable in the absence of immunosuppressive/cytotoxic therapy); -Prior HZ; -Prior receipt of varicella vaccine; -Allergic sensitivity to neomycin; -History of anaphylactoid reaction to gelatin; -Significant underlying illness that would be expected to prevent completion of the study. Treatments Subjects received a single dose of zoster vaccine or placebo at Day 0. Subjects received a single 0.5ml  subcutaneous  injection  in  the  deltoid  area  of  the  nondominant  arm.  The  estimated  potency  at vaccination of the 12 vaccine lots used in the study ranged from 18,700 to 60,000 PFU per dose. The median estimated potency of the zoster vaccine at vaccination was 24,600 PFU and more than 90% of vaccinated  subjects  received  doses  lower  than  32,300  PFU.  The  zoster  vaccine  and  the  placebo contained the same stabilizers, but only the zoster vaccine included trace quantities of neomycin. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Antiviral therapy, famciclovir (500 mg every 8 hours for 7 days), was offered for treatment of HZ if the subject was seen within the 72 hours of onset of rash. If the subject was first seen beyond 72 hours of rash onset, famciclovir could be offered at the physician's discretion

Outcomes/endpoints

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The study objectives were to determine whether vaccination of older adults with zoster vaccine could decrease the incidence and/or severity of HZ and its complications, in particular, PHN.

Initially,  HZ  pain  Burden  of  Illness  (BOI)  was  listed  as  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint.  However, incidence of PHN was treated as a co-primary endpoint for the efficacy analyses.

The  HZ  pain  burden  of  illness  (BOI)  score  was  a  composite  endpoint  incorporating  the  incidence, severity  and  duration  of  HZ  pain.  For  each  confirmed  case  of  HZ,  the  ZBPI  (Zoster  Brief  Pain Inventory) data were used to calculate a \"HZ Severity of Illness Score\", defined as the area under the ZBPI  worst  pain  response-versus-time  curve  during  this  182-day  period  (i.e.,  the  HZ  pain  and discomfort severity-by-duration area-under-the-curve [AUC]). The HZ Severity of Illness Score was defined as zero for subjects who did not develop a confirmed case of HZ during the study and for 6 cases (2 vaccine recipients and 4 placebo recipients) with no pain assessments. The HZ BOI Score represented the average severity of illness among all subjects in the vaccine and placebo groups; it was calculated as the sum of the HZ Severity of Illness Scores of all members of a group divided by the total number of subjects ( N ) in that group. PHN was defined by the presence of a typical rash and HZ-associated pain or discomfort, rated as 3 or greater  (on  a  scale  ranging  from  0  to  10)  and  persisting  or  appearing  more  than  90  days  after  rash onset. The diagnosis of HZ was confirmed by expert adjudication and viral testing. Secondary endpoints were: -incidence of HZ; -duration of HZ pain; -Activities of daily living interference due to HZ (ADLI). Immune response (tertiary objective) : The immune responses to the zoster vaccine were tested in the CMI Substudy at baseline and at six weeks, at 12, 24, and 36 months post-vaccination by using VZV interferon-gamma (IFNγ ) enzyme linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay, VZV responder cell frequency (RCF) assay, and glycoprotein enzyme-linked  immunosorbent  assay  (gpELISA).  Exploratory  analyses  were  also  performed  to determine whether the VZV-specific immune responses correlated with protection against HZ. Sample size Estimates made at the time the trial was designed indicated that a total of 400 confirmed cases of HZ and  a  total  of  62  cases  of  PHN  would  be  required.  With  a  total  enrollment  of  ~37,200  subjects (~18,600  per  vaccination  group),  it  was  expected  that  the  required  cases  of  HZ  and  PHN  would accumulate during an average of 4.5 years of follow-up, assuming an annual HZ incidence of 3/1000 in placebo subjects, and a conservative estimate of 10% annual loss to follow-up. A mean AUC for worst pain among cases of HZ in the placebo group was assumed to be 280, with a standard deviation of 212. Based on a planned sample size re-estimation based on the first 200 evaluable cases of HZ, it was shown that that the mean variability of the HZ pain AUC scores for the first 223 evaluable HZ cases was greater than had been assumed for sample size calculations when the protocol was written. As a consequence, the number of evaluable HZ cases needed for the final analysis was calculated to be 750, an increase from the 400 cases specified in the original protocol, in order to maintain 97% power to detect a 60% reduction in burden of illness of HZ needed for the final analysis. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No sample size calculation was performed on the immunogenicity and safety endpoints, due to their exploratory nature.

## Randomisation

Subjects were randomised in a 1:1 ratio to receive either zoster vaccine or placebo. The randomisation was stratified for two age groups (60 to 69 years, and ≥ 70 years).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Blinding (masking)

Because  the  placebo  and  the  vaccine  were  visually  distinct,  an  independent  third  party  (vaccine technician) was responsible for labeling syringes and reconstituting and administering the vaccine/placebo.  The  unblinded  vaccine  technician  had  no  subsequent  role  in  the  assessment  of subjects and did not maintain any separate record of study vaccine or placebo assignments.

<!-- image -->

Statistical methods The vaccine efficacy for the HZ BOI, VEBOI, was defined as the relative reduction in HZ BOI Score in the zoster vaccine group compared with the placebo group and was estimated by: P V BOI T T VE / 1 -= , where TV and TP are  the  estimated  HZ  BOI  Scores  for  the  zoster  vaccine  and  placebo  group, respectively. The primary analysis was made using a modified-intention-to-treat (MITT) approach, which included all subjects who did not develop evaluable HZ within 30 days post-vaccination or who dropped out by day  30.  Point  estimate  and  confidence  interval  for  VEBOI  were  determined  using  special  statistical methodology developed for this type of endpoint (Chang MN, Guess HA, and JF Heyse: Reduction in burden of illness: a new efficacy measure for prevention trials. Stat Med 1994; 13:1807-1814). The analysis was stratified by age group. The vaccine efficacy for PHN, VEPHN, was defined as the relative reduction in PHN incidence rate in the vaccine group compared with the placebo group and was estimated by: P V PHN VE λ λ / 1 -= , where λ V and λ P are the incidence rates (person time data) of PHN in the zoster vaccine and placebo group, respectively. The  point  estimate  for VEPHN and  the  associated  exact  95%  CI  were  determined  by  using  MantelHaenszel type  of  methodology.  The  primary  analysis  was  made  for  the  MITT-population,  and  was stratified by the age group. The vaccine efficacy for HZ, VEHZ , was defined as the relative reduction of the HZ incidence rate in the zoster vaccine group compared with the placebo group. In  order  to  control  the  overall  p-value  among  multiple  tests  of  primary  and  secondary  efficacy endpoints, Hochberg's stepwise procedure was used. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

Participant flow

The  patient  disposition  is  seen  in  the  table  below.  The  number  of  discontinuations  was  small  and evenly distributed among the treatment arms.

|                          | Zoster Vaccine (N=19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N=19270)   | Placebo (N=19276)   | Placebo (N=19276)   | Total (N=38546)   | Total (N=38546)   |
|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                          | n                          | (%)                        | n                   | (%)                 | n                 | (%)               |
| Vaccinated:              | 19270                      | ( 100)                     | 19276               | ( 100)              | 38546             | ( 100)            |
| Completed:               | 18359                      | (95.3)                     | 18357               | (95.2)              | 36716             | (95.3)            |
| Discontinued:            | 911                        | ( 4.7)                     | 919                 | ( 4.8)              | 1830              | ( 4.7)            |
| Died                     | 793                        | ( 4.1)                     | 792                 | ( 4.1)              | 1585              | ( 4.1)            |
| Withdrawn from the study | 57                         | ( 0.3)                     | 75                  | ( 0.4)              | 132               | ( 0.3)            |
| Lost to follow-up        | 53                         | ( 0.3)                     | 40                  | ( 0.2)              | 93                | ( 0.2)            |
| Other                    | 8                          | ( 0.0)                     | 12                  | ( 0.1)              | 20                | ( 0.1)            |

|               | Zoster Vaccine Placebo (N=691) (N=704)   | Zoster Vaccine Placebo (N=691) (N=704)   | Zoster Vaccine Placebo (N=691) (N=704)   | Total (N=1395)   | Total (N=1395)   |
|---------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|
|               | n (%)                                    | n                                        | (%)                                      | n                | (%)              |
| Vaccinated:   | 691 (100)                                | 704                                      | (100)                                    | 1395             | (100)            |
| Completed:    | 676 (97.8)                               | 681                                      | (96.7)                                   | 1357             | (97.3)           |
| Discontinued: | 15 (2.2)                                 | 23                                       | (3.3)                                    | 38               | (2.7)            |

<!-- image -->

Subject Accounting for Subjects in the Main Study (004) Completion data for the CMI substudy is also summarised below. Subject Accounting for Subjects in the CMI Substudy Recruitment The study was initiated on 06-Nov-1998, and the final HZ case was accrued on 30-Sept-2003. Last patient out was 28-Apr-2004 (with the exception of one subject who was contacted late). The cut-off date for in-house data was 23-Nov-2004. Conduct of the study Each subject was followed for the development of HZ for approximately 2 to 4.5 years. Subjects were instructed  to  contact  study  site  personnel  immediately  if  signs  or  symptoms  of  HZ  occurred.  An automated telephone response system (ATRS) was used to actively follow subjects on a monthly basis and  inquire  if  any  unreported  potential  HZ  cases  occurred  during  the  previous  month.  During enrollment, each subject was educated on the signs and symptoms of HZ and the use of the ATRS. All suspected cases of HZ were to be clinically evaluated by a study site investigator within 24 hours of the first reported symptom. Baseline data The two vaccination groups were comparable with respect to the baseline characteristics (including gender, age, race, marital status, education, working status and health status). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Overall  the  study  004  included  more  male  (59%)  than  female  participants  (22760  vs  15786, respectively). The median age in both groups was 69 years. 59% of the subjects were 60-69 years and 41% were ≥ 70years of age. 6.6 % of the vaccine recipients and 6.9 % of the placebo recipients were 80 years of age or older.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Numbers analysed

The primary analysis was based on a modified-intention-to-treat (MITT) approach, which included all subjects who did not develop evaluable HZ within 30 days post-vaccination. Sixteen and 29 patients were excluded from MITT in the active and the placebo group, respectively. Three individuals had a second episode of HZ. In these cases, only the first episode was included in the analysis.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Outcomes and estimation IMMUNOGENICITY OUTCOMES Vaccine-associated immune responses pre- and postavaccination in VZV seropositive or seronegative adults. Individuals  in  the  target  population  for  zoster  vaccine  generally  have  high  baseline  VZV  antibody titers  in  the  gpELISA.  Nonetheless,  following  a  dose  of  zoster  vaccine,  significant  increases  from baseline were seen at 2 and 6 weeks postvaccination, indicating that the vaccine elicits an anamnestic response. Among subjects enrolled in the CMI Substudy, the estimated Geometric mean titer (GMTs) at  6  weeks postvaccination were 478.7 gpELISA units/mL (mean fold rises from baseline (GMFR): 1.7)  in  the  zoster  vaccine  group  and  287.8  gpELISA  units/mL  (GMFR  from  baseline,  1.0)  in  the placebo group. The estimated fold differences for both GMT and GMFR between the zoster vaccine group and placebo group were 1.7 (95% CI = [1.6, 1.8]). Regarding VZV IFNγ ELISPOT Counts, the 6-week postvaccination response in the zoster vaccine group  was  significantly  higher  than  in  the  placebo  group,  in  terms  of  the  Geometric  mean  count (GMC) (69.8 spot-forming cells [SFC]/106 PBMC in zoster vaccine group, 31.8 SFC/10 6 PBMC in placebo  group)  and  the  GMFR  from  Day  0  (2.1  zoster  vaccine  group,  0.9  placebo  group).  The estimated  fold  differences  for  both  GMC  and  GMFR  between  the  zoster  vaccine  group  and  the placebo group were 2.2 (95% CI = [1.9, 2.5]). Persistence  of  VZV  Antibody  Titers  by  gpELISA  Among  the  CMI  Substudy  Participants  is summarised below. N = Number of subjects vaccinated in the CMI Substudy. n = Number of subjects contributing to the immunogenicity analysis. gpELISA = Glycoprotein enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. CMI = Cell mediated immunity. GMT = Geometric mean titer. Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Zoster Vaccine (N=691)                                                               | Zoster Vaccine (N=691)                                                                                | Placebo (N=704)     | Placebo (N=704)               | Placebo (N=704)                                                            |
|------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Endpoint                                             | Time Point n                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Observed Responses                                                                   | 95% CI                                                                                                | n                   | Observed Responses            | 95% CI                                                                     |
| GMT N = Number n = Number gpELISA = CMI = Cell GMT = | Day 0 6 Weeks 12 Months 24 Months 36 Months 678 667 649 636 625 6 Weeks 24 Months 36 Months of subjects vaccinated in of subjects contributing Glycoprotein mediated immunity. Geometric mean titer. Medicinal | 278.8 474.7 353.7 329.5 331.6 the CMI the immunogenicity enzyme-linked immunosorbent | (258.0, 301.4) (441.5, 510.5) (328.1, 381.2) (304.5, 356.5) (305.1, 360.4) Substudy. analysis. assay. | 691 684 661 644 612 | 291.0 291.4 306.6 300.6 305.7 | (269.7, 314.0) (269.3, 315.3) (283.3, 331.9) (277.8, 325.3) (280.6, 333.2) |
| Geometric Mean Fold Rises From Day 0                 | 12 Months 655 636 624 612                                                                                                                                                                                      | 1.7 1.3 1.2 1.2                                                                      | (1.6, 1.8) (1.2, 1.3) (1.1, 1.2) (1.1, 1.3)                                                           | 673 650 633 601     | 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.0               | (1.0, 1.0) (1.0, 1.1) (1.0, 1.1) (1.0, 1.1)                                |

In  order  to  evaluate  whether  the  vaccine-induced,  VZV-specific  immune  responses  correlated  with protection  against  HZ,  the  responses  by  VZV  IFNγ ELISPOT assay and gpELISA were analyzed according to HZ status. This analysis was somewhat limited because the sub-study represented only 3.6% of the total study population, and relatively few substudy participants developed HZ during the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

study. Furthermore, correlation between immune responses and protection against HZ were observed with  gpELISA  measurements,  while,  the  results  of  VZV  IFNγ ELISPOT  test  had  a  less  clear correlation to the protection.

## VACCINE EFFICACY OUTCOMES

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

|                      | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)            | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)                     | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)                   | Placebo (N = 19276)                            | Vaccine efficacy for HZ Pain BOI   |
|----------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                      | n                            | m                            | Total follow- up time (Person -Years) | Estimated HZ Pain BOI (Per 1000 Person- Years) | n                     | m                     | Total follow- up time (Person -Years) | Estimated HZ Pain BOI (Per 1000 Person- Years) | Point Estimate (95% CI)            |
| All                  |                              |                              |                                       |                                                |                       |                       |                                       |                                                |                                    |
|                      | 315                          | 19254                        | 58203                                 | 2.208                                          | 642                   | 19247                 | 57736 longer                          | 5.682                                          | 0.611 (0.511, 0.691)               |
| By Age Group (Years) | By Age Group (Years)         | By Age Group (Years)         | By Age Group (Years)                  | By Age Group (Years)                           | By Age Group (Years)  | By Age Group (Years)  |                                       |                                                |                                    |
| 60 to 69             | 12 2                         | 1037 0                       | 31323                                 | 1.495                                          | 33 4                  | 1035 6                | 30953                                 | 4.334                                          | 0.655 (0.515, 0.755)               |
| ≥ 70                 | 19 3                         | 8884                         | 26881                                 | 3.471                                          | 30 8                  | 8891                  | 26783                                 | 7.781                                          | 0.554 (0.399, 0.669)               |

| Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)             | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)          | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)                  | Placebo (N = 19276)                 | Vaccine Efficacy with respect to PHN Point Estimate (95% CI)   |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| n                            | m Total Follow- Up Time (Person-Years) | Rate of PHN (Per 1000 Person-Years) | n                     | m                     | Total Follow- Up Time (Person-years) | Rate of PHN (Per 1000 Person-Years) |                                                                |
| 27                           | 19254 58203                            | 0.464                               | 80                    | 19247                 | 57736                                | 1.384                               | 0.665 (0.475, 0.792)                                           |

Incidence of HZ: The estimated VEHZ was 51.3% (95% CI = [44.2%, 57.6%]). The test of treatmentby-age-group interaction on HZ was statistically significant (p-value&lt;0.001). The reduction of HZ incidence was 63.9% (95% CI = [55.5%, 70.9%]) in the younger age (60 to 69 years of age) group and 37.6% (95% CI = [25.0%, 48.1%]) in the older age (&gt;70 years of age) group.

BOI related to HZ pain: The estimated VEBOI was 61.1% (95% CI [51.1%, 69.1]). The test of treatment-by-age-group interaction on BOI was not statistically significant (p=0.266). Statistical  Analysis  of  HZ  BOI  Efficacy  Based  on  the  Protocol-Defined  AUC  Scale  Over  6  Months  of Follow-Up After HZ Rash Onset (MITT Population) and adjusted for age and gender p-Value for testing the vaccine efficacy for BOI &gt;25% was &lt;0.001; p-value for testing the vaccine efficacy for BOI &gt;0% was &lt;0.001; p-value for testing treatment-by-age-groupinteraction in vaccine efficacy for BOI was 0.266 . N = Number of subjects randomized. n = Number of evaluable HZ cases in the MITT population. m = Number of subjects in the MITT population. AUC = Area under the curve. HZ = Herpes zoster. BOI = Burden of illness. questionnaire MITT = Modified intention-to-treat. CI = Confidence interval. Incidence of PHN: The estimated VEPHN was 66.5% (95% CI = [47.5%, 79.2%]). The test of treatment-by-age-group interaction on PHN was not statistically significant (p &gt;0.999). Statistical al Analysis of the Incidence of PHN (MITT Population) p-Value for testing the vaccine efficacy for PHN &gt;25% was &lt;0.001 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Incidence of Evaluable HZ Cases (MITT Population)

Compared with placebo, zoster vaccine reduced the duration of clinically significant pain (defined as the number of days between the first day after rash onset when the subject had a worst pain score ≥ 3 and the  first  visit  when  the  worst  pain  score  became  &lt;3  and  remained  &lt;3  for  the  remainder  of  the follow-up period, up to 6 months following HZ rash onset) associated with HZ (median duration of clinically significant pain among HZ cases in the zoster vaccine and placebo groups: 20 days vs. 22 days;  p-value&lt;0.001  from  the  analysis  based  on  the  MITT  population;  p-value=0.041  from  the analysis based on the evaluable HZ cases only). See below ancillary analyses with regard to reduction of HZ pain. Compared with placebo, zoster vaccine resulted in an 8.2% reduction in the risk of having substantial ADLI (defined as having a combined ADLI score ≥ 2 for ≥ 7 days) beyond the reduction in HZ. The hypothesis testing on this endpoint was not statistically significant (p-value=0.341). Ancillary analyses Risk of developing PHN after HZ: In terms of PHN incidence, there is a VEPHN of 66.5 % throughout all study subjects. Referring only to subjects, developing HZ, there is a slight decrease in the risk of subsequently acquiring also PHN. In the vaccine group, the risk of suffering from PHN after HZ was 8.6 % (315/ 27), while in the placebo group it was 12.5 % (642/ 80). This effect was more prominent in the group of older subjects. The risk of  developing  a  PHN  after  HZ  ( ≥ 70  years  old)  was  reduced  to  9.8%  among  vaccinated  subjects, compared to 18.5% for unvaccinated subjects with HZ. Reduction of HZ pain Among all subjects, who developed HZ, HZ pain Severity-by-Duration (0-6 month), a key component of the HZ BOI, was reduced by 21.8% in the vaccine compared to the placebo group (142.2 vs 180.5, p-value = 0.008). With regard to the acute pain (pain between 0-30 days) there was no statistically significant difference between the vaccination group and the placebo group with regard to the Severity-by-Duration score, the mean score was 89,3 (95% CI 81.7, 96.8) and 91,8 (95% CI 86.6, 97.0) for the vaccine group and placebo group, respectively. Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)            | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)                             | Zoster Vaccine (N = 19270)   | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)   | Placebo (N = 19276)                   | Placebo (N = 19276)                                    | Placebo (N = 19276)   |
|-------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|
| Age Group (Years) | n                            | m                            | Total Follow- Up Time (Person- Years) | Observed Incidence Rate of HZ (Per 1000 Person- Years) | 95% CI                       | n                     | m                     | Total Follow- Up Time (Person- Years) | Observed Incidence Rate of HZ (Per 1000 Person- Years) | 95% CI                |
| 60 to 69          | 122                          | 10370                        | 31323                                 | 3.895                                                  | (3.2, 4.6)                   | 334                   | 10356                 | 30953                                 | 10.791                                                 | (9.6, 12.0)           |
| ≥ 70              | 193                          | 8884                         | 26881                                 | 7.180                                                  | (6.2, 8.3)                   | 308                   | 8891                  | 26783                                 | 11.500                                                 | (10.2, 12.8)          |
| All               | 315                          | 19254                        | 58203                                 | 5.412                                                  | (4.8, 6.0)                   | 642                   | 19247                 | 57736                                 | 11.120                                                 | (10.2, 12.0)          |

Following vaccination, the duration of clinically significant pain (3) associated with HZ in both age groups was significantly reduced (20 days vs 22 days, p-value &lt; 0.001). However, less significant pain (&lt;3) a reduction was observed only in the younger age group (30 vs. 36 days), while for the group of older  participants  no  difference  was  found compared to the placebo group (&lt;3; median duration 41 days for both groups).

The overall use of analgesic medication was similar in both study groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Analysis performed across trials (pooled analyses and meta-analysis)

## None

## · Clinical studies in special populations

<!-- image -->

The  possibility  of  future  changes  in  the  epidemiology  of  HZ  or  PHN  following  introduction  of ZOSTAVAX was discussed (e.g. delaying age of incidence of HZ or PHN) but there is currently no data to suggest such a change.

None · Discussion on clinical efficacy The  main  goal  in  the  development  of  zoster  vaccine  was  to  boost  the  VZV-  specific  (cellular) immunity in order to prevent the reactivation of the VZV. Cell  mediated  immune  responses  towards  zoster  vaccine  were  independent  from  the  used  dose (potency in terms of pfu/ml) of the vaccine virus and also from some other parameters known to be relevant  for  the  immunogenicity  and  efficacy  of  vaccines,  such  as  gender,  co-morbidity  and  comedication. In contrast, dependency was observed with regard to the age of individuals and possibly the number of doses administered (1 or 2). Overall,  in  seropositive  vaccinees,  the  zoster  vaccine  elicits  significantly  higher  VZV  specific responses  compared  to  placebo  as  measured  by  gpELISA  and  VZV  IFNγ ELISPOT.  Immune responses were shown to persist above baseline up to 36 months. However, the values decrease over time during the follow-up, being only slightly above baseline values at the end of the follow up. A dose  of  zoster  vaccine,  either  42  days  or  several  years  following  initial  VZV  vaccination,  elicits  a VZV-specific immune response of a magnitude that is similar to that seen after an initial vaccination. Therefore, the persistence of immunity and protection against HZ was questioned for the long-term as well as after one dose as compared to two-dose immunization (with consideration to age categories). The company agreed that there is a need to determine long-term duration of vaccine protection and committed  to  further  assess  the  long-term  efficacy  through  extension  of  follow-up  of  around  7000 vaccinated subjects (from study 004) for up to 10 years post vaccination, in order to detect potential waning of protection. A second dose of HZ vaccine given at any time post dose 1 restores but not significantly exceeds cellmediated  immune  responses  observed  after  the  first  dose  as  measured  by  gpELISA.  In  contrast, another immunological parameter, the VZV IFNγ ELISPOT may be increased significantly after a second vaccine dose. Although it is not possible for the time being to correlate any clinical benefit with  cell-mediated  immune  parameters  measured,  this  observation  suggests  that  ZOSTAVAX individually stimulates different compartments of the human cellular immune system. To what extent individual and combined immunological effects do mutually contribute to vaccine efficacy cannot be explained for the time being. Therefore, to date, without clear established correlation between an immune response and protection against  HZ,  there  is  no  immunologic  evidence  that  a  2-dose  regimen  would  be  superior  to  a  single dose. A 2-dose versus 1-dose comparative efficacy trial would be difficult to perform because of the very large number of subjects to be included and no defined optimal dosing interval yet. Apart from further  assessing  the  long-term  efficacy  of  1-dose  regimen,  the  applicant  proposed  to  consider studying immunogenicity. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Clinical data demonstrate the efficacy of ZOSTAVAX in immunocompetent persons over 60 years of age, resulting in a decreased incidence and severity of HZ and its complications.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Overall, the vaccine reduced the incidence of HZ in the study population by 51 % and the incidence of PHN by 67%. An effect of the vaccine was observed with respect to the HZ'Burden of illness', which ,  besides  the  incidence  of  HZ,  includes  duration  and  severity  of  pain  as  an  indicator  of  vaccine efficacy.  Overall  the  vaccine  efficacy  for  the  HZ  BOI  was  61  %.  There  is  currently  no  plausible explanation  for,  why  the  vaccine  is  not  efficacious  in  preventing  HZ  in  the  remaining  49%  of  the vaccinees.

Also  because  of  the  lack  of  data,  the  applicant  committed  to  evaluate  the  safety,  tolerability  and immunogenicity of ZOSTAVAX in subjects who reported having experienced a previous episode of HZ.

However, efficacy shows important differences with respect to the age of the vaccinee. The VEHZ was about 64 % in the group 60 to 69 years of age, but only about 37 % in subjects ≥ 70 years of age. With respect to HZ BOI, the effect was also more pronounced in the younger age group (66.6% vs 56.4%), but this was not statistically significant. Though this effect is not fully understood, it seems to indicate that vaccination may be more effective at younger ages. The applicant claimed the inclusion of the age group 50-59 years of age because the annual risk of HZ begins to increase markedly around 50 years of age. The incidence increases from approximately 2.5 per 1000 person-years in 40 to 49 year olds to approximately 5.0 per 1000 in 50 to 59 year olds and approximately 7.0 per 1000 in 60 to 69 year olds. Nevertheless, the pivotal study included subject of 60 years of age or older and therefore the number of vaccine recipients in the 50-59 years of age group is too limited to warrant this indication, even in view of some preliminary safety and immunogenicity data  from  additional  subjects  in  a  new  study  (Protocol  010)  comparing  two  formulations  of ZOSTAVAX including subjects 50 to 59 years of age (n = 135). Furthermore, it cannot be excluded that  vaccination  of  individuals  at  the  age  of  50-60  years  of  age  may  postpone  HZ  to  the  older  age groups where the disease is more severe. Among subjects who develop HZ, there is a slight decrease in the risk of subsequently developing PHN, in  the  vaccine  group  compared  to  the  placebo  group,  with  a  more  prominent  effect  in  older subjects. Regarding the reduction of zoster  associated pain, there was a statistical  difference  in  duration  and severity  of  pain  between  the  two  study  groups.  Regarding  chronic  pain,  there  was  a  significant reduction of severity-by-duration of HZ pain (22%) and a reduction of clinically significant pain (by two days). On the other hand, among subjects with HZ the relative reduction (of 31%) in interferences of  Activities  of  Daily  Living  was  not  statistically  significant  and  vaccination  did  not  reduce  the severity-by-duration of acute pain. Furthermore, the overall use of analgesic medication was similar in both study groups and there was no reduction in the rate of hospitalisation. Therefore, considering the correlation between zoster associated pain and HZ and PHN, a separate indication was not considered warranted, even if it was acknowledge that pain efficacy data could be described in the pharmacodynamic section of the SPC. Persons with immunosuppressive therapies and individuals with primary or other immune disorders, as well as neurological disorders, multiple sclerosis and herpes simplex virus infections were excluded from the main efficacy study.  The exclusion of these subjects was not related to safety concerns, but to the potential for these concomitant conditions to confound the evaluation of vaccine efficacy.  Since no clinical data are available, vaccination in subjects with immunodeficency states, immunosuppressive therapy and active untreated tuberculosis is contraindicated and a warning on the lack  of  data  in  adults  known  to  be  infected  with  HIV  is  included  in  the  SPC.  The  applicant  also committed  to  study  the  safety  and  immunogenicity  in  some  of  the  patient  populations  which  were excluded from the pivotal study including mild and moderately immunocompromised, HIV-infected individuals or patients receiving chronic doses of systemic corticosteroid therapy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Clinical safety

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The safety of zoster vaccine was assessed in 6 randomised, controlled clinical studies (Protocols 001, 002, 003, 004, 007, and P009) and 1 open-label booster clinical study (Protocol 005). Five of these clinical  studies  were  placebo-controlled.  These  studies  were  conducted  between  1996  and  2004. Additional safety data on VARIVAX Protocol 049 was also submitted.

In each of the clinical studies safety was evaluated for 42 days after each injection of zoster vaccine, PUVV (high-titre VARIVAX), or placebo. Subjects were instructed to report all adverse experiences (AE)  that  occurred  during  the  first  42  days  post  vaccination.  Beyond  42  days  post  vaccination,  all deaths and vaccine-related SAEs were also collected. Different  database  technologies  and  adverse  experience  dictionaries  (e.g.  Costart,  MedDRA)  were used.  Formal integration of all data was not feasible due to the different databases and dictionaries used across the studies. · Patient exposure The  largest  safety  database  is  from  Protocol  004,  in  which  38,546  subjects  were  enrolled  (19,270 subjects  received  zoster  vaccine).  In  this  study  a  subset  of  6616  subjects  (3,345  subjects  received zoster vaccine) across all study sites were enrolled in an Adverse Event Monitoring Substudy, which provided a more detailed evaluation of the vaccine's safety profile. Protocols  001,  002,  004,  005,  and  007  enrolled  subjects  who  were ≥ 60  years  of  age.  Protocol  009 enrolled subjects who were ≥ 50 years of age (n=185 subjects were between 50 to 59 years old). A total of  20,697  subjects  who  were  vaccinated  with  at  least  one  dose  of  zoster  vaccine  (20,456  of  whom received the final vaccine formulation that will be used for marketing) were ≥ 50 years of age. A total 144 subjects were 30 to 49 years. Protocol 003 enrolled subjects in tropical countries who were ≥ 30  years  of  age,  although  the  numbers  are  small  and  therefore  the  results  have  limited  impact. VARIVAX  Protocol  049  targeted  varicella  history-negative  subjects ≥ 13  years  of  age;  the  study population  included  both  VZV-  seropositive  and  VZV-seronegative  subjects,  with  a  small  minority being ≥ 30 years of age. 598 subjects received a second dose of zoster vaccine or high-titered PUVV. Among those receiving a second dose, 481 subjects were ≥ 50 years of age and 117 subjects were 30 to 49 years of age. The  mean  age  of  enrolled  subjects  for  zoster  vaccine  evaluation  was  close  to  69  years.  The  study population was predominately white. The studies enrolled immunocompetent individuals, many of whom had concurrent, medically-stable chronic medical conditions that were typical of persons in the age groups studied. The most frequently reported  prior  medical  conditions  (incidence ≥ 20%  in  one  or  more  vaccination  group)  were hypertension and arthritis. · Adverse events Protocol 004 In  the  routine  safety  monitoring  cohort  (Days  0  to  42  post  vaccination)  including  all  subjects,  the percentage of subjects with one or more systemic adverse events was 8.3 % in the zoster group and 8.7 % in the placebo group. The AEs were comparable in both groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the Substudy, 58.0% of the subjects in the zoster vaccine group and 34.4% of the subjects in the placebo group reported one or more adverse experiences (Day 0 through Day 42 post vaccination). This difference is accounted for in large part by the frequency of injection-site AEs (48.2 % in the zoster vaccine group and 16.6% in the placebo group). The most frequently reported injections site AE were erythema (35.7 % of subjects in the zoster group vs.7.0 % in the placebo group), pain/tenderness (34.5 % in the zoster group vs. 8.6 % in the placebo group), swelling (26.2 % in the zoster group vs. 4.5 % in the placebo group) and pruritus (7.1 % in the zoster group vs. 1.0 % in the placebo group), warmth (1.7 % vs. 0.3 %). The majority (app. 85 %) of reactions were mild (swelling or erythema reported maximum sizes of ≤ 2 inches). Usually, the median duration of reaction in the zoster group was about 4 days compared to 2 days in the placebo group.

<!-- image -->

The proportions of subjects reporting one or more systemic clinical AE in the 2 vaccination groups were  similar  (24.7  %  for  the  zoster  group  vs.  23.6  %  for  the  placebo  group).  The  most  frequently reported systemic clinical adverse experiences ( ≥ 2% in 1 or more vaccination groups) were headache, respiratory infection, and rash. The  incidence  rates  of  the  specific  vaccine-related  systemic  clinical  adverse  experiences  of  fever, diarrhoea,  headache,  and  maculopapular  rash  appeared  to  be  numerically  higher  in  zoster  vaccine recipients  when  compared  with  placebo  recipients.  With  the  exception  of  headache  (zoster  vaccine group, 1.4%; placebo group, 0.9%), no statistically significant differences were observed between the 2 vaccination groups with respect to any reported vaccine-related systemic clinical adverse. Protocol 007 (Post-dose 1) and Protocol 009 The purpose of Protocol 007 was to evaluate the safety profile of a 2-dose regimen of zoster vaccine in adults ≥ 60 years of age. The purpose of Protocol 009 was to evaluate the safety profile of a single dose of zoster vaccine at the intended maximum release potency in adults ≥ 50 years of age. For  the  subjects  receiving  zoster  vaccine  in  these  studies,  72.8%  reported  one  or  more  adverse experiences,  compared  with  43.8%  of  placebo  recipients.  The  percentage  of  subjects  reporting injection-site  adverse  experiences  was  greater  in  zoster  vaccine  recipients  (60.2%)  compared  with placebo recipients (10.5%). In the zoster group the most common injection-site AEs (incidence ≥ 25%) were erythema, pain, and swelling. The other commonly reported adverse experience (incidence ≥ 5%) was pruritus. In  Protocol  009,  the  majority  of  injection-site  adverse  experiences  in  both  vaccination  groups  were reported  within  5  days  post  vaccination  and  were  reported  to  be  mild  in  intensity.  In  the  higher potency vaccine group, the proportions of subjects reporting pain/tenderness (47.3 % in the high and 38.9 % in the low potency group) and swelling (41.2 % in the high and 32.9 % in the low potency group) were statistically significantly higher than in the lower potency vaccine group. A numerically higher rate of injection site pruritus (12.6 %) was observed in the zoster vaccine high potency group compared with the low potency group (9.0 %). The same trend was also seen for warmth. For all other injection-site AEs, the 2 groups were comparable. The  percentage  of  subjects  reporting  systemic  clinical  AEs  was  comparable  after  receiving  zoster vaccine  or  placebo,  but  the  percentage  of  subjects  with  vaccine  related  systemic  clinical  AEs  was higher among zoster vaccine recipients. Nearly 40% of zoster vaccine recipients reported at least one systemic  clinical  adverse  experience.  The  most  frequently  reported  systemic  clinical  AEs  in  both studies (Protocol 007 post dose 1 and Protocol 009) (incidence ≥ 5% in zoster vaccine recipients) was headache (8.7%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Other Protocols

Subjects  enrolled  in  Protocol  001  and  subjects  enrolled  in  Protocol  002,  as  well  as  the  VZVseropositive subjects enrolled in Protocol  003,  reported  the  same  general  pattern  of  adverse experiences as the subjects in Protocols 004, 007, and 009.

## Adverse Experiences After a Second Dose of Zoster Vaccine

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Across 4 clinical studies, Protocols 002, 005, and 007 and VARIVAX Protocol 049, a total of 481 subjects ≥ 50 years of age received a second VZV vaccination. The injection-site adverse experiences reported  by  subjects  within  Days  0  to  42  post-vaccination  after  receiving  a  second  dose  of  zoster vaccine  or  PUVV  were  generally  similar  to  the  injection-site  adverse  experiences  reported  after  an initial dose. The systemic clinical AEs reported by subjects within Days 0 to 42 post vaccination after receiving a second dose of zoster vaccine or PUVV were generally slightly lower in incidence and similar in spectrum to the systemic clinical AEs reported by subjects after an initial dose.

- Safety in special populations

· Serious adverse event (SAE)/deaths/other significant events SAE In protocol 004 routine safety monitoring cohort(Days 0 to 42 post vaccination) including all subjects, the percentage of subjects with one or more systemic adverse events was 1.37 % in the zoster group and 1.36% in the placebo group. Only 5 serious adverse events (within 42 days after vaccination) were assessed by the investigators as at least possible vaccine-related; two were in the zoster vaccine group: · A 80 year old man developed joint pain, swelling, and stiffness on day 3 post vaccination. He was later diagnosed with polymyalgiac rheumatica. · A 64 year old woman with a history of asthma experienced an exacerbation of asthma on day 2 post vaccination. Within  the  three  placebo  cases,  there  was  one  case  of  an  anaphylactic  reaction  90  minutes  after administration of placebo. Information is insufficient to assess whether the AE was related to a preexisting peanut allergy or caused by hydrolized porcine gelatin (used as a stabilizer and present in the placebo formulation). The rates of HZ-related hospitalization in the zoster vaccine group (5 hospitalizations) and the placebo group (6 hospitalizations) were not different. In  protocol  007  and  009,  a  total  of  10  subjects  reported  SAEs  but  none  was  determined  by  the investigator to be vaccine related. Deaths No  deaths  occurred  in  Protocols  001,  002,  003,  005,  007,  and  009.  In  Protocol  004,  the  overall mortality rate in the zoster vaccine group was similar to that in the placebo group. VZV-Like Rashes The  reported  rates  of  non-injection-site  varicella-like  and  HZ-like  rashes  within  42  days  post vaccination were low (&lt; 1 %) in both zoster vaccine recipients and placebo recipients in all of the clinical studies. In Protocol 004, a total of 82 non-injection-site varicella-like (18 in the zoster and 14 in the placebo group)  or  HZ-like  rashes  (17  in  the  zoster  and  33  in  the  placebo  group)  were  reported.  Lesion specimens from 45 HZ-like rashes and 11 varicella-like rashes were available for PCR testing. From these specimens, a diagnosis of HZ was confirmed for 5 subjects in the zoster vaccine group and 20 subjects in the placebo group. All varicella -like and zoster -like rashes that were VZV-positive by PCR were found to be due to wild-type VZV; the attenuated vaccine strain of VZV was not detected in any of these rashes. · Laboratory findings No laboratory safety tests were performed in any of the clinical studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The number of recipients 50-59 years old is somewhat limited. The data indicate that the frequency of injection-site reactions is slightly higher than in the older age group.

The proportion of subjects with injection-site adverse experiences from Day 0 to 42 post vaccination was generally higher in the younger age group compared with the older age group. Specifically, the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

proportions of subjects reporting injection-site erythema, pain/tenderness, and swelling were numerically greater among subjects in the younger age group.

## · Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions

No specific drug interactions were studied. No concomitant use with other vaccines have been studied. Study  of  concomitant  administration  with  influenza  virus  vaccine  is  being  conducted.  Plan  formal studies of concomitant use with other routinely administered adult vaccines were under evaluation. · Discontinuation due to adverse events Number of discontinuated subjects was very low. In all these studies only two subjects discontinuated because of vaccine related adverse event. These events were not serious. · Post marketing experience There is  no  postmarketing  experience  exists  since  Zoster  vaccine  was  not  yet  been  licensed  in  any country at the time of the assessment. Post-marketing experience is solely available for, VARIVAX, a marketed Oka/Merck VZV vaccine (with  a  lower  potency  than  ZOSTAVAX)  typically  administered  to  varizella  history  negative individuals who are younger than the target population for the zoster vaccine. 1.1 Pharmacovigilance Detailed description of the Pharmacovigilance system The CHMP considered that the Pharmacovigilance system has deficiencies that should be addressed as part of the follow up measures. Risk Management Plan The MAA submitted a risk management plan. No clinically important safety risks have been identified, nevertheless, there are missing information and some potential risks cannot be excluded. Summary of the risk management plan Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Safety issue                                                                                | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                             | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Lack of data in immunocompromised subjects. Medicinal                                       | The Applicant will study the safety and immunogenicity in HIV-infected individuals and subjects on chronic systemic corticosteroid therapy.       | Contraindications in primary and acquired immunodefiscuiency states, in case of immunosuppressive therapy or active untreated tuberculosis (see SPC section 4.3). Warnings in section 4.4 and 5.1 with regard to adults infected by HIV and subject with immunocompromised subjects. |
| Lack of data on concomitant administration of zoster vaccine and other authorised vaccines. | The applicant will provide results of a study of concomitant administration with influenza virus vaccine (protocol 011).                          | Warning in section 4.5 of the SPC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| - Zoster-like or Varicella-like Rashes Temporally Associated With                           | Health care providers reporting these adverse experiences will be offered the opportunity to submit specimens to the Applicant's Varicella Zoster | - Information on zoster-like or varicella-like rashes are included in section 4.8 of the SPC.                                                                                                                                                                                        |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

| Zoster Vaccine. - Potential Transmission of Oka/Merck Vaccine Virus Strain. - Inadvertent Exposure of Immunocompromis ed Individuals - Potential Central Nervous System Events   | Virus Identification Program (VZVIP). Through this program, clinical specimens can be analyzed by PCR in order to determine whether an observed event is associated with the presence of wild- type VZV or of Oka/Merck vaccine virus. It is expected that by adding this additional measure to standard post-marketing reporting, it will be possible to get a clear picture of the adverse experiences that are associated with the presence of vaccine virus.   | - Warning on transmission in section 4.4 of the SPC                                                                           |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Exposure to Zoster Vaccine During Pregnancy                                                                                                                                      | The pregnancy registry for VARIVAX will be expanded to include ZOSTAVAX.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Contraindication in case of pregnancy (see section 4.3 of the SPC) and warmings in section 4.4 and 4.6 of the SPC. authorised |
| Potential for allergic reactions to the active substance or to any excipients or trace of residuals (e.g. neomycine)                                                             | Routine pharmacovigilance                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Contraindication and warnings (see sections 4.3 and 4.6 of the SPC).                                                          |
| Unknown duration of Protection and need for a booster dose, with theoretical possibility to shift the occurrence of HZ to an older age.                                          | Study of long-term persistance of efficacy (extension of Protocol 004 and Protocol 013 which extends follow-up through 10 years postvaccination for about 7000 recipients) longer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                               |

- Potential Central Nervous System Events Exposure to Zoster Vaccine During Pregnancy The pregnancy registry for VARIVAX will be expanded to include ZOSTAVAX. Contraindication in case of pregnancy (see section 4.3 of the SPC) and warmings in section 4.4 and 4.6 of the SPC. Potential for allergic reactions to the active substance or to any excipients or trace of residuals (e.g. neomycine) Routine pharmacovigilance Contraindication and warnings (see sections 4.3 and 4.6 of the SPC). Unknown duration of Protection and need for a booster dose, with theoretical possibility to shift the occurrence of HZ to an older age. Study of long-term persistance of efficacy (extension of Protocol 004 and  Protocol 013 which extends follow-up through 10 years postvaccination for about 7000 recipients) The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 1.2 Overall conclusions, risk/benefit assessment and recommendation Quality During  the  evaluation  of  ZOSTAVAX  no  major  objections  were  identified.  Other  minor  concerns have  been  adequately  addressed,  however,  several  commitments  are  made  by  the  applicant,  and several follow-up measures are defined to provide further information post-approval. In conclusion, all quality issues are resolved. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology No non-clinical data were performed nor considered necessary in view of the experience with varicella live viral vaccines and the lack of relevant animal models. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy

Immune response  to  vaccination  has  been  demonstrated,  even  if  there  is  no  established  correlation with vaccine efficacy. Immune responses were shown to persist at least up to 36 months.

<!-- image -->

Clinical study 004 performed with ZOSTAVAX demonstrated that, compared to placebo, vaccination of adults, 60 years of age or older, with live attenuated (Oka/Merck) varicella zoster vaccine decreases the  incidence  of  HZ  (5.4  versus  11.1  per  1000  person-years)  and  PHN  (0.5  versus  1.4  per  1000 person-years). The vaccine also showed efficacy with respect to the HZ 'Burden of illness', which includes, besides the incidence of HZ, duration and severity of pain as an indicator of vaccine efficacy. The  effect  of  vaccination  on  both  HZ  BOI  and  incidence  of  PHN  mainly  results  from  the  reduced incidence  of  HZ  after  vaccination.  Nevertheless,  since  the  VEBOI is  larger  than  the  VEHZ  (61%  vs 51%), it seems that vaccination may also influence the course/severity of HZ. Vaccine efficacy in  terms  of  HZ  incidence  was  clearly  better  in  the  age  group  60-69  years  of  age. However,  a  benefit  from  vaccination  was  also  evident  for  older  subjects,  i.e.  &gt;70  years  of  age; although the reduction of HZ incidence was less prominent in this age group, there was, compared to younger individuals, a more pronounced effect of vaccination with respect to the duration of clinically significant pain (score ≥ 3) and severity of illness. Long-term  protection  and  need  for  a  booster  or  a  second  dose  will  be  further  investigated,  with considetation to age categories. Data  are  missing  in  some  patient  populations  such  as  mild  and  moderately  immunocompromised subjects or subjects who reported having experienced a previous episode of HZ. Safety Based on a relatively large safety database consisting of more than 20 000 exposed individuals from controlled clinical trials with an average follow up time of about 3 years, ZOSTAVAX showed a good safety profile. ZOSTAVAX was generally well tolerated in adults ≥ 60 years of age. The most commonly observed adverse  reactions  were  injection  site  reactions  and  headache.  Injection-site  reactions  were  more frequent among zoster vaccine recipients compared to placebo recipients but they were generally mild in intensity and of short duration. The overall incidence of systemic clinical adverse events following a dose of zoster vaccine was similar to that following a dose of placebo. Following a dose of zoster vaccine, both varicella-like rashes and zoster-like rashes are uncommon. From the safety  database  the  adverse  reactions  reported  in  clinical  trials  have  been  included  in  the Summary of Product Characteristics. No clinically  important  safety  risks  have  been  identified,  nevertheless,  there  is  missing  information and some potential risks cannot be excluded. Having considered the safety concerns in the risk management plan, the CHMP considered that the proposed activities described in section 3.5 adequately addressed them. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Different storage conditions of the lyophilized powder and the diluent

During the evaluation of ZOSTAVAX, the appropriateness of the applicant's approach on handling the  different  storage  conditions  for  the  lyophilized  powder  and  the  diluent  has  been  extensively discussed at the Biologics Working Party, the Vaccine Working Party and CHMP.

The diluent is supplied together with the lyophilized powder to avoid that the vaccine is reconstituted with the wrong diluent (e.g. 0.9% NaCl solution for injection) or with the wrong volume of diluent. It is believed that this risk outweighs the potential risk of incorrect use or error caused by the different storage conditions of the vaccine components. As the components of ZOSTAVAX cannot be stored together, a link between the lyophilized powder and the diluent is made through the text on the SPC, labeling and package leaflet, including a clear reference to each other and specific recommendation of use/method of administration. This is not a self-administered  product  and  it  is  expected  that  reconstitution  and  administration  by  a  health  care professional according to the instructions ensure correct storage and use of the vaccine. In order to secure traceability of all the batches that have been shipped together and to maintain the link between active substance and diluent, the applicant will use a validated computerized system, which will assign a specific code for each combination that is shipped. The applicant will also ensure that the expiry date of the diluent shipped with the active substance is at least equivalent to the expiry date of the active substance. If either component of the product has to be replaced (for ex. if a component has expired or if a component is missing) the applicant will provide a replacement of the complete product (active substance and diluent). The applicant also pointed out that they currently market a frozen varicella vaccine presented in the same way as ZOSTAVAX on the Italian and US markets; in the US alone, over 40 million doses have been distributed over the past 10 years where the different storage conditions have been implemented in  distribution  centers,  pharmacies,  physician's  practices  and  public  health  clinics.  The  CHMP considers that the distribution channels within the EU are comparable to the US ones. Taking into  account  the  above,  the  CHMP  concludes  that  the  company  has  provided  a  satisfactory justification  for  this  approach  and  has  implemented  appropriate  measures  to  ensure  the  safe  and correct use of the vaccine. Risk-benefit assessment The live, attenuated strain of VZV (Oka/Merck strain) is a well-known vaccine strain. The difference of  ZOSTAVAX  as  compared  to  the  currently  available  Varivax  is  the  more  than  tenfold  higher potency. In a population of ≥ 60 years of age, a single dose of ZOSTAVAX was shown to substantially reduce the  risk  of  both  herpes  zoster  and  post-herpetic  neuralgia  over  a  period  of  about  three  years  after vaccination. An effect was also observed in term of the severity and duration of zoster-related pain which is merely a consequence of the prevention of HZ and PHN. It  is  unknown as how long the vaccine-induced immune response will offer protection or whether a second dose will be beneficial. The  current  safety  database  suggests  a  good  safety  profile  for  the  single  dose  regimen.  No  safety signals were observed. The safety in immuno-compromised individuals remains to be established. A risk management plan was submitted. The CHMP, having considered the data submitted, was of the opinion that: Medicinal product no longer authorised

-  pharmacovigilance activities in addition to the use of routine pharmacovigilance were needed to investigate further some of the safety concerns;
-  no additional risk minimisation activities were required beyond those included in the product information.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

As a consequence, the benefit risk ratio of ZOSTAVAX for the prevention of herpes zoster ('zoster' or shingles) and herpes zoster related postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) in subject 60 years of age or older is considered positive.

## Recommendation

Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  by consensus that the risk-benefit balance of ZOSTAVAX in the prevention of herpes zoster ('zoster' or shingles) and herpes zoster related postherpetic neuralgia (PHN ) in individuals from 60 years of age was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised