---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:46:51
document_pages: 34
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/adcirca-h-c-1021-ii-0001-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: adcirca-h-c-1021-ii-0001-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 60.7211473
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 11:22:12.224136
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 22 October 2009

Doc. Ref No.:EMA/731375/2009

## ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR ADCIRCA

## International non-proprietary name/Common name: tadalafil

## Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/1021/II/0001

Variation Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 1.1. Introduction

Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a chronic and progressive disease of the small pulmonary arteries  that  is  characterised  by  vascular  proliferation  and  remodelling.  It  results  in  increased pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance and, ultimately, right ventricular heart failure and death. Although the pathogenesis of PAH is not completely understood, it likely involves an imbalance in the normal relationships between vasodilators and vasoconstrictors, growth inhibitors and mitogenic factors, and antithrombotic and prothrombotic determinants that are probably consequences of pulmonary endothelial cell dysfunction and/or injury.

PAH is defined by right-heart catheterization showing a precapillary pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure &gt; 25 mmHg at rest or &gt; 30 mmHg with exercise, with a pulmonary artery wedge pressure  &lt;  15  mmHg).  There  is  a  female-to-male  preponderance  (1.7:1),  with  patients  most commonly presenting in the third and fourth decades, although the age range is from infancy to greater than 60 years. The annual incidence of idiopathic pulmonary hypertension has been estimated within 1 or 2 cases per million individuals per year. The median life expectancy from the time of the diagnosis in patients with idiopathic PAH (IPAH), before the availability of disease-specific (targeted) therapy, was 2.8 years through the mid-1980. PAH is a rare, progressive, life-threatening disease with a poor prognosis.

Current  clinical  classification  of  PAH  comprises  apparently  heterogeneous  conditions,  which  share comparable clinical and haemodynamic pictures and virtually identical pathologic changes of the lung microcirculation. PAH  includes the idiopathic (IPAH, formerly termed primary pulmonary hypertension),  familial  forms  (FPAH),  PAH  associated  with  various  conditions  (APAH),  such  as scleroderma  and  other  connective  tissue  diseases  (CTD),  congenital  heart  defects  with  systemic-topulmonary shunts, portal hypertension, human immunodeficiency virus infection, exposure to drugs and  toxins  and  other  more  rare  settings:  thyroid  disorders,  glycogen  storage  disease,  Gaucher´s disease,  hereditary  hemorrhagic  telangiectasia,  haemoglobinopathies  (Sickle  disease  especially), myelo-proliferative  disorders,  splenectomy,  PAH  associated  with  significant  venous  or  capillary involvement and finally, persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn.

The New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification of PAH is as follows:

-  Class  I:  PAH  without  a  resulting  limitation  of  physical  activity.  Ordinary  physical  activity does not cause undue dyspnoea or fatigue, chest pain, or near-syncope.
-  Class II: PAH resulting in a slight limitation of physical activity. The patient is comfortable at rest,  but  ordinary  physical  activity  causes  undue  dyspnoea  or  fatigue,  chest  pain,  or  nearsyncope.
-  Class III: PAH resulting a marked limitation of physical activity. The patient is comfortable at rest,  but  less  than  ordinary  activity  causes  undue  dyspnoea  or  fatigue,  chest  pain,  or  nearsyncope.
-  Class IV: PAH resulting in an inability to carry out any physical activity without symptoms. The patient has signs of right heart failure. Dyspnoea, fatigue, or both may be present even at rest, and discomfort is increased by any physical activity.

Variables associated with poor survival included, among others, a NYHA Functional Class III or IV and  the  presence  of  Raynaud's  phenomenon.    Patients  with  a  NYHA  Class  I  or  II  have  a  median survival of 59 months (approximately 5 years), while patients with a NYHA Class III have a median survival of 32 months (2.6 years), and patients with a NYHA Class IV have a median survival of 6 months.    For  Primary  Pulmonary  Hypertension  (PPH),  the  US  National  Institutes  of  Health  (NIH) registry  showed survival rates for untreated patients of 68%, 48%, and 34% after 1, 3, and 5 years from diagnosis, respectively. Although advances in therapies and patient management have improved these rates, there is still no known cure for PPH or other forms of PAH.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Symptoms of PAH include dyspnoea (most commonly), fatigue, chest pain or discomfort, dizziness, syncope,  near  syncope,  oedema,  leg  oedema,  and  palpitations.    When  the  disease  is  advanced,  the clinical  manifestations  include  cyanosis,  dyspnoea  on  exertion,  haemoptysis,  atypical  chest  pain  or angina pectoris, syncope, heart failure, arrhythmias and cerebrovascular accidents.

General measures recommended for patients with PAH is to engage in activities appropriate to their physical capabilities in order to prevent deconditioning and attendant worsening of overall function. At present,  conventional  treatment  for  patients  with  primary  and  secondary  PAH  includes  calciumchannel  blockers,  anticoagulants,  diuretics  and  oxygen.  In  addition,  other  medicinal  products  are currently authorised in the European Union (EU) for the treatment of PAH, such as oral endothelin-1 receptor  antagonists,  intravenous,  inhaled  or  subcutaneous  prostacyclin  and  a  phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor. As a last alternative, a lung or heart/lung transplant may be offered to the patient.

Tadalafil  is  a  potent  and  selective  inhibitor  of  phosphodiesterase  type  5  (PDE5),  the  enzyme responsible  for  the  degradation  of  cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP).  Pulmonary  arterial hypertension  is  associated  with  impaired  release  of  nitric  oxide  by  the  vascular  endothelium  and consequent reduction of cGMP concentrations within the pulmonary vascular smooth muscle. PDE5 is the  predominant  phosphodiesterase  in  the  pulmonary  vasculature.    Inhibition  of  PDE5  by  tadalafil increases the concentrations of cGMP resulting in relaxation of the pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cell and vasodilation of the pulmonary vascular bed.

Adcirca (previously known as Tadalafil Lilly) was granted a marketing authorisation by the European Commission on 1 October 2008 in the treatment of erectile dysfunction further to an informed consent application for the authorised medicinal product Cialis.

This type II variation concerns the change of the indication of Adcirca from erectile dysfunction to the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) classified as WHO functional class II and III, to improve exercise capacity. Efficacy has been shown in idiopathic PAH (IPAH) and in PAH related to collagen vascular disease.

The pack sizes have been consequently changed from 2, 4, 8 and 12 tablets to 28 and 56 tablets.

As a consequence, changes were made to sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.8, 4.9, 5.1, 5.2 and 6.5 of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC), Annex IIIA and the Package Leaflet.

In  addition,  the  conditions  or  restrictions  regarding  supply  and  use  imposed  on  the  marketing authorisation  holder  in  Annex  II  have  been  changed  to  'Medicinal  product  subject  to  restricted medical prescription'. A statement to that effect has also been added to section 4.2 of the SPC.

Furthermore, Annex II has been updated to include the agreed version 1.3 of the Risk Management Plan (RMP).

## 1.2 Non-clinical aspects

Lilly-sponsored  non-clinical  studies  were  conducted  in  accordance  with  ICH  guidelines,  good laboratory practice (GLP) procedures, and local regulatory requirements.

##  Primary Pharmacodynamics

A comprehensive program of nonclinical studies with tadalafil was included in the initial marketing authorisation application for the use of tadalafil in the treatment of male erectile dysfunction (ED). According  to  the  MAH,  this  nonclinical  program  was  considered  sufficient  to  support  the  current application for the treatment of PAH.

An in vivo pharmacology study was also conducted by the MAH to confirm the efficacy of tadalafil in an animal model of PAH.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Effects  of  Tadalafil  on  Monochrotaline-Induced  pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  and  pulmonary cGMP Levels (Study Report 030327)

The effects of tadalafil on PAH progression during the development of PAH (prevention study) and the effects of tadalafil after PAH  was  established  (treatment study), were  evaluated in the monochrotaline (MCT)-induced PAH rat model. In addition, cGMP levels in pulmonary tissue were measured at the end of each study phase. Tadalafil, a selective inhibitor of PDE5, would be expected to increase nitric oxide (NO)-induced cGMP levels by inhibiting cGMP degradation. Doses of 0.5, 2.5, and 10 mg tadalafil/kg were selected for study. The dose of 10 mg/kg was expected to produce an exposure in rats similar to that in humans following a 40-mg dose. The lower doses were selected to provide a range of responses. Sildenafil, 25 mg/kg/day, was used as a positive control.

This dose of sildenafil was expected to provide exposures in rats similar to those at the human clinical dose of 60 mg/day. An additional control group of rats was not treated with MCT (normal group). In the prevention study, tadalafil (0, 0.5, 2.5, and 10 mg/kg/day) was given orally to rats during the development phase of PAH, that is, from the day of MCT injection to 3 weeks later. At the end of the study,  haemodynamic  parameters  and  cardiac  weights  were  measured.  Tadalafil  at  10  mg/kg/day significantly  decreased  mean  pulmonary  artery  pressure  (MPAP)  and  systolic  right  ventricular pressure (SRVP) relative to the MCTinjected control group (vehicle treated), without affecting mean systemic arterial blood pressure (MBP) or heart rate (HR). In addition, tadalafil attenuated the increase in right ventricular (RV) weight/left ventricular (LV) + septal (S) weight, [RV/(LV+S)], an indicator of  right  ventricular  hypertrophy,  resulting  in  an  RV/(LV+S)  close  to  the  range  of  the  normal  (nonMCT-injected)  group.  Similar  effects  were  observed  following  sildenafil  treatment.  These  data demonstrate  that  treatment  with  tadalafil  at  10  mg/kg/day  during  the  first  3  weeks  following  MCT injection prevents the progression of PAH in this rat model.

In  the  treatment  study,  tadalafil  (0,  0.5,  2.5,  and  10  mg/kg/day)  was  given  to  rats  when  PAH  was already established, that is, from 3 weeks after MCT injection to 6 weeks post-injection. Rats were observed  daily  for  mortality;  and  at  the  end  of  the  study,  blood  gases  and  cardiac  weights  were measured. Tadalafil at 10 mg/kg/day had a tendency to reduce the RV hypertrophy and to increase the partial  pressure  of  oxygen  in  arterial  blood  and  arterial  oxygen  saturation  to  approximately  normal levels.  Compared  with  the  MCT-injected  control  group,  the  10-mg/kg  dose  of  tadalafil  induced  a significantly  higher  probability  of  survival.  The  survival  rate  in  the  0.5-,  2.5-,  and  10-mg/kg/day tadalafil groups was dose-dependently increased to 55%, 60%, and 70%, respectively, versus 40% in the  MCT-control  group.  Similar  effects  were  observed  following  sildenafil  treatment.  Collectively, these  data  suggest  that  tadalafil  at  10  mg/kg/day  improves  pulmonary  haemodynamics,  blood  gas exchange, and survival even when treatment occurs in the established phase of PAH (late stage).

Rat lungs were removed at the end of either the prevention or treatment study (3 or 6 weeks after MCT injection), wet weights were measured, and total cGMP levels in the isolated tissues were detected by radioimmunoassay using a cGMP assay kit. At 3 weeks after MCT injection, when PAH development was  confirmed,  there  was  no  difference  in  pulmonary  cGMP  levels  between  the  MCT-injected (vehicle)  control  and  non-MCT  injected  normal  groups.  Treatment  with  tadalafil  (0.5,  2.5,  and 10 mg/kg/day)  for  3  weeks  during  the  development  phase  of  PAH  (early  stage)  caused  a  dosedependent  increase  in  pulmonary  tissue  cGMP,  with  statistical  significance  at  10  mg/kg/day.  At  6 weeks  after  MCT  injection  when  60%  mortality  was  observed  in  the  control  group,  a  slight  but significant  increase  in  pulmonary  cGMP  (approximately  35%  relative  to  the  normal  level)  was recorded in the MCT-control group. Treatment with tadalafil at all doses during the established phase of PAH (late stage) significantly elevated pulmonary cGMP with an approximately 200% maximum increase  relative  to  the  MCT-control  group.  Similar  effects  were  observed  following  sildenafil treatment.  These  results  indicate  that  tadalafil  selectively  inhibits  pulmonary  PDE5 in  vivo and provides the necessary cGMP to reduce MPAP.

In summary, tadalafil, 10 mg/kg/day, attenuated PAH progression and reduced mortality in the MCTinduced PAH rat model. The effects on pulmonary haemodynamics were also associated with elevated cGMP in the lung. These results suggest that tadalafil, by selective and sustained inhibition of PDE5 in the  lung,  can  maintain  the  high  levels  of  cGMP  needed  to  relax  pulmonary  arteries,  improve

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pulmonary  haemodynamics  and  blood  gas  exchange,  and  delay  the  progression  to  right  ventricular failure. Thus, it is expected that tadalafil would be an effective, once daily treatment option in humans with PAH.

##  Safety Pharmacology and toxicology

The safety pharmacology studies with tadalafil were discussed in the initial marketing authorisation application  for  ED.  However,  because  the  recommended  human  dose  for  the  treatment  of  PAH  is higher than the maximum recommended dose for ED (40 mg versus 20 mg), the exposure multiples achieved in the safety pharmacology and toxicology studies relative to the higher proposed clinical dose were discussed by the MAH.

For  comparative  purposes,  the  40-mg  proposed  human  dose  equates  to  0.6  mg/kg  for  a  60-kg individual;  human  plasma  levels  following  administration  of  that  dose  in  a  21-day  study  (LVHM) achieved a maximum Cmax of 1271 ng/mL (3.3 μ M). This is equivalent to a Cmax of 76 ng/mL (0.2 μ M) unbound tadalafil.

In receptor binding assays, tadalafil displayed an affinity of 1 ± 0.3 μ M at the dopamine D2 receptor. This is lower than the clinical Cmax of unbound tadalafil (0.2 μ M) and so, would not be expected to have  any  clinical  consequences.  Tadalafil  did  not  compete  with  radiolabelled  receptor  ligands  for benzodiazepine,  GABAA,  muscarinic,  histamine  H1,  5-HT2,  dopamine  D1, α 1-adrenergic, α 2adrenergic,  or β -adrenergic  receptors  at  concentrations  up  to  10 μ M;  and  the  methylcatechol  and catechol  derivatives  of  tadalafil  did  not  compete  with  the  same  ligands  at      concentrations  &lt;3 μ M. Tadalafil  was  evaluated  for  cardiovascular  and  respiratory  effects  in  dogs.  All  effects  occurred  at doses ≥ 20 mg/kg orally or ≥ 3 mg/kg intravenously. When given to spontaneously hypertensive rats, deoxycorticosterone acetate-treated rats, or renal vascular hypertensive rats, single oral 1- and 5-mg/kg doses lowered blood pressure for at least 7 hours, without affecting heart rate. Tadalafil was a weak blocker of the hERG current, reaching 51% inhibition at a concentration of 100 μ M which is more than  30  times  higher  than  total  therapeutic  plasma  concentrations  and  more  than  500  times  the maximum Cmax of unbound tadalafil.

There were no effects on central nervous system (CNS) function at doses ≤ 100 mg/kg orally or on gastrointestinal  transit  time  at  oral  doses  up  to  800  mg/kg.  Tadalafil  0.3  mg/kg  intravenously, increased  urine  output  and  sodium  excretion  in  rats  without  affecting  potassium  excretion.  A 0.1 mg/kg dose potentiated diuretic and natriuretic effects of atrial natriuretic factor.

Based on the results of these safety pharmacology studies, there is no reason to expect that the oral administration  of  tadalafil  at  the  proposed  dose  of  40  mg  would  result  in  any  adverse  secondary pharmacological effects on the cardiovascular, CNS, or gastrointestinal systems in humans. However, there may be an increase in urine output and sodium excretion and a potentiation of the diuretic and natriuretic effects of atrial natriuretic factor but no concern is expected about this issue from clinical data.

Regarding toxicology, tadalafil was evaluated in a variety of toxicology studies in laboratory animals and in  vitro test  systems.  At  the  time  of  the  initial  marketing  authorisation,  studies  included  singledose toxicity in mice, rats, and dogs; repeat-dose toxicity in mice, rats, and dogs; in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity; carcinogenic potential in mice and rats; and reproductive and developmental toxicity in rats  and  mice.  During  the  original  assessment  for  tadalafil  10  and  20  mg  tablets,  a  concern  on testicular  toxicity  was  raised  based  on  the  finding  on  tadalafil  related  testicular  alterations  in  dogs (atrophy of seminiferous tubules and hypospermia/aspermia). These dog findings were not confirmed clinically in studies of up to 9 months duration and reassurance was provided further to the conduct of 3 studies in men assessing the potential effect of spermatogenesis of tadalafil 10 mg and 20 mg.

##  Environmental Risk Assessment

In addition, an Environmental Risk Assessment for the Use of tadalafil in the new proposed indication was  submitted.  In  summary,  data  from  environmental  chemistry,  fate,  and  toxicity  studies  and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

predictions  of  concentrations  in  the  environment  were  considered  to  evaluate  the  risk  to  the environment  from  the  therapeutic  use  of  tadalafil  in  humans  in  Europe.  According  to  the  data presented it was agreed that tadalafil is unlikely to represent a risk to the environment.

##  Discussion on nonclinical aspects

An extensive and complete series of pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic, and toxicology studies with the  PDE5  inhibitor,  tadalafil,  were  performed  in  support  of  the  original  marketing  application  of tadalafil, 10 and 20 mg taken as needed, for the treatment of erectile dysfunction.

An in  vivo pharmacology  study  was  recently  conducted  to  confirm  the  efficacy  of  tadalafil  in  an animal model of PAH. This study investigated the effects of tadalafil on PAH progression during the development of PAH and the effects of tadalafil after PAH was established, in the MCT-induced PAH rat model. The results suggest that tadalafil, by the inhibition of PDE5 in the lung, can maintain the high  levels  of  cGMP  needed  to  relax  pulmonary  arteries,  improve  pulmonary  haemodynamics  and blood  gas  exchange,  and  delay  the  progression  to  right  ventricular  failure.  The  MAH  has  provided adequate data to support the new indication requested.

The  MAH  provided  a  comparison  of  margins  of  safety  for  doses  administered  in  repeat-dose toxicology studies versus clinical steady-state exposure at 20mg bid. It should be considered that doses up to 20 mg day of tadalafil are currently administered to patients. Based on the discussion provided regarding  comparison  of  exposure  levels  for  unbound  tadalafil  in  mouse,  rat,  dog  and  human  from repeat-dose  studies  and  for  unbound  tadalafil  in  mouse,  rat  and  human  for  carcinogenicity  and reproduction/developmental  studies,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  oral  administration  of tadalafil at the proposed dose of 40 mg would result in any new adverse effects in humans.

Therefore, from the toxicological point of view, the non-clinical safety of tadalafil was evaluated in the original marketing authorisation application and there is no specific additional safety concern that would need further investigations considering that safety margins expected are not modified by other factors such as possible interactions with other coadministered drugs on the basis of this continuous treatment.

## 1.3 Clinical aspects

Lilly-sponsored  studies  in  the  treatment  of  Pulmonary  Artery  Hypertension  (PAH)  were  conducted following  standard  research  design  conventions  in  accordance  with  ICH  guidelines,  good  clinical practice  (GCP)  procedures,  and  local  regulatory  requirements.  Clinical  studies  were  conducted  in accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  were  conducted  in  compliance  with 'Ordinance on Good Clinical Practice' and 'Details of Good Clinical Practice.'

## 1.3.1. Clinical pharmacology

## 1.3.1.1. Pharmacokinetics

Most  aspects  of  the  previous  tadalafil  clinical  pharmacology  package  previously  submitted  for tadalafil  in  the  treatment  of  ED  are  applicable  to  the  present  application,  including  mechanism  of action, pharmacodynamics, and intrinsic/extrinsic factors affecting pharmacokinetics.

The  pharmacokinetics  of  tadalafil in patients with PAH  was  assessed  through  collection  of pharmacokinetic  data  from  a  single  Phase  3  Study  (LVGY)  in  389  subjects  with  PAH  receiving placebo  or  tadalafil  once-daily  for  up  to  16 weeks  and  the  results  of  a  population  pharmacokinetic analysis  (LVGY  Population  PK/PD  Report).  Five  additional  clinical  pharmacology  studies  using  a 40 mg dose have been conducted:

-  H6D-MC-LVGZ [LVGZ]: Bosentan interaction
-  H6D-MC-LVHC [LVHC]: Pharmacokinetics in Japanese subjects
-  H6D-EW-LVHO [LVHO]: Food interaction

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  H6D-EW-LVHL [LVHL]: Digoxin interaction
-  H6D-EW-LVHM [LVHM]: Oral contraceptive interaction

As  tadalafil  is  metabolized  by  CYP3A4  and  includes  a  methylenedioxy  functional  group  in  its chemical  structure,  the  possibility  of  mechanism-based  inhibition  of  CYP3A  has  been  further investigated (Study 2003IV-DI001). Further, an in vitro interaction study of tadalafil with P-gp was conducted using 2 in vitro models (Study 2006TP-Pgp02).

Bioavailability: In  the  PK  PD  study  report  a  reduction  in  bioavailability  of  35%  (95%  CI:  28.6%  42.0%) for the 40-mg dose was observed when compared to lower tadalafil doses (2.5, 10, and 20 mg). As stated by the MAH this is due to the low solubility of the drug substance at doses approximating 40 mg. According to that, it could not be ruled out that administering two pills of 20 mg (40 mg) oncedaily achieved a lower median steady-state exposure than one pill of 20 mg twice-daily. The MAH provided additional PK and PK/PD simulations of tadalafil 40 mg once-daily versus tadalafil 20 mg twice daily that suggested that 20 mg twice-daily administration results in a 55% higher exposure than 40  mg  once-daily.  Nevertheless,  this  increase  in  exposure  is  not  associated  to  a  clinically  relevant increase in 6MWD, whereas safety implications of a higher tadalafil exposure have not been tested. It seems reasonable to include in the SPC the posology of tadalafil that was superior to placebo during the pivotal trial LVGY (i.e. 40 mg, once-daily).

Food  interaction: Food  does  not  affect  the  rate  or  extent  of  tadalafil  absorption  in  a  clinically significant  manner  with  tadalafil  dosing  up  to  and  including  40  mg.  Therefore,  tadalafil  may  be administered without regard to meals (Study LVHO).

Distribution  and  elimination: Available  data  suggest  that  tadalafil  is  extensively  distributed  into tissues across doses of 2.5 through 40 mg. Mean half-life of tadalafil 40 mg dose is similar to that of lower doses. The current SPC is appropriate with respect to elimination data available for tadalafil.

Metabolites: It  is  appropriate  to  apply  the  previously  established  metabolism  properties  reflected  in current SPC, to the 40 mg dose. The major circulating metabolite is the methylcatechol glucuronide. This  metabolite  is  at  least  13,000-fold  less  potent  than  tadalafil  for  PDE5.  Consequently,  it  is  not expected to be clinically active at observed metabolite concentrations.

Genetic  polymorphism: A  recent  study  has  investigated  the  contributions  of  the  CYP3A4  and CYP3A5 isoforms to the metabolism of the phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE5Is) sildenafil, udenafil, and vardenafil, but not tadalafil (Ku HY, et al. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008; 36: 986-90). The study  findings  suggest  that  CYP3A5  and  CYP3A4  play  a  significant  role  in  the  metabolism  of PDE5Is. The genetic polymorphism of CYP3A5 may contribute to interindividual variability in the disposition of PDE5Is, especially vardenafil. Nevertheless, since major metabolic pathway for tadalafil is  not  CYP3A5,  no  significant  consequences  of  possible  genetic  polymorphism  for  CYP3A5  are expected for tadalafil.

Time dependency: Data available suggest an absence of time-dependent pharmacokinetics .

Intra- and inter-individual variability: Expected tadalafil intra- and inter-individual variability is low and probably of no clinical significance in 'non-special' populations.

Renal  impairment :  Due  to  decreased  absorption  rate,  the  40  mg  once-daily  dose  does  not  follow  a linear kinetics as compared with 20 mg once-daily. In patients with renal insufficiency is expected a similar  absorption  rate  than  in  patients  with  normal  renal  function  and,  additionally,  a  50%  fold increase  in  AUC  at  steady  state.  The  MAH  has  submitted  detailed  data  from  patients  with  mild  to moderate renal insufficiency from studies LVAJ and LVGY. Should a doubling of exposure occur in subjects  with  mild  or  moderate  renal  impairment,  like  that  reported  in  the  historical  clinical pharmacology study (Study LVAJ), concentration-time profiles in mild and moderate renal impairment following daily administration of 20-mg tadalafil at steady-state would be broadly similar to those for subjects with normal renal function receiving 40 mg once-daily. Safety data from studies LVGY and LVGX shows that the incidence of AEs is generally similar across all degrees of renal

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

function.  Recommendation of a starting dose of 20 mg tadalafil administered once-daily in patients with mild and moderate renal impairment was acceptable.

Hepatic impairment: Due to limited clinical experience with doses exceeding 10 mg in patients with chronic hepatic cirrhosis (Child-Pugh Class A and B) in the ED and PAH programmes, together with the  potential  of  accumulation,  a  starting  dose  of  tadalafil  20 mg  once  per  day  may  be  considered. Tadalafil is not recommended for patients with PAH having severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh Class C), given insufficient clinical experience in this patient group.

Gender: The  individual  tadalafil  plasma  concentration  time  profiles  for  females  and  males  are essentially similar following single and multiple, once-daily doses of 40 mg tadalafil. The overlap in the distribution of AUC  and C max  values for female and male subjects is apparent, with any mean difference being &lt;10% and of no clinical relevance.

Ethnicity: Pharmacokinetic studies have included subjects and patients from different ethnic groups, and no differences in the typical exposure to tadalafil have been identified.

Body-weight: In the pivotal clinical trial LVGY, 11% of patients in the placebo group and 13.3% in the tadalafil group had active history of obesity and the body-weight range of patients included was 40-155 kg. Obesity itself may increase pulmonary artery pressures. A subgroup analysis of efficacy (6MW test) of study LVGY by body-weight range (&lt;60kg; 60-90kg; &gt;90 kg) showed that 6MWD change from baseline measures were comparable across weight groups within each treatment with the greatest  magnitude  of  change  from  baseline  in  those  receiving  20-mg  and  40-mg  tadalafil.  In particular, no loss of efficacy was apparent in patients weighing more than 90 kg.

Elderly: The increase in exposure in elderly subjects is 25% higher than that of young subjects at the 10 mg dose. The increase in tadalafil exposure in elderly patients was marginal relative to those less than  50  years  of  age  following  daily  doses  of  20  mg  and  40  mg  in  the  LVGY  Population  PK/PD Report.  Given  the  collective  pharmacokinetic  data,  no  dose  adjustment  is  warranted  in  the  elderly (with normal renal or hepatic function) based upon pharmacokinetics alone. Additionally, in both the 16-week blinded portion of the Study LVGY, as well as open label experience (Study LVGX) safety and  tolerability  of  tadalafil  appears  similar  between  subjects  65  years  or  older  and  those  under  65 years of age.

Children: There is no clinical experience with Adcirca in children.

'In  vitro'  interaction  studies:  In  vitro examination  of  mechanism-based  inhibition  of  CYP3A4 indicated that tadalafil is a less potent mechanism-based inhibitor than diltiazem and erythromycin and predicted  that  40-mg  tadalafil  would  not  cause  clinically  significant  inhibition  of  theCYP3A4 isoforms. In  vitro assessments  also  suggested  that  the  potential  for  inhibition  of  P-gp  by  tadalafil would not be of clinical significance.

Interaction with bosentan: A strong relationship between tadalafil clearance and concomitant bosentan use was observed in the LVGZ study in healthy volunteers and also in the population analysis of PAH subjects, with tadalafil clearance increasing from 1.59 to 2.79 L/h in those subjects receiving bosentan, representing  a  decrease  of  approximately  35%  in  the  median  AUCss  with  bosentan.  These  results indicate that potent CYP3A inducers (rifampin) could lower systemic exposure of tadalafil to a greater extent than moderate CYP3A4 inducers (Study LVGZ). Coadministration of tadalafil and bosentan did not  discernibly  alter  exposure  to  bosentan  or  its  metabolites  following  single-  and  multiple-dose administration (Study LVGZ). The decrease in tadalafil AUC induced by bosentan is similar to that described for sildenafil (in the Revatio SPC). On the contrary of sildenafil, tadalafil does not increase bosentan AUC at steady state. These results also suggest that a relative lower efficacy of tadalafil is expected in patients with PAH receiving concomitant bosentan. In fact, in the clinical trial, the effect of adding tadalafil 40 mg in patients already in bosentan treatment was not statistically different from than seen in patients on bosentan plus placebo.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Interaction with other drugs: The absence of a drug interaction when digoxin is taken in combination with 40-mg tadalafil can therefore be concluded based on the results of the LVHL study. At steadystate tadalafil (40 mg once per day) increased ethinylestradiol exposure (AUC) by 26% and C max by 70% relative  to  oral  contraceptive  administered  with  placebo.  This  information  may  be  of  clinical significance since most patients with PAH are women. There was no statistically significant effect of tadalafil on levonorgestrel.

Relationship between exposure and safety: A higher tadalafil exposure is correlated with a higher rate of treatment emergent events, most of them of mild to moderate intensity, and associated with PDE5 inhibition  (i.e.:  headache,  back  pain,  dizziness,  dyspepsia,  flushing,  myalgia,  and  nasal  congestion). Nevertheless, a higher tadalafil exposure is not correlated with a higher rate of serious adverse events as compared to placebo in patients with PAH.

## 1.3.1.2. Pharmacodynamics

The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of tadalafil have been extensively evaluated in singleand multiple-dose clinical pharmacology studies and population-based pharmacokinetic analysis of data from 4 clinical trials in support of the ED indication.

##  Mechanism of action

Tadalafil  is  a  potent  and  selective  inhibitor  of  phosphodiesterase  type  5  (PDE5),  the  enzyme responsible  for  the  degradation  of  cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  (cGMP).  Pulmonary  arterial hypertension  is  associated  with  impaired  release  of  nitric  oxide  by  the  vascular  endothelium  and consequent reduction of cGMP concentrations within the pulmonary vascular smooth muscle. PDE5 is the  predominant  phosphodiesterase  in  the  pulmonary  vasculature.  Inhibition  of  PDE5  by  tadalafil increases the concentrations of cGMP resulting in relaxation of the pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cell and vasodilation of the pulmonary vascular bed.

##  Primary pharmacology

Studies in vitro have shown that tadalafil is a selective inhibitor of PDE5. PDE5 is an enzyme found in corpus cavernosum smooth muscle, vascular and visceral smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, platelets, kidney,  lung,  and  cerebellum.  The  effect  of  tadalafil  is  more  potent  on  PDE5  than  on  other phosphodiesterases.  Tadalafil  is  &gt; 10,000-fold  more  potent  for  PDE5  than  for  PDE1,  PDE2,  and PDE4, enzymes which are found in the heart, brain, blood vessels, liver, and other organs. Tadalafil is &gt; 10,000-fold more potent for PDE5 than for PDE3, an enzyme found in the heart and blood vessels. This selectivity  for  PDE5 over PDE3 is important because PDE3 is an enzyme involved in cardiac contractility. Additionally, tadalafil is approximately 700-fold more potent for PDE5 than for PDE6, an  enzyme  which  is  found  in  the  retina  and  is  responsible  for  phototransduction.  Tadalafil  is  also &gt; 10,000-fold more potent for PDE5 than for PDE7 through PDE10.

Tadalafil 10 mg/kg significantly decreased mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) and systolic right ventricular pressure in a monocrotaline-induced rat PAH model.

##  Secondary pharmacology

Previous  special  studies  included  in  the  original  marketing  authorisation  were  conducted  to  assess tadalafil effects on visual function, renal blood flow and myocardial blood flow.

Single  10-,  20-,  and  40-mg  doses  of  tadalafil  had  no  effect  on  colour  vision  or  visual  function  in healthy subjects. Single 20- and 80-mg doses of tadalafil had no effect on effective renal plasma flow as assessed by renal radionuclide scan in healthy, young male subjects. In addition, there was no effect on  lumbar  and  gluteal  venocongestion  assessed  by  FDG-positron  emission  tomography  (PET)  and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans. This study also showed that single 20- and 80-mg doses of tadalafil had no effect compared to placebo on the presence of inflammatory or myolytic biomarkers. Three studies were conducted in subjects with coronary artery disease. In subjects with coronary artery

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

disease  undergoing  exercise  stress  testing,  10-mg  tadalafil  did  not  significantly  reduce  the  total exercise time or time to ischemia compared to placebo. Twenty (20) mg tadalafil had no significant effect on myocardial blood flow, as assessed by PET, both at rest and during pharmacological stress.

##  Relationship between plasma concentration and effect

Pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic  Modelling  were  conducted  on  the  LVGY  Study  Population. The  LVGY  Population  PK/PD  model  predicted  that  subjects  who  benefited  most  from  tadalafil treatment  received  doses  of  at  least  20  mg  tadalafil  once-daily,  irrespective  of  the  pharmacokinetic influence  of  bosentan  and  other  disease  or  subject-specific  factors.  The  results  of  the  LVGY  are discussed in section 3.3.2.2.

##  Pharmacodynamic interactions with other medicinal products or substances

The pivotal study LVGY in patients with PAH included a subgroup of patients already on bosentan therapy (endothelin receptor blocker) who were administered tadalafil. In addition, pharmacodynamic interaction studies with alcohol, nitrates, alpha-blockers, antihypertensives, aspirin and warfarin were included  in  the  initial  marketing  authorisation  application  for  Cialis  and  Adcirca.  Only  a  brief description of studies is given here:

Theoretically, adding a PDE5 inhibitor (i.e. tadalafil) to an endothelin receptor blocker (i.e. bosentan) would result in a potentiation of the pharmacodynamic effect. Nevertheless, bosentan is an enzymatic inducer  of  tadalafil  metabolism,  thus  reducing  tadalafil  exposure.  The  possible  benefit  of  adding tadalafil  in  patients  already  on  bosentan  are  discussed  in  section  3.3.2.2.  Several  pharmacodynamic interaction  studies  of  tadalafil  with  alcohol,  nitrates,  alpha-blockers,  antihypertensives,  aspirin  and warfarin have been performed. Relevant results from these studies are already included in section 4.5 of the SPC.

##  Genetic differences in PD response

No  data  on  possible  genetic  differences  in  PD  response  have  been  submitted  in  this  variation application.  PDEs  belong  to  a  large  superfamily  [11  different  gene  families  (PDEs  1-11)]  of structurally  related,  functionally  distinct,  and  highly  regulated  enzymes  (Francis  et  al.,  2001).  Most cells contain representatives of multiple PDE gene families, but in different amounts, proportions, and subcellular locations. PDE5 isoforms (PDE5A1-3) are relatively abundant in vascular smooth muscle, including  the  pulmonary  vasculature  and  corpus  cavernosum  of  the  penis,  where  they  apparently regulate hydrolysis of cGMP pools that modulate vasodilation (Corbin &amp; Francis, 2002; Corbin, et al., 2002). PDE5A1 and PDE5A2 are ubiquitous, but PDE5A3 is specific to smooth muscle (Lin, et al., 2006).  Genetic  variants  of  the  PDE5A  may  predispose  to  essential  hypertension  (EH)  and  erectile dysfunction (ED) and could affect the local and systemic response to PDE5 inhibitors. A recent study showed no correlations of a novel polymorphism of the PDE5A promoter gene with the intermediate phenotype EH/ED and the blood pressure and heart rate response to sildenafil administration (Salvi, et al,.2004).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.3.2. Clinical efficacy

As indicated in the table below, one pivotal study (LVGY) was submitted to support this variation application for the PAH indication. The primary objective in Study LVGY was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20, and 40 mg administered once daily for 16 weeks in the treatment of subjects with PAH.  Additionally, there is an ongoing, multicenter, 2-part extension of Study LVGY (Study  LVGX).  Part  1  is  a  blinded  treatment  extension  of  Study  LVGY  to  evaluate  the  long-term safety (primary objective) and efficacy (secondary objective) of tadalafil 20 and 40 mg administered once  daily  for  52 weeks.    Part  2  is  an  open-label  extension  of  which  the  primary  objective  is  to evaluate the long-term safety of tadalafil 40 mg administered once daily.

Table 1 - Summary of efficacy studies submitted to support the registration of tadalafil for PAH

| Study ID                  | No. of study centres / locations   | Design/ Control Type                                                   | Study Posology*                                                                                                                                                                      | No. of Subjects by arm; Entered/Completed                                                                                    | Duration                                                 | Gender M/F Median Age    | Primary Endpoin t                   |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| H6D-MC- LVGY (PHIRST- 1)§ | 82 study sites (EU, US, and Japan) | Parallel, randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled                | Tadalafil 2.5 mg OD Tadalafil 10 mg OD Tadalafil 20 mg OD Tadalafil 40 mg OD Placebo mg OD                                                                                           | Randomized and treated: 323 tadalafil, 82 placebo (total = 405) Completed: 272 tadalafil, 69 placebo (84.2% and 84.1%)       | 16 weeks (treatment period) + 2 weeks (Follow-up)        | M&F 21%/79% Age: 54 yrs  | 6MWD at end of treatment (Week- 16) |
| H6D-MC- LVGX (PHIRST- 2)§ | 82 study sites (EU, US, and Japan) | Extension to Study LVGY: double-blind followed by an open-label period | Part 1 (double-blind; 52-weeks): -Tadalafil 20 mg OD† -Tadalafil 40 mg OD‡ Part 2 (open-label): Tadalafil 40 mg OD (all patients; reduction to 20 mg OD in case of drug intolerance) | Entered (from study LVGY): 357 tadalafil (40 mg = 294; 20 mg = 63) Completed Part 1: 293 tadalafil (40 mg = 241; 20 mg = 52) | Double- blind: 52 weeks Open-label: long-term (variable) | M&F 22%& 78% Age: 54 yrs | Safety and tolerabili ty            |

OD = once-daily; 6MWD = 6-minute walk distance; W = week.

* Subjects who had been treated for PAH with stable bosentan therapy for at least 12 weeks were permitted to continue bosentan therapy during the study.

†Tadalafil 20 mg: Subjects who completed study LVGY without clinical worsening and were receiving tadalafil 20 mg

‡Tadalafil 40 mg: Subjects who discontinued study LVGY due to clinical worsening and were receiving tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20 mg, or placebo; Subjects who completed study LVGY and had clinical worsening at the week 16 visit and were receiving tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20 mg, or placebo; Subjects who completed study LVGY without clinical worsening and were receiving tadalafil 2.5, 10, 40 mg, or placebo.

§ Acronym of the study in www.clinicaltrials.gov

## 1.3.2.1.   Dose response studies

The choice of tadalafil dose-range in the LVGY study is based on previous experience in ED and also in limited reports on the use in patients with PAH. Single doses of tadalafil up to 100 mg for 21 days have been administered and tolerated in tadalafil clinical studies in ED (Study LVBG and LVBI). In the  LVGY pivotal study, tadalafil  was  administered  orally,  once  daily  within  a  2.5-  to  40-mg  dose range. Dosage groups above once-daily tadalafil 40 mg were not included in the PAH studies due to previously  observed  limitations  in  tadalafil  absorption  and  indications  of  limited  haemodynamic improvements beyond tadalafil 40 mg (Ghofrani et al. 2004). In that study, tadalafil  reduced  mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) following a single dose of 20, 40, or 60 mg equivalently to a single dose of sildenafil 50 mg in patients with PAH (Ghofrani et al. 2004).  In a study of 16 patients with Eisenmenger syndrome, patients taking tadalafil 1 mg/kg (up to 40 mg) experienced a mean decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and improvements in mean systemic oxygen saturation and World Health Organisation (WHO) functional class (Mukhopadhyay et al. 2006).  In another study of 12 patients who switched from a once-daily dose of sildenafil 100 to 150 mg (for 3 to 6 months) to a once-daily dose of tadalafil 10 to 20 mg  (for 3 to 6 months), subjects showed  significant improvements from baseline with no significant difference between the 2 therapies in 6-minute walk distance  (6MWD),  New  York  Heart  Association  (NYHA)  score/WHO  functional  class,  Borg dyspnoea score, and Short Form-36v2 (SF-36) physical function scores for both therapies (Tay et al. 2008). Additionally, tadalafil led to marked functional improvement in a patient with severe idiopathic PAH 2 weeks after initiation of a dose of tadalafil 20 mg/day (Palmieri et al. 2004).  After 6 months of treatment with tadalafil  20  mg/d,  one  42-year  old  female  with  idiopathic  PAH  experienced

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

improvement from WHO Functional Class (from III to II), in QoL and exercise tolerance (Affuso et al. 2006).

## 1.3.2.2.   Study LVGY

## Methods

Study LVGY was a multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20, and 40 mg administered once daily for 16 weeks in the treatment  of  subjects  with  PAH.  Study  LVGY  randomized  406  subjects  at  82  study  sites  in  North America, Europe, and Japan. Tadalafil was administered orally, once daily within a 2.5- to 40-mg dose range. Treatment duration was 16 weeks. The study lasted 2 years (Date of first patient enrolled: 18 August 2005; Date of last patient completed: 16 August 2007).

##  Study Participants

The main inclusion criteria were the following:

-  Subjects were at least 12 years of age, body weight ≥ 40 kg (at screening) and had a diagnosis of PAH that was idiopathic, related to collagen disease, related to anorexigen use, related to human  immunodeficiency  virus  (HIV)  infection,  associated  with  an  atrial  septal  defect,  or associated  with  surgical  repair  of  at  least  1  year  in  duration  of  a  congenital  systemic-topulmonary shunt (for example, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus).
-  The diagnosis was established by a resting mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) ≥ 25 mm Hg,  pulmonary  wedge  pressure ≤ 15  mm  Hg,  and  pulmonary  vascular  resistance  (PVR) ≥ 3 Wood units via right heart catheterization.
-  If on bosentan, must have been on a maintenance dose ≤ 125 mg twice-daily for at least 12 weeks  prior  to  screening  and  have  a  screening  for  aspartate  transaminase  (AST)/alanine transaminase  (ALT)  &lt;3  times  the  upper  limit  of  normal  (ULN);  If  on  beraprost  sodium (allowed  for  subjects  only  in  Japan),  must  have  been  on  for  at  least  9  consecutive  months before study entry, must have been on a maintenance dose ≤ 180 µg per day, and must have had no evidence of significant parenchymal lung disease, as evidenced by pulmonary function tests within 6 months of screening showing total lung capacity ≥ 60% predicted;
-  Had 6MW test distance ≥ 150 and ≤ 450 meters at screening;
-  Had WHO Functional Class I, II, III, or IV status;
-  A female subject of childbearing potential must have had a negative serum pregnancy test at the screening visit and agreed to use 2 medically reliable methods of contraception until study completion;
-  Written informed consent was obtained prior to any study procedure being performed.

##  Treatments

The following figure shows treatment period in each group.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  Objectives

The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the phosphodiesterase type  5  (PDE5)  inhibitor  tadalafil  in  the  treatment  of  subjects  with  arterial  pulmonary  arterial hypertension  (PAH).  A  secondary  objective  was  to  evaluate  tadalafil  population  pharmacokinetics. Safety was evaluated using adverse events (AEs), physical examinations, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and clinical laboratory data. Population pharmacokinetics was assessed by plasma tadalafil concentrations.

##  Outcomes/endpoints

Primary efficacy endpoint:

-  6-minute  walk  (6MW)  distance  change  from  baseline  to  Week  16.  The  6MW  test  was conducted according to  'Guidelines  for  conduct  of  6-minute  walk  test'  (modified  from  the American Thoracic Society Statement, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002; 166:111-7).

Secondary efficacy endpoints:

-  WHO functional class change from baseline to Week 16.
-  Time to first occurrence of clinical worsening, defined as any of the following: death, lung transplantation,  atrial  septostomy,  hospitalization  due  to  worsening  PAH,  initiation  of  new PAH  therapy  (for  example,  prostacyclin  or  analog,  endothelin  receptor  antagonist,  PDE5 inhibitor), or worsening of WHO functional class.
-  Change in Borg dyspnoea score from baseline to Week 16.
-  In  a  subgroup  of  subjects,  cardiopulmonary  haemodynamic  (includes  heart  rate,  mean pulmonary artery pressure [mPAP], pulmonary vascular resistance [PVR], mean right atrial pressure  [mRAP],  cardiac  index  [CI],  cardiac  output  [CO],  pulmonary  capillary  wedge pressure [PCWP], mean arterial pressure [mAP], mixed venous oxygen saturation [MVO2], systemic arterial oxygen saturation[SaO2], and systemic vascular resistance [SVR]) changes from baseline to Week 16.
-  Quality  of  life  (QoL),  as  measured  by  Short-Form-36v2  (SF-36v2)  Health  Survey  and European Quality of Life (EuroQoL) Questionnaire scores from baseline to Week 16.

##  Sample size, randomisation and statistical methods

A sample size of 400 subjects (80 subjects/treatment group) was to provide approximately 90% power at  an α -level  (two-sided) of 0.001 to detect a 45-meter placebo-adjusted treatment effect in 6MWD (change from baseline to Week 16). This sample size was calculated based upon a common SD of 60 meters. A simple t test was assumed for the purpose of sample size calculation.

Subjects in Study LVGY were randomly assigned to 1 of 5 treatment groups (tadalafil 2.5, 10, 20, 40 mg,  or  placebo)  in  a  1:1:1:1:1  ratio.  Randomization  was  stratified  by  the  following  factors:  PAH etiology (idiopathic/anorexigen use and others), use of bosentan (yes and no), and baseline 6MWD ( ≤ 325 and &gt;325 meters).

Primary and secondary efficacy analyses were done on an intent-to-treat (ITT) basis. The ITT analysis includes  all  randomly  assigned  subjects  who  received  study  drug.  Subjects  were  analyzed  by randomized  treatment  assignment.  All  variables  were  summarized  by  descriptive  statistics  for  each treatment  group.  The  statistics  for  continuous  variables  included  mean,  median,  standard  deviation (SD), minimum, maximum, and number of observations. Discrete variables were summarized using frequencies and percentages. Two-tailed 95% confidence intervals based on t distribution were also provided for summary statistics presented for efficacy.

For the primary endpoint (change in the 6MW test from baseline to week-16) the null hypothesis of no difference  between  each  of  the  tadalafil  treatment  groups  and  placebo  for  the  primary  efficacy endpoint was tested using a permutation-based procedure similar to the Mann-Whitney test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6MWD ( ≤ 325, &gt;325 meters) (Rosenberger and Lachin, 2002; StatXact Procs for SAS Users, 2004). In the analysis, change from baseline values were ranked

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

without  regard  to  stratum  (including  only  subjects  for  placebo  and  the  active  treatment  arm  being tested  in  the  pairwise  comparison)  using  the  observed  change  from  baseline  to  Week  16.  The permutation  test  was  performed  using  StatXact  with  Monte  Carlo  enumeration  of  10,000  random samples. Step-down testing began with the tadalafil 40-mg dose and then proceeded downward based upon  achieving  a  significance  level  of  0.01  for  the  preceding  dose.  Descriptive  analyses  were conducted adopting an observed data approach as well as the last observation carried forward (LOCF) approach for the change from baseline in 6MWD. The treatment difference compared to placebo and the corresponding 95% confidence interval was estimated by Hodges-Lehman method.

An additional  analysis  on  the  change  in  6MWD  was  performed  using  2-sample  t  test  stratified  by baseline 6MWD, PAH etiology, and bosentan use for all pairwise comparisons with placebo following the step-down procedure. The baseline 6MWD was considered as a categorical variable; PAH etiology and bosentan were used as discrete variables. If 6MWD at Week 16 was missing, the post-baseline LOCF approach was used for the calculation of the change from baseline. Least-squares (LS) mean treatment differences from the stratified t test are provided.

## Results

##  Participant flow

A total of 457 subjects were screened, there were 51 screen failures, the majority of which were due to subjects failing the entry criteria. 406 subjects were randomised to receive either placebo (82 patients), tadalafil  2.5  mg  (82  patients),  10mg  (80  patients),  20  mg  (82  patients)  or  40  mg  (79  patients)  OD. Eighty  two  (82)  centres  in  USA,  Europe,  Japan  and  Canada,  enrolled  subjects  into  this  study.  The number of subjects recruited per centre ranged from one to 23. There were two high recruiting centres with 23 subjects each one (centre 601 from Italy and centre 113 from USA).

Figure 1 - Illustration of subject disposition in Study H6D-MC-LVGY.

<!-- image -->

The  rate  of  patients  who  completed  the  16-week  treatment  was  similar  across  different  groups. Discontinuations due to adverse events were slightly higher in the placebo group and tadalafil 2.5 mg group as compared with the other treatment groups.

##  Baseline data

Demographics and baseline characteristics are summarised in the Table below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2 - Demographics and Baseline Characteristics Summary and Analysis by Randomized Study Treatment Group - All ITT Subjects

|                                       |                                                                                                               | Placebo (N=82)                   | 2.5mg (N=82)                                   | -Tadalafil. 10mg (N=80)                      | 20mg (N=82)                                         | 40mg (N=79) （%)                                        | Total (N=405) (%）                                          |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Variable                              |                                                                                                               | n （%)                            | （%）                                            | n (%)                                        | n (%)                                               | n                                                      | n                                                          |
| Age (yrs)                             | Number of Subjects                                                                                            | 82                               | 82                                             | 80                                           | 82 52.84                                            | 79 52.56                                               | 405 53.67                                                  |
|                                       | Mean SD                                                                                                       | 54.98 15.25                      | 54.28 16.23                                    | 53.65 15.19                                  | 15.53                                               | 15 .34                                                 | 15 . 47                                                    |
|                                       | M1n1mum                                                                                                       | 24.13                            | 14.69                                          | 24.16                                        | 18.98                                               | 22.13                                                  | 14.69                                                      |
|                                       | Median                                                                                                        | 54 .44 81.50 90.29               | 57.55                                          | 52.95 84.45                                  | 53.57 82.63                                         | 52.67 86.12                                            | 54.08 90.29                                                |
|                                       | Maximum                                                                                                       |                                  | 82                                             | 80                                           | 82                                                  | 79                                                     | 405                                                        |
| Age Group (yrs)                       | Number of Subjects 12 -<18                                                                                    | 82 0                             | 1 (1.22)                                       | 0 (0.00)                                     | 0 (0.00)                                            | 0 (0.00)                                               | 1 (0.25) 292 (72.10)                                       |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | （000） 57 (69.51)                 | 57 (69.51) (29.27)                             | 58 (72.50)                                   | 60 (73.17) 22 (26.83)                               | 60 (75.95) 19                                          | (27.65)                                                    |
|                                       | 18 -<65 >=65                                                                                                  | 25 (30.49)                       | 24 6 (7.32)                                    | 22 (27.50) 7 (8.75)                          | 5 (6.10)                                            | (24.05) 5 6.33)                                        | 112 34 (8.40)                                              |
|                                       | >=75 Number of Subjects                                                                                       | 82                               | 82                                             | 80 67 13                                     | 82 62                                               | 79                                                     | 405                                                        |
| Sex                                   | Female                                                                                                        | 65                               | 64                                             |                                              |                                                     | 59                                                     | 317 (78.27)                                                |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | 11 (13.41)                       |                                                |                                              | (75.61)                                             | (74.68)                                                |                                                            |
|                                       | Male                                                                                                          | (79.27) 1.7 (20.73)              | (78.05) 18 (21.95)                             | (83.75) (16.25)                              | 20 (24.39) 82                                       | 20 (25.32) 79                                          | 88 (21.73) 405 43                                          |
| Ethnicity                             | Number of Subjects Hispanic or Latino                                                                         | 82 9 (10.98)                     | 82 8 (9.76)                                    | 80 8 (10.00) 72 (00·06)                      | 5 (6.10) 76                                         | 13 (16.46) 66 (83.54)                                  | (10.62) 360                                                |
|                                       | Not Hispanic or Latino Unknown Number of Subjects White                                                       | 73 (89.02) 0(0.00) 82 72 (87.80) | 73 (89.02) 1 (1.22)                            | 0 (0.00) 80                                  | (92.68) 1 (1.22) 82                                 | 0 (0.00) 79 64 (81.01)                                 | (68*88) 2(0.49) 405                                        |
| Race                                  | As1an                                                                                                         | 3 (3.66) 7                       | 82 65 (79.27) 9 (10.98)                        | 64 5 8 1 (1.25)                              | 61 (74.39) 9 8 （                                    | 8 4                                                    | 326 34 34                                                  |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  | 7 (8.54)                                       | (80.00) (6.25)                               |                                                     | (10.13) (5.06)                                         | (80.49)                                                    |
|                                       | Black or African American American Indian or Alaska                                                           | (8.54)                           |                                                |                                              | (10.98) 9.76)                                       |                                                        | 5 (1.23)                                                   |
| Race                                  | Native                                                                                                        | 0 (0.00)                         | 0 (0.00)                                       | (10.00)                                      | 2.44)                                               | 2 (2.53) 0 (0.00)                                      | 2 (0.49)                                                   |
|                                       | Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander Unknown                                                             | 0 (0.00) 0 (0.00) 0 (0.00)       | 0 （000） 1 (1.22) 0 （ 0.00)                     | 2 (2.50) 0 （000）                             | （000）0 1 （ 1.22) 0.00)                              | 0 （ 0.00) 1 0(0.00)                                    |                                                            |
|                                       | American Indian or Alaska Native White Black or African American                                              |                                  |                                                | 0.00)                                        |                                                     | (1.27)                                                 | 2 (0.49) 1 (0.25) 1(0.25)                                  |
| Weight (kg)                           | Native Hawaiian or Other Number of Subjects Mean                                                              | 0(0.00) 82 82 76.59 21.82        | 0(0.00) 80 74.29                               | 0(0.00)                                      | 1(1.22) 82 75 .64 20.83                             | 79 73.95 18.52                                         | 405 75.25 20.29 40.45 73.00                                |
| Duration of PAH (yrs)                 | SD Min1mum Medlan Maximum Number of Subjects >=0-<2year                                                       | 41.00 73.00 155 .45 82 41        | 75.71 19.52 40 .45 72.86 128.64 82 (50.00) 47  | 20.93 41.00 72.50 139.00 80 (58.75)          | 42.00 71.50 126.82 82 46 (56.10) 12 (14.63)         | 42.00 73.18 139.00 79 41 (51.90)                       | 155 .45 405 224 (55.31) 77 (19.01) (25.68)                 |
| Btiology                              | >=2-<4 years >=4 years Number of Subjects Idiopathic disease                                                  | 49 (59.76) 13 (15.85) 20 (24.39) | 16 (19.51) 25 (30.49) 82                       | 22 (27.50) 11 (13.75) 80 52 (65.00)          | 24 (29.27) 82 50 (60.98) 21 (25.61)                 | 14 (17.72) 24 (30.38) 79                               | 104 (60.99) 95 (23.46)                                     |
| Btiology                              | Related to collagen vascular Associated with an atrial septal defect Relatedtoanorexigen use Surgical repair, | 82 54 (65.85) 16 (19.51)         | 45 (54.88) 16 (19.51) 7(8.54) 0                | 23 (28.75) 4(5.00) 1 （ 1.25) （000）           | 4(4.88) 4 4.88) 3 (3.66) 82                         | 46 (58.23) 19 (24.05)                                  | 405 247                                                    |
| Current use of Bosentan 6-minute walk | ofat least 1 year duration Number of Subjects Yes No                                                          | 9 (10.98) 2 （ 2.44) 1 （ 1.22) 81 | 5 (6.10) 9 (10.98) 82 80 43 (52.44) 39 (47.56) | 41 (51.25) 39 (48.75) 80 338.21 74.87 157.00 | 45 (54.88) 37 (45.12) 82 337.54 73.95 150.00 352.60 | 8 (10.13) 4 5.06) 2 (2.53) 79 42 (53.16) 37 (46.84) 79 | 32(7.90) 16 3.95) 15 3.70) 405 216 (53.33) 189 (46.67) 404 |
| distance (meters)                     | Number of Subjects Mean SD Minimum                                                                            | 82 45 (54.88) 37 (45.12) 82      | 346.87 71.31 158.60                            | 80 （00·0）0 24 (30.00)                        | 450.00 82                                           | 352.26 170.90 380.00 450.00 79                         | 76.42 150.00 360.00 463.00 405                             |
|                                       | Median Maximum                                                                                                | 152.40 363.00 463.00 82          | 360.00 82                                      | 357.00                                       |                                                     |                                                        | 343.61                                                     |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | 343.41 84.19                     | 450.00 1                                       | 444.00                                       |                                                     | 78.02                                                  |                                                            |
| WHO functional class                  | Class I                                                                                                       |                                  |                                                |                                              |                                                     |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       | Number of Subjects                                                                                            | 23                               | 29                                             |                                              | 0                                                   |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              |                                                     | 2                                                      |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              | 28                                                  | 26                                                     | 4(0.99) 130 (32.10)                                        |
|                                       | Class II Class III                                                                                            | 1(1.22) (28.05) 56 (68.29)       | (1.22) (35.37) 49 (59.76) 3                    | 5 4 (67.50)                                  | 5 4                                                 |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       | Class IV                                                                                                      | 2 (2.44)                         | (3.66)                                         | 2 （ 2.50)                                    |                                                     | 51                                                     | 264 (65.19) 7 (1.73)                                       |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              | (0.00) 0                                            | 0                                                      |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | 82                               |                                                |                                              | (34.15) (65.85) （00·0）                              | (2.53) (32.91) (64.56) （00'0）                          |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  | 81                                             | 08                                           | 08                                                  | 79                                                     | 402                                                        |
| Borg dyspnea                          | Number of Subjects                                                                                            |                                  |                                                |                                              |                                                     |                                                        | 4.00                                                       |
| score                                 | Mean SD                                                                                                       | 4 .07 2.25                       | 4.00                                           | 4 .03                                        | 3.83                                                | 4.06                                                   | 2.25                                                       |
|                                       | M1n1mum Median                                                                                                |                                  |                                                | 2.07                                         |                                                     | 2 .42                                                  |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              | 2.22                                                |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | 0.00                             |                                                |                                              |                                                     |                                                        | 00.0 4.00                                                  |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                | 0.50                                         | 00.0                                                | 00.0                                                   |                                                            |
|                                       | Max1mum                                                                                                       |                                  | 0.00 4.00 10.00                                | 3.00                                         | 3.00                                                | 3.00                                                   | 10.00                                                      |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              |                                                     | 9.00                                                   |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                | 9.00                                         |                                                     |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  |                                                |                                              | 10.00                                               |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               |                                  | 2.30                                           |                                              |                                                     |                                                        |                                                            |
|                                       |                                                                                                               | 4.00 10.00                       |                                                |                                              |                                                     |                                                        |                                                            |

Abbreviations: N number of randomized subjects whohave received studymedication; number of subjects per category;

PAH etiology: 247  (61%)  total  patients  had  idiopathic  PAH  and  95  (23%)  total  patients  had  PAH related to collagen vascular disease.

Functional class at baseline: 1 30 (32%) total patients were on WHO functional class II and 264 (65%) total patients were on functional class III.

Concomitant medications that could alter efficacy results: a total of 216 patients in the ITT population (45  and  171  on  tadalafil)  had  concomitant  treatment  with  bosentan.  Fourteen  patients  in  the  ITT

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

population  [placebo  =  2  (2.4%);  tadalafil  =  12  (3.7%)]  had  concomitant  treatment  with  beraprost during the study. Thirty-eight patients [placebo = 7 (8.5%); tadalafil = 31 (9.6%)] were on diltiazem and 10 patients [placebo 3 (3.7%); tadalafil: 7 (2.2%)] were on verapamil.

##  Outcomes and estimation

Table 3 provides a summary of efficacy results for the primary endpoint.

Table 3 - Summary of Efficacy - Primary Endpoint (Change from Baseline to End of Treatment [Week 16])

|                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffTadalafilffffffffffffffffffffffffffff                                                              | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffTadalafilffffffffffffffffffffffffffff                                                              | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffTadalafilffffffffffffffffffffffffffff                                                              | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffTadalafilffffffffffffffffffffffffffff                                                              | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffTadalafilffffffffffffffffffffffffffff                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 6-minute walk distance (meters)                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                | Placebo (N=82)                                                                                                                 | 2.5mg                                                                                                                          | 10mg                                                                                                                           | 20mg (N=82)                                                                                                                    | 40mg                                                                                                                           |
|                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                | (N=82)                                                                                                                         | (N=80)                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                | (N=79)                                                                                                                         |
| ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff | ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff |
| Changefrombaseline                                                                                                             | n Mean (SD) Median Min,Max 95% C.I.*a p-value*b Trtdifference*c 95%C.I.*c p-value*d Trtdifference*d 95% C.I.*d                 | 79 9.21(59.96) 12.20 -131.1, 134.50 -4.22,22.65                                                                                | 79 21.79(60.83) 17.00 -140.0,270.00 8.17,35.42 0.4023 10.00 -10.00,28.00 0.1624 13.53 -5.51, 32.56                             | 78 28.60 (62.17) 30.50 -147.0,247.70 14.58,42.61 0.0466 16 .10 -2.90,35.00 0.0401 19 .85 0.91,38.80                            | 80 36.23 (47.53) 32.00 -45.70,201.40 25.65,46.81 0.0278 21.90 4.10,38.40 0.0016 27.45 10.55,44.34                              | 76 41.14 (49.39) 35.05 -64.00,174.00 29.85,52.42 0.0004 26.00 9.50,44.00 0.0003 32.75 15.23,50.26                              |
| Endpoint                                                                                                                       | n Mean (SD) Median Min, Max 95%C.I.*a                                                                                          | 79 356.71(104.44) 381.00 97.50,530.30 333.31,380.10                                                                            | 79 368.32(96.59) 375.00 120.00,700.00 346.68,389.96                                                                            | 78 368.61(88.85) 379.00 158.60,520.00 348.58,388.64                                                                            | 80 374.49(87.56) 374.90 150.00,600.00 355.01,393.98                                                                            | 76 393.80(83.15) 401.80 212.00,578.00 374.80,412.80                                                                            |
| Baseline                                                                                                                       | n Mean (SD) Median Min, Max 95%C.I.*a                                                                                          | 79 347.49(81.18) 366.80 170.70,463.00 329.31,365.68                                                                            | 79 346.53(71.60) 360.00 158.60,450.00 330.49,362.56                                                                            | 78 340.01(72.80) 357.00 168.00,444.00 323.60,356.43                                                                            | 80 338.26(74.45) 353.95 150.00,450.00 321.69,354.83                                                                            | 76 352.67(78.75) 380.00 170.90,450.00 334.67,370.66                                                                            |

Abbreviations: N = number of randomized subjects who have received study medication; n = number of subject with nonmissing data at baseline and endpoint;

C.I. = confidence interval; trt = study treatment; Endpoint = Week 16 or the last nonmissing observation in treatment period carried forward. *a 95% C.I. is calculated based on t Distribution.

*b Primary analysis: Permutation test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6-minute walk distance (&lt;= 325 m and &gt;325 m) on rank compared to placebo.

*c Treatment difference compared to Placebo and the confidence intervals are estimated using the methodology of Hodges-Lehmann.

*d ANCOVA model with Type II sum of squares including the centered baseline of 6MWD (cont.), PAH etiology, and bosentan use. Treatment difference is the Active Least Square mean subtract Placebo Least Square mean

## Main efficacy endpoint (Change in 6MW test from baseline to week 16)

The placebo-adjusted treatment difference for tadalafil 40 mg following the Hodges-Lehman method prespecified in the protocol was 26.0 metres (95%CI: 9.5 to 44.0 m; p = 0.0004) (Table 3 and Figure 2).  The  additional  improvement  in  6MWD  between  tadalafil  40  mg  and  placebo  following  the  'ad hoc'  ANOVA testing was 32.8 meters (95% confidence interval: 15.2 to 50.3 meters; p = 0.0003) (Table 3).

A significant improvement in 6MWD in the tadalafil 40 mg treatment group compared to placebo was also observed after 12 weeks of treatment (Change from baseline to week 12: tadalafil 40 mg, +38.47 m vs. placebo, +16.49 m; p = 0.0084). The improvement in 6MWD in the tadalafil 40 mg treatment group compared to placebo was also observed after 8 weeks of treatment but at a significance level of no less than 0.01 (Change from baseline to week 8: tadalafil 40 mg, +29.62 m vs. placebo, +18.97 m; p = 0.0152). Tadalafil 20 mg, as well as the 2.5 mg and 10 mg dose did not meet the prespecified alpha testing level at 0.01.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 2 - Six-minute walk distance change from baseline to endpoint (Week 16) for all ITT subjects using LOCF.

<!-- image -->

Boxplots display 5th (dot), 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, 95th (dot) percentile. Mean represented by dotted line. Abbreviations: ITT = intent to treat (population); LOCF = last observation carried forward; Tad = tadalafil.

## Secondary efficacy endpoints:

Change in WHO functional class, time to clinical worsening and change in Borg Dyspnoea score is shown in the table below.

Table 4 - Summary of Secondary Endpoints (Change from Baseline to End of Treatment - Week 16) All ITT Subjects (N = 405)

|                                                    | Placebo                                            | Tadalafil                                          | Tadalafil                                          | Tadalafil                                          | Tadalafil                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| SecondaryEfficacyAnalyses                          |                                                    | 2.5mg                                              | 10mg                                               | 20mg                                               | 40mg                                               |
| ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) | ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) | ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) | ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) | ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) | ChangeinWHOFunctionClassfromBaseline toWeek16,n(%) |
| n                                                  | 82                                                 | 82                                                 | 80                                                 | 82                                                 | 79                                                 |
| Improved                                           | 17 (20.73)                                         | 21 (25.61)                                         | 19 (23.75)                                         | 30 (36.59)                                         | 18 (22.78)                                         |
| No Change                                          | 52 (63.41)                                         | 43 (52.44)                                         | 50 (62.50)                                         | 37 (45.12)                                         | 53 (67.09)                                         |
| Worsen                                             | 13 (15.85)                                         | 18 (21.95)                                         | 11 (13.75)                                         | 15 (18.29)                                         | 8 (10.13)                                          |
| p-valuea                                           |                                                    | 0.9720                                             | 0.5758                                             | 0.1694                                             | 0.3630                                             |
| ClinicalWorsening                                  | ClinicalWorsening                                  | ClinicalWorsening                                  | ClinicalWorsening                                  | ClinicalWorsening                                  | ClinicalWorsening                                  |
| n                                                  | 82                                                 | 82                                                 | 80                                                 | 82                                                 | 79                                                 |
| No.ofSubjects(%)hadClinicalWorsening               | 13 (15.85)                                         | 10 (12.20)                                         | 7 (8.75)                                           | 8 (9.76)                                           | 4 (5.06)                                           |
| Probabilitystayingeventfree atDay112(Week16)b      | 0.84                                               | 0.87                                               | 0.91                                               | 0.90                                               | 0.94                                               |
| 95%ConfidenceIntervalb                             | 0.74, 0.90                                         | 0.77, 0.93                                         | 0.82,0.95                                          | 0.80, 0.95                                         | 0.85, 0.98                                         |
| p-valuec                                           |                                                    | 0.5591                                             | 0.1955                                             | 0.3018                                             | 0.0410                                             |
| BorgDyspneaScore                                   | BorgDyspneaScore                                   | BorgDyspneaScore                                   | BorgDyspneaScore                                   | BorgDyspneaScore                                   | BorgDyspneaScore                                   |
| n                                                  | 79                                                 | 79                                                 | 78                                                 | 78                                                 | 76                                                 |
| Mean (SD)                                          | 0.41 (1.89)                                        | -0.68 (1.76)                                       | -0.36 (1.92)                                       | -0.29 (2.08)                                       | -0.70 (1.75)                                       |
| Median                                             | 0.00                                               | -0.50                                              | 0.00                                               | -0.25                                              | -0.5                                               |
| p-valued                                           |                                                    | 0.0103                                             | 0.1483                                             | 0.1581                                             | 0.0679                                             |

Abbreviations: ITT = intent to treat; N = number of randomized subjects who have received study medication; n = number of subject with nonmissing data at baseline and endpoint; PAH = pulmonary arterial hypertension; SD = standard deviation; 6MW = 6-minute walk; a) Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6MWD compared to placebo; b) Estimate was from Kaplan-Meier method; c) Permutation test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6MWD (  =325 and  325 meters) on log-rank score compared to placebo; d) Permutation test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6MWD (  =325 and  325 meters) on rank compared to placebo. Source: EFFN71GY, EFFN044GY, EFFN04GY, EFFN01GY.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Time to clinical worsening

In  total,  13  (15.9%)  patients  on  placebo  and  4  (5.1%)  patients  on  tadalafil  40  mg  had  clinical worsening. Mean time to clinical worsening was 106 days in patients randomised to tadalafil 40 mg and 101 days in those randomised to placebo (Table 5).

## Table 5 - Summary of Clinical Worsening (All ITT Subjects)

|                                                |               | fffffffffffffffffffffffffftadalafilfffffffffffffffffffffffffff   | fffffffffffffffffffffffffftadalafilfffffffffffffffffffffffffff   | fffffffffffffffffffffffffftadalafilfffffffffffffffffffffffffff   | fffffffffffffffffffffffffftadalafilfffffffffffffffffffffffffff   |
|------------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                | Placebo       | 2.5mg                                                            | 10mg                                                             | 20mg                                                             | 4 0mg                                                            |
|                                                | (N=82)        | (N=82)                                                           | (N=8 0)                                                          | (N=82)                                                           | (N=7 9)                                                          |
| Clinical Worsening                             | n (号)         | n (&)                                                            | n ()                                                             | n                                                                | n (号)                                                            |
|                                                |               |                                                                  |                                                                  | (&)                                                              |                                                                  |
| Totalnumber of subjects had clinical worsening | 13 (15. 85)   | 10 (12.20)                                                       | 7 (8.75)                                                         | 8(9.76)                                                          | 4 (5.06)                                                         |
| Death                                          | 1(1.22)       | 0(0.00)                                                          | 1 (1.25)                                                         | 0(0.00)                                                          | 0(0.00)                                                          |
| HospitalizationduetoWorseningPAH               | 2(2.44)       | 2 (2 .44)                                                        | 3 (3 .75)                                                        | 0(0.00)                                                          | 1 (1.27)                                                         |
| Initiation of New PAH Therapy                  | 0(0.00)       | 1 (1.22)                                                         | 0 (0.00)                                                         | 2 (2.44)                                                         | 1 (1.27)                                                         |
| Worseningof WHoFunctionalClass                 | 11 (13.41)    | 10 (12.20)                                                       | 6 (7.50)                                                         | 6(7.32)                                                          | 3(3.80)                                                          |
| Time to Clinical Worsening （Day)               |               |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |                                                                  |
| n                                              | 82            | 82                                                               | 80                                                               | 82                                                               | 7 9                                                              |
| Mean (SD)                                      | 100.79(27.94) | 102.91(25.09)                                                    | 105.80(23.83)                                                    | 103.23(27.79)                                                    | 106.24(24.16)                                                    |
| Medi an                                        | 112.00        | 112.00                                                           | 112.00                                                           | 112.00                                                           | 112.00                                                           |
| Min,Max                                        | 3.00,120.00   | 5.00,146.00                                                      | 8.00,135.00                                                      | 3.00,137.00                                                      | 1.00,125.00                                                      |
| p-value*                                       |               | 0.5591                                                           | 0.1955                                                           | 0.3018                                                           | 0.0410                                                           |

Abbreviations: N = number of randomized subjects who have received study medication; n = number of subjects per category.

* Permutation test stratified by PAH etiology, bosentan use, and baseline 6-minute walk distance (&lt;= 325 m and &gt;325 m) on log-rank score.

## Cardiopulmonary Haemodynamics

Of  405  randomized  and  treated  subjects,  93  were  included  in  the  substudy  of  cardiopulmonary haemodynamics. The tadalafil 40 mg treatment group had statistically significant improvements from baseline in mPAP, PVR, CI, and CO ( t test p&lt;0.05). However, post hoc analyses demonstrated that changes  from  baseline  in  cardiopulmonary  haemodynamic  parameters  for  the  tadalafil  40  mg treatment group were not significantly different compared to placebo.

## Health Outcomes/Quality of Life Evaluation

The  tadalafil  40  mg  treatment  group  was  statistically  significantly  improved  in  6  of  8  domains (physical-functioning,  role-physical,  bodily  pain,  general  health,  vitality,  and  social  functioning;  all p&lt;0.05) of the SF-36 Health Survey. The tadalafil 40 mg treatment group had statistically significant improvements in the EuroQoL current health-state VAS (p=0.0215) and the 2 index scores (US and UK; all p&lt;0.001) compared to placebo.

##  Ancillary analyses

Predefined  subpopulations  were  evaluated  (bosentan  use  (yes/no),  PAH  etiology,  baseline  6MWD, sex, age, and baseline WHO functional class) for the primary and key secondary efficacy endpoints (Figure 3). Since over 50% of subjects enrolled in the study were receiving concomitant bosentan, the subpopulation was examined to evaluate the efficacy of tadalafil as an add-on therapy to bosentan. This analysis was exploratory and due to the small sample size in this subpopulation, the study lacked  adequate  power  to  determine  statistically  significant  differences  within  subgroups, even if there were large differences between treatment groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 3 - Tadalafil 40 mg placebo-adjusted change from baseline in 6-minute walk distance (meters) by study subpopulation: mean (95% confidence interval)

<!-- image -->

Placebo-adjustedChangein6-MinuteWalkDistance(meters)inTadalafil40mg, with95%ConfidenceIntervals

Abbreviations:ITT=intent to treat;Tad=tadalafil;WHO=World Health Organization.

Naïve  patients  (no  bosentan  use)  randomised  to  placebo  had  worsening  from  baseline  to  end  of treatment (-2.89 m), while placebo patients already on bosentan therapy improved from baseline to end of treatment (+18.84 m). The change from baseline to end of treatment in patients randomised to tadalafil  40  mg  without  concomitant  bosentan  (+42.18  m)  is  slightly  higher  than  that  obtained  in patients receiving concomitant bosentan (+40.15 m).

## 1.3.2.3.   Study LVGX: 6-Minute Walk Distance, WHO Functional Class, Borg Dyspnea Score

LVGX was a extension of study LVGY. Part 1 is a blinded treatment extension of Study LVGY to evaluate  the  long-term  safety  (primary  objective)  and  efficacy  (secondary  objective)  of  tadalafil  20 and  40  mg  administered  once  daily  for  52 weeks.  Part  2  is  an  open-label  extension  of  which  the primary objective is to evaluate the long-term safety of tadalafil 40 mg administered once daily. The variation application included the interim analysis of ongoing Study LVGX (data cut-off date of 04 October 2007). The complete efficacy results for Part 1 of Study LVGX were submitted at the time of responses to request for supplementary information (database lock 13 November 2008).

##  6-Minute Walk Distance

Table 6 presents the final 6-MW results for all subjects who entered and received study treatment in Part 1 of Study LVGX, and includes baseline 6-MW distance in Study LVGY. Subjects receiving an unchanged dose of tadalafil 20 mg (P:20 to 20 mg) had an improvement from Study LVGY baseline of 353 m (median 362 m) to a Study LVGX endpoint [52 weeks, LOCF] mean of 402 m (median 401 m). Subjects receiving an unchanged dose of tadalafil 40 mg (P:40 to 40 mg) had an improvement from Study LVGY baseline mean of 356 m (median 380 m) to Study LVGX endpoint [52 weeks, LOCF] mean of 400 m (median 420 m). It appears that subjects have similar improvement in exercise capacity, whether taking tadalafil 20 mg or tadalafil 40 mg.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 6 - 6-minute Walk Distance (meters) by Visits and Endpoint - Summary by Study Treatment and Study Treatment in Previous Study - All Subjects Entered and Received Study Treatment (N=357) Study H6D-MC-LVGX (Final 52-Week)

6-minute

| walk distance (meters)   |                  | T 20mg (N=63)   |          | P:Pla (N=75)   |                 | P:2.5-20mg (N=150)    |          | --Tadalafil 40mg- P:40mg (N=69)   |          | A11 T 40mg (N=294)    |                 | TOTAL (N=357)         |          |
|--------------------------|------------------|-----------------|----------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------------|----------|-----------------------------------|----------|-----------------------|-----------------|-----------------------|----------|
| LVGY Baseline            | n                | 63              |          | 75             |                 | 150                   |          | 69                                |          | 294                   |                 | 357                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD) Median | 353.49 362.00   | (64.49)  | 349.54 366.80  | 4(77.44)        | 338.64 (75.00) 356.25 |          | 355.76 (77.60) 380.00             |          | 345.44 (76.32) 360.00 |                 | 346.86 (74.35) 360.00 |          |
|                          |                  | 181.70,         | 450.00   | 180.00,        | 463.00          | 157.00,               | 450.00   | 170.90,                           | 450.00   | 157.00,               | 463.00          | 157.00,               | 463.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I. ★       | 337.25,         | 369.73   | 331.72,        | 367.36          | 326.54,               | 350.74   | 337.12,                           | 374.40   | 336.68,               | 354.20          | 339.12,               | 354.60   |
| Baseline                 | n                | 63              |          | 73             |                 | 145                   |          | 69                                |          | 287                   |                 | 350                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD) Median | 397.74 395.30   | (71.74)  | 361.72 381.50  | (100.42)        | 368.97 375.00         | (91.80)  | 403.31 414.00                     | (84.23)  | 375.38 384.00         | 3(93.41)        | 379.41 385.55         | 1(90.21) |
|                          |                  | 163.70,         | 600.00   | 121.90,        | 530.30          | 158.60,               | 700.00   | 212.00,                           | 641.80   | 121.90,               | 700.00          | 121.90,               | 700.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I. ★       | 379.67,         | 415.81   | 338.29，        | 385.15          | 353.90,               | 384.03   | 383.08，                           | 423.54   | 364.53,               | 386.23          | 369.92,               | 388.89   |
| Week 16                  | n                | 58              |          | 66             |                 | 140                   |          | 66                                |          | 272                   |                 | 330                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD)        | 396.37 391.25   | (77.01)  | 375.17 397.80  | (102.23)        | 373.71 383.00         | (97.85)  | 404.24 410.25                     | (86.57)  | 381.47 392.50         | (96.86)         | 384.09 392.15         | 9(93.74) |
|                          | Median           | 168.20,         | 550.00   | 122.00,        | 534.00          | 56.70,                | 603.00   | 156.00,                           | 547.00   | 56.70,                | 603.00          | 56.70,                | 603.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I.         | 376.12,         | 416.61   | 350.04,        | 400.30          | 357.36,               | 390.06   | 382.95,                           | 425.52   | 369.91,               | 393.04          | 373.94,               | 394.24   |
| Week 28                  | n                | 55              |          | 64             |                 | 125                   |          | 61                                |          | 250                   |                 | 305                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD) Median | 406.41 400.00   | (106.76) | 401.00         | 387.48 ( 98.30) | 374.24 381.00         | 1(96.02) | 404.32 406.00                     | 2(87.43) | 384.97(95.03) 395.35  |                 | 388.84(97.41) 396.20  |          |
|                          |                  | 180.00,         | 900.00   | 163.00,        | 548.00          | 158.50,               | 580.00   | 204.50，                           | 598.90   | 158.50,               | 598.90          | 158.50,               | 900.00   |
| Week 28                  | 95% C.I. ★       | 377.55,         | 435.27   | 362.92,        | 412.03          | 357.24,               | 391.24   | 381.93,                           | 426.71   | 373.13,               | 396.81          | 377.86,               | 399.81   |
| Week40                   | n                | 51              |          | 62             |                 | 119                   |          | 60                                |          | 241                   |                 | 292                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD) Median | 411.81 415.00   | (78.72)  | 388.62 420.00  | (104.15)        | 376.26 382.50         | (91.96)  | 404.90 411.50                     | (85.37)  | 386.57 400.00         | (94.04)         | 390.98 401.00         | (91.93)  |
|                          |                  | 181.40,         | 560.00   | 100.00,        | 548.60          | 126.00,               | 643.00   | 217.00,                           | 574.50   | 100.00,               | 643.00          | 100.00,               | 643.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I.         | 389.67,         | 433.95   | 362.17,        | 415.07          | 359.56,               | 392.95   | 382.85,                           | 426.95   | 374.64,               | 398.50          | 380.39,               | 401.57   |
| Week 52                  | n                | 51              |          | 59             |                 | 117                   |          | 59                                |          | 235                   |                 | 286                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD)        | 415.31 ( 79.82) |          | 393.54         | 1(98.24)        | 386.17                | (94.16)  | 410.01                            | 1(77.79) |                       | 394.00 ( 91.56) | 397.80 (89.82)        |          |
|                          | Median           | 420.00          |          | 410.00         |                 | 390.00                |          | 433.00                            |          | 401.00                |                 | 403.00                |          |
|                          |                  | 178.30,         | 570.00   | 130.00,        | 567.00          | 118.00,               | 607.00   | 190.00,                           | 574.00   | 118.00,               | 607.00          | 118.00,               | 607.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I.         | 392.86,         | 437.76   | 367.94,        | 419.14          | 368.92,               | 403.41   | 389.74,                           | 430.28   | 382.24,               | 405.77          | 387.35,               | 408.26   |
| Endpoint                 | n                | 60              |          | 70             |                 | 14 4                  |          | 67                                |          | 281                   |                 | 341                   |          |
|                          | Mean (SD)        | 401.52          | (90.29)  | 377.90 398.50  | (109.09)        | 371.21 380.50         | (100.09) | 400.26 420.00                     | (83.34)  | 379.80 390.00         | (99.12)         | 383.63 393.20         | (97.85)  |
|                          | Median           | 401.40 168.20,  | 570.00   | 130.00,        | 567.00          | 56.70,                | 607.00   | 156.00,                           | 574.00   | 56.70,                | 607.00          | 56.70,                | 607.00   |
|                          | 95% C.I. *       | 378.20,         | 424.85   | 351.89,        | 403.91          | 354.73,               | 387.70   | 379.93,                           | 420.59   | 368.16,               | 391.44          | 373.20，               | 394.05   |

Abbreviations:N=number of entered subjects who have received study medication;n = number of subject with non-missing data; C.I.=confidence interval;Endpoint =Week 52 or the last nonmissing observation carried forward;Prev=Actual received studytreatmentinpreviousplacbo-controldouble-blindstudy;P=Prev. *a*95%C.I.iscalculatedbasedontDistribution.

However, this comparison does not take into account the clinical outcome of tadalafil treatment, such as change in WHO Functional Classification, clinical worsening, or death.

##  Secondary endpoints

## WHO Functional Class:

Table 7 presents the final WHO Functional Class change from LVGX Part 1 baseline to endpoint, and, for reference, the baseline WHO Functional Class status in Study LVGY. Subjects in the P:20 to 20mg and P:40 to 40-mg tadalafil dose groups had similar WHO functional class at LVGX baseline, which reflects improvement resulting from 16 weeks of treatment during Study LVGY. Specifically, (47/63, 74.6%) subjects in the P:20 to 20-mg tadalafil group were in WHO Functional Class I or II, and the remaining subjects were in WHO Functional Class III; and (42/69, 60.9% subjects in the P:40 to 40-mg tadalafil group were in WHO Functional Class I or II, and the remaining subjects were in WHO Functional Class III. At endpoint, 19.4% subjects taking tadalafil 20 mg had worsened, while 9.0%  subjects  taking  tadalafil  40  mg  had  worsened.  Thus,  as  assessed  by  WHO  Functional  Class, worsening of PAH occurred in approximately twice the percentage of subjects taking tadalafil 20 mg than tadalafil 40 mg for 16 weeks in Study LVGY plus the 52 weeks of Part 1 of Study LVGX.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 7 - WHO Functional Class by Visit, Endpoint and Change from Baseline - Summary by Study Treatment and Study Treatment in Previous Study - All Subjects Entered and Received Study Treatment (N=357) - Study H6D-MC-LVGX (Final 52-Week)

---Tadalafil 40mg--

| Who Functional class            |                    | T20mg (N=63)          | P:P1a (N=75)           | P:2.5-20mg (N=150)    | P:40mg (N=69)         | A11 T 40mg (N=294)      | TOTAL (N=357)           |
|---------------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| LVGY Baseline                   | n                  | 63                    | 75                     | 150                   | 69                    | 294                     | 357                     |
|                                 | Class I            | 0(0.00)               | 1 (1.33)               | 0 (0.00)              | 1 (1.45)              | 2 (0.68)                | 2(0.56)                 |
|                                 | Class II           | 21 (33.33)            | 20 (26.67)             | 47 (31.33)            | 25 (36.23)            | 92 (31.29)              | 113 (31.65) 237         |
|                                 | Class III          | 42 (66.67)            | 53 (70.67)             | 99 (66.00)            | 43 (62.32)            | 195 (66.33)             | (66.39)                 |
|                                 | Class IV           | 0(0.00)               | 1 (1.33)               | 4 (2.67)              | 。 (0.00)              | 5(1.70)                 | 5(1.40)                 |
| Baseline                        | n                  | 63                    | 75                     | 150                   | 69                    | 294                     | 357                     |
|                                 | Class I            | 5(7.94)               | 2 (2.67)               | 5 (3.33)              | 4 (5.80)              | 11 (3.74)               | 16 (4.48)               |
|                                 | Class II class III | 42 (66.67)            | 31 (41.33) 36 (48.00)  | 67 (44.67) 66         | 38 (55.07)            | 136 (46.26) (43.88)     | 178 (49.86) 145 (40.62) |
|                                 | Class IV           | 16  (25.40) 0(0.00)   | 6 (8.00)               | (44.00) 12 (8.00)     | 27 (39.13) 0(0.00)    | 129 18 (6.12)           | 18 (5.04)               |
| Week 16                         | n                  | 61                    | 69                     | 145                   | 66                    | 280                     | 341                     |
|                                 | Class I            | 6(9.84)               | 2(2.90)                | 6(4.14)               | 5 (7.58)              | 13 (4.64)               | 19 (5.57)               |
|                                 | Class II Class III | 35 (57.38) 20 (32.79) | 37 (53.62) 27 (39.13)  | 69 (47.59) 65 (44.83) | 39 (59.09) 21 (31.82) | 145 (51.79) 113 (40.36) | 180 (52.79) 133 (39.00) |
|                                 | Class IV           |                       | 3(4.35)                | 5(3.45)               | 1 (1.52)              |                         | 9(2.64)                 |
|                                 |                    | 0(0.00)               |                        |                       |                       | 9(3.21)                 |                         |
| Change from baseline to week 16 | n                  | 61                    | 69                     | 145                   | 66                    | 280                     | 341                     |
|                                 | Worsen             | 6(9.84)               | 3(4.35)                | 11 ( 7.59)            | 6 (9.09)              | 20 (7.14)               | 26 (7.62)               |
|                                 | No change          | 51 (83.61)            | 54 (78.26)             | 115 (79.31)           | 51 (77.27)            | 220 (78.57)             | 271 (79.47)             |
|                                 | Improved           | 4( 6.56)              | 12 (17.39)             | 19 (13.10)            | 9 (13.64)             | 40 (14.29)              | 44 (12.90)              |
|                                 | 1 class            | 4(6.56)               | 11 (15.94)             | 17 (11.72)            | 9 (13.64)             | 37 (13.21)              | 41( (12.02)             |
|                                 | 2 classes          | 0(0.00)               | 1 (1.45)               | 2 (1.38)              | 0 (0.00)              | 3(1.07)                 | 3(0.88)                 |
| Week 28                         | n                  | 57                    | 66                     | 132                   | 63                    | 261                     | 318                     |
|                                 | Class I            | 6(10.53)              | 2(3.03)                | 6( 4.55)              | 5 (7.94)              | 13(4.98)                | 19( 5.97)               |
|                                 | class II           | 34(59.65)             | 38 (57.58)             | (46.21)               | 42 (66.67)            | 141 (54.02)             | 175 (55.03)             |
|                                 | class III class IV | 17(29.82) 0(0.00)     | 25 (37.88) 1(1.52)     | 63 (47.73) 2( 1.52)   | 16 (25.40) 0(0.00)    | 104 (39.85) (1.15)      | 121 (38.05) 3 (0.94)    |
|                                 |                    |                       |                        |                       |                       | 3                       |                         |
| change from baseline to week 28 | n                  | 57                    | 66                     | 132                   | 63                    | 261                     | 318                     |
|                                 | Worsen             | 7(12.28)              | (4.55)                 | 15 (11.36)            | 2 (3.17)              | 20 (7.66)               | 27 (8.49)               |
|                                 | No change          | 43 (75.44)            | 49 (74.24)             | 98 (74.24)            | 51 (80.95)            | 198 (75.86)             | 241 (75.79) 50 (15.72)  |
|                                 | Improved           | 7(12.28)              | 14 (21.21)             | 19 (14.39)            | 10 (15.87)            | 43 (16 .48)             | 47 (14.78)              |
|                                 | 1class             | 7(12.28)              | 13 (19.70)             | 17 (12.88)            | 10 (15.87)            | 40 (15.33)              |                         |
|                                 | 2 classes          | 0(0.00)               | (1.52)                 | 2(1.52)               | (0.00)                | 3(1.15)                 | 3(0.94)                 |
| Week 40                         | n                  | 51                    | 63                     | 12 6                  | 62                    | 251                     | 302                     |
|                                 | class I            | 6(11.76)              | 3 (4.76)               | 8 (6.35)              | 3 (4.84)              | 14 (5.58)               | 20 (6.62) (56.29)       |
|                                 | class II           | 33(64.71)             | 40 (63.49)             | 59(46.83)             | 38 (61.29) 21 (33.87) | 137 (54.58) 97 (38.65)  | 170 109 (36.09)         |
|                                 | class III          | 12(23.53)             | 19 (30.16)             | 57 (45.24)            |                       |                         |                         |
|                                 | class IV           | 0(0.00)               | 1 (1.59)               | 2(1.59)               | 。 (0.00)              | 3 (1.20)                | 3 (0.99)                |
| change from baseline to week 40 | n                  | 51                    | 63                     | 126                   | 62                    | 251                     | 302                     |
|                                 | Worsen             | 5(9.80)               | 3(4.76)                | 14 (11.11)            | 4(6.45)               | 21 ( 8.37)              | 26 (8.61)               |
|                                 | No change          | 38(74.51)             | 43 (68.25)             | 89 (70.63)            | 53 (85.48)            | 185 (73.71)             | 223 (73.84)             |
|                                 | 1 cla8s            | 8(15.69) 8(15.69)     | 17 (26.98) 16 (25.40)  | 23 (18.25) 22 (17.46) | 5(8.06) 5(8.06)       | 45(17.93) 43 (17.13)    | 53 (17.55) 51 (16.89)   |
| change from baseline to week 40 | 2 classe8          | 0(0.00)               | 1(1.59)                | 1 (0.79)              | 0(0.00)               | 2(0.80)                 | 2(0.66)                 |
| Weel 52                         | n                  | 52                    | 62                     | 12 0                  | 60                    | 242                     | 294                     |
|                                 | Class I            | 4(7.69)               | 4 (6.45)               | 8 (6.67)              | 6 (10.00)             | 18 (7.44)               | 22 2(7.48)              |
|                                 | class II           | 33(63.46)             | 37 (59.68)             | 65 (54.17)            | 36 (60.00)            | 138 (57.02)             | 171 (58.16) 97( (32.99) |
|                                 | class III class IV | 13 (25.00)            | 20(32.26)              | 46(38.33)             | 18 (30.00)            | 84 (34.71)              |                         |
|                                 |                    | 2( 3.85)              | 1 (1.61)               | 1 (0.83)              | (0.00)                | 2(0.83)                 | 4( 1.36)                |
| change from baseline to week 52 | n                  | 52                    | 62                     | 120                   | 60                    | 242                     | 294                     |
|                                 | Worsen             | 8(15.38)              | 2(3.23)                | 10 (8.33)             | 4( 6.67)              | 16 (6.61)               | 24(8.16)                |
|                                 | No change          | 37(71.15)             | 44(70.97)              | 85(70.83)             | 46 (76.67)            | 175 (72.31)             | 212 (72.11) 58(19.73)   |
|                                 | 1 cla8s            | 7(13.46) 7(13.46)     | 16  (25.81) 15 (24.19) | 25 (20.83) 23 (19.17) | 10 (16.67) 10 (16.67) | 51(21.07) 48 (19.83)    | 55 (18.71)              |
|                                 | 2 classes          | 0(0.00)               | 1 ( 1.61)              | 2(1.67)               | 0 (0.00)              | 3(1.24)                 | 3(1.02)                 |
| Endpoint                        | n                  | 62                    | 73                     | 146                   | 67                    | 286                     | 348                     |
|                                 | class I            | 4(6.45)               | 4 (5.48)               | 8(5.48)               | 6 (8.96)              | 18 (6.29)               | 22 (6.32) 186 (53.45)   |
|                                 | Class II           | 38(61.29)             | 40 (54.79)             | 69 (47.26)            | 39 (58.21) 21 (31.34) | 148 (51.75) 110 (38.46) | 128                     |
|                                 | class III class IV | 18 (29.03) 2 （3.23)   | 25 (34.25) 4 (5.48)    | 64 (43.84) 5 5(3.42)  | 1 (1.49)              | 10 (3.50)               | (36.78) 12 (3.45)       |
| change from baseline            | n                  | 62                    | 73                     | 146                   | 67                    | 286                     | 348                     |
|                                 | Worsen             | 12 (19.35)            |                        | 13 3(8.90)            | (8.96)                |                         | 35 (10.06)              |
| to Endpoint                     |                    |                       | 4( 5.48)               |                       |                       | 23 ( 8.04)              |                         |

Endpoint=Week 52 or the last nonmissing observation carried forward;Prev =Actual received study treatment in previous placbo-controldouble-blindstudy;P=Prev.

In patients taking concomitant bosentan, there may be a dilution of tadalafil treatment effect, perhaps partly  attributable  to  a  decrease  in  tadalafil  exposure  or  possibly  due  to  greater  clinical  stability  of subjects in the bosentan subgroup in Study LVGY. Table 8 presents the final WHO Functional Class change data by bosentan use for Part 1 of Study LVGX. In subjects not taking concomitant bosentan, 30.8% of subjects in the P:20 to 20-mg group compared to 6.25% of subjects in the P:40 to 40-mg group worsened in WHO Functional Class from LVGX baseline to endpoint.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 8 - WHO Functional Class by Visit, Endpoint and Change from Baseline - Summary by Study Treatment and Study Treatment in Previous Study - All Subjects Entered and Received Study Treatment No Bosentan Use (N=165) - Study H6D-MC-LVGX (Final 52-Week)

<!-- image -->

Abbreviations:N=number of entered subjects who have received study medication;n= number of subject with non-missing data; Endpoint=Week 52 or the last nonmissingobservation carried forward;Prev=Actual receivedstudytreatment in previous placbo-controldouble-blindstudy;P=Prev.

Time  to  functional  class  deterioration: Figure  4  presents  the  cumulative  incidence  of  clinical worsening across both Study LVGY and Part 1 of Study LVGX for subjects who started on tadalafil 20  mg  and  tadalafil  40  mg.  Over  the  full  68  weeks  of  the  two  studies,  23  (28.05%)  subjects experienced clinical worsening with tadalafil 20 mg compared to 17 (21.52%) with tadalafil 40 mg. Clinical worsening was defined as any of the following: death, lung transplantation, atrial septostomy, hospitalisation due to worsening PAH, initiation of new PAH therapy (for example, prostacyclin or analogue, endothelin receptor antagonist, PDE5 inhibitor), or worsening of WHO Functional Class. The Kaplan-Meier curve suggests a separation between tadalafil 20 mg and tadalafil 40 mg after about 10 weeks (70 days) of treatment.

Figure 4 - Kaplan-Meier estimated survival curves of clinical worsening summary of analysis by treatment All subjects entered and received study unchanged dose level of tadalafil 20 mg or 40 mg in Study LVGY through Study LVGX Study H6D-MC-LVGY and its extension Study H6D-MC-LVGX

<!-- image -->

## 1.3.2.4 Discussion on clinical efficacy

The Draft CHMP Guideline on the Clinical Investigations of Medicinal Products for the Treatment of Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (EMEA/CHMP/EWP/356954/2008)  was considered for the assessment of this application.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The choice of tadalafil dose-range in the LVGY study (2.5 mg, 10 mg, 20 mg and 40 mg, orally, OD) is based on previous experience in ED and on limited reports on the use in patients with PAH. Dosage groups  above  once-daily  tadalafil  40  mg  were  not  included  in  the  PAH  studies  due  to  previously observed limitations in haemodynamic improvements beyond tadalafil 40 mg (Ghofrani et al. 2004). Additional  PK  and  PK/PD  simulations  of  tadalafil  40  mg  once-daily  versus  tadalafil  20  mg  twice daily, suggested that 20 mg twice-daily administration results in a 55% higher exposure than 40 mg once-daily. The proposed posology (40 mg, once-daily) was therefore considered acceptable.

The pivotal study LVGY was a placebo-controlled study. Although until now clinical trials with other products for this indication have been placebo-controlled, it would have been desirable to have an arm with an active control. However these trials versus placebo could be considered acceptable bearing in mind the methodological difficulties in performing a non-inferiority trial in this specific population. The  duration  of  the  study  (16  weeks)  is  adequate.  The  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria,  objectives, sample size calculation, the stratified randomisation performed, the methods used to ensure masking and statistical methods are considered adequate.

'Ad  hoc'  analyses  using  ANCOVA  in  addition  to  the  prespecified  Hodges-Lehman  method  were conducted  and  justified  by  the  MAH  mainly  due  to  the  unexpectedly  high  rate  of  patients  with concomitant bosentan. The results obtained with the ANCOVA 'ad-hoc' method with mean values has overestimated the net effect of tadalafil in the 6MWD compared with the pre-specified HodgesLehman method with median values. In this case, in which the change in 6MWD does not follow a normal  distribution,  the  pre-specified  non-parametric  Hodges-Lehman  method  is  more  appropriate than  the  ANCOVA  ad-hoc  method.  Nevertheless,  according  to  the  information  provided  for  other medicinal products intended for use in PAH, it is acceptable to include also the mean values in section 5.1 of the SPC.

The primary endpoint was the change from baseline (defined as the mean 6MWD of the last two 6MW Tests prior to randomization) in 6MW test evaluated after 16 weeks of treatment compared to placebo. Additional comparisons at weeks 8 and 12 were also done. The suitability of 6MW test as a standalone primary endpoint in PAH is at present under discussion being current challenges for the 6MW Test the adequate validation in non-idiopathic PAH or less severe functional classes in PAH patients, definition  of  the  minimal  meaningful  clinical  differences  (clinical  impact),  definition  of  therapeutic goals and its relation to survival. The ceiling effect of the test, which becomes more patent in patients who are taking several drugs or patients with less severe forms (e.g. functional class II patients) is another drawback of this endpoint. However this variable, which has been used as a primary endpoint for the registration of PAH drugs so far, remains useful with regard to comparisons with other drugs to assess  function  and  symptomatic  improvement although it must be recognised that it cannot give a complete  picture  of  the  effect  of  the  drug.  This  is  relevant  when  considering  the  lack  of  clear correlation between improvement in exercise capacity and survival.  The inclusion of clinical variables as  secondary  endpoints  is  also  important  to  support  the  efficacy  of  a  drug  for  which  an  effect  on exercise  capacity  is  observed.  The  clinical  endpoints  included  as  secondary  endpoints  in  this application were considered adequate. The proposed duration of the study was considered acceptable.

Most patients recruited into the study had idiopathic PAH or PAH related to vascular collagen disease, which is consistent with the population included in the indication requested. The indication requested by  the  MAH includes  functional  classes  II  and  III  since  the  pivotal  study  theoretically  involved patients with both functional classes. According to the MAH 65% were functional class III and 32% were functional class II. Concerns were raised not only in relation to the representativeness of patients included  in  class  II  but  also  to  the  magnitude  of  the  effect  achieved  that  was  limited  and  not statistically significant. The MAH was requested to further characterise these patients according to the clinical and functional criteria currently used in clinical practice (e.g. baseline 6MWD, haemodynamic characteristics,  background  medications,  etc).  From  the  additional  information  provided,  it  seemed that patients with functional class II and III may be differentiated on the basis on the 6MWH and Borg dyspnoea  score  at  baseline.  On  the  contrary,  neither  haemodynamic  parameters  nor  concomitant medications allowed differentiating class II patients from class III patients. However, the MAH argued that  these  haemodynamic  results  could  be  related  to  the  small  sample  size  within  these  subgroups and/or the high proportion of subjects taking bosentan at baseline. In addition, the MAH argued that

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the relationship between WHO Functional Class and haemodynamic parameters in patients with PAH is currently unclear. This rationale is acceptable. The effect on 6MWD was similar in both classes II and III. The MAH included an 'ad-hoc' ANCOVA analysis, which overestimated the net effect on 6MWD compared with the pre-specified non-parametric Hodges-Lehman method. Nevertheless, the results  were  statistically  significant  in  favour  of  tadalafil  40  mg  versus  placebo  with  both  testing methods in both class II and III.

Regarding  the  primary  endpoint,  data  provided  show  that  tadalafil  40  mg  significantly  improves 6MWD test compared to placebo (26.0 meters, p=0.0004) at week 16. Additional comparisons at week 12  also  revealed  a  significant  improvement  in  6MWD  with  respect  to  placebo  for  the  highest  dose although the changes are not statistically significant for the rest of the doses. The magnitude of the effect  observed  at  weeks  16  and  12  for  tadalafil  40  mg  is  similar  to  that  for  other  licensed  drugs. However these results are difficult to assess given the heterogenicity of the population included in the pivotal  trial  (different  PAH  aetiologies  and  functional  classes)  and  the  variety  of  concomitant medications  that  could  have  an  effect  on  efficacy  (bosentan,  beraprost,  calcium-channel  blockers). Therefore,  additional  analysis  focused  on  intrasubject  comparison  (responders  rate)  rather  than  on intergroup  comparison  were  requested.  These  responder  analyses  further  support  the  superiority  of tadalafil 40 mg versus placebo either in the whole study population or in the subgroup of patients not on bosentan therapy, and also the choice of the tadalafil 40 mg dose versus the lower tadalafil doses.

In relation to secondary endpoints tadalafil did not improve WHO functional class. According to stepdown  testing,  after  not  achieving  significant  differences  in  the  WHO  functional  class,  no  p-values should have been calculated for the remaining secondary variables and the data presented should be interpreted as a descriptive analysis. Changes in Borg dyspnea score or cardiopulmonary haemodynamics was similar in the placebo and tadalafil groups. The improvement by 6 days in the secondary endpoint 'time to clinical worsening' is of doubtful clinical significance. Nevertheless, the percent of patients with no clinical worsening by week 16 (5% vs. 16%) does seem to be clinically significant  bearing  in  mind  that  usually  longer  periods  of  time  are  necessary  to  demonstrate  an improvement in time to clinical worsening.

The  MAH  provided  subgroup  analyses  for  6MWD  according  to  concomitant  bosentan  use,  PAH aetiology, baseline 6MWD, gender, age and baseline WHO functional class.

The results on the 6MWD in the whole population were statistically significant in favour of tadalafil 40 mg versus placebo but in the lower range of other products intended for this indication. In patients not  on  bosentan  therapy,  tadalafil  40  mg  is  consistently  more  effective  than  placebo  in  the improvement in 6MWD in different subpopulations by PAH aetiology, functional class and baseline 6MWD, which is consistent with the statistically significant results in the whole study population.

Ancillary analyses provided by the MAH in the subgroup of patients receiving concomitant bosentan show that the representative patients who may benefit from adding tadalafil 40 mg to bosentan is those on functional class II but with a baseline 6-MWD of less than 325 m. These results are not consistent, since  functional  class  II  in  study  LVGY  corresponds  with  a  median  6MWD  at  baseline  by  388  m, whereas  functional  class  III  corresponds  with  a  median  6MWD  at  baseline  by  334  m.  It  has  been confirmed that a pharmacokinetic interaction between tadalafil and bosentan exists, leading to lower tadalafil systemic exposure, and that a negative effect of bosentan on tadalafil efficacy cannot be ruled out.  The  responders'  analyses  also  showed  no  significant  differences  between  tadalafil  40  mg  and placebo in patients already on bosentan therapy in the rate of responders/non-responders. Therefore, the efficacy of tadalafil in patients already on bosentan  therapy has not been  conclusively demonstrated. This issue has been addressed in sections 4.4, 4.5 and 5.1 of the SPC.

With respect to the aetiology the subgroup analysis shows a significant effect of tadalafil on 6MWD both in patients with idiopathic and connective-tissue disease pulmonary hypertension. Unlike other PAH products tadalafil shows a greater effect on connective-tissue disease than on idiopathic PAH. No effect is observed for repaired S-P shunts and other types of PAH subgroups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The effect of tadalafil on 6MWD is observed in females compared to those on placebo. Males show little  improvement but no conclusion can be drawn due to the small number of men included in the study.  Analysis  of  the  6MWD  according  to  predefined  body-weight  ranges,  showed  that  6MWD change from baseline measures were comparable across weight groups within each treatment with the greatest  magnitude  of  change  from  baseline  in  those  receiving  20-mg  and  40-mg  tadalafil.  In particular, no loss of efficacy was apparent in patients weighing more than 90 kg.

Subjects receiving unchanged treatment of tadalafil 20 mg from Study LVGY through Study LVGX had similar net improvements in the 6-MWD at study endpoint than those patients receiving tadalafil 40  mg  through  Study  LVGX  (net  change  from  baseline  (+39  m  vs.  +40  m).  Nevertheless,  data  on number  of  patients  with  clinical  worsening,  time  to  clinical  worsening  and  improvement  in  WHO functional class are consistently in favour of the 40 mg dose versus the 20 mg dose, and consistent with  the  additional  analysis  of  responders,  supporting  the  choice  of  the  40  mg  dose  as  the  more effective dose tested in the study LVGY.

## 1.3.3. Clinical safety

##  Patient exposure

Of the  405  subjects  in  the  intent-to-treat  (ITT)  population  of  Study  LVGY,  402  had  exposure  data (placebo: 82, tadalafil: 320). Exposure cannot be calculated for the remaining 3 subjects for whom the last dose of medication was not reported and no medication was returned. Of the 320 tadalafil-treated subjects with exposure data, 282 were treated for at least 12 weeks. Total exposure was 92.51 subjectyears  and  includes  the  tadalafil  20  and  40  mg  treatment  groups  in  which  the  majority  of  subjects (69 and 72 subjects, respectively) were exposed to tadalafil for at least 12 weeks.

In  Study  LVGX, 357 subjects entered, received study medication, and were evaluated for safety in Part  1  (52  weeks).  Of  these,  352  subjects  had  exposure  data  (62  tadalafil  20  mg  and  290  tadalafil 40 mg).  Study  medication  was  taken  orally,  once  daily.  The  mean  number  of  days  on  therapy  was 326.64 and the mean number of doses taken was 322.93. Total exposure to tadalafil in subject-years was 314.79 (tadalafil 20 mg, 55.48 subject years; tadalafil 40 mg, 259.31 subject-years).

From  the  results  of  a  pooled  analysis  of  exposure  data  from  67  clinical  pharmacology  studies conducted worldwide, although 5 formulations were administered in these studies (oral suspension, PEG solution, co-precipitate tablet, soft gelatin capsule, and market image formulation), the exposure (AUC) was generally comparable across studies. Thus, safety data from all formulations are included in  this  section.  The  formulation  used  in  most  studies  was  the  market-image  tablet.  In  these  pooled studies, a total of 2,157 subjects received at least 1 dose of tadalafil.

##  Adverse events

## PAH Pivotal Trial (LVGY)

Overall the proportion of patients in the pivotal trial with any treatment emergent adverse event was higher in the tadalafil groups (any dose) as compared to placebo (p = 0.035) and also in the tadalafil 40 mg group with respect to placebo (p = 0.004). Nevertheless, the rate of serious adverse events was similar in all treatment groups (Table 9).

The proportion of subjects with an AE considered by the investigator as treatment related (treatmentrelated AEs) was also statistically significantly different among treatment groups overall and greater in the tadalafil 10, 20, and 40 mg treatment groups compared to placebo. There was a dose-trend for AEs related to tadalafil from 41.5% for the 2.5 mg dose to 65.8% with the 40 mg dose.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 9 - Overview of patients with treatment emergent adverse events (study LVGY)

| Variable                                            | Placebo (n=82)   | Tadalafil (any dose) N = 323   | 2.5 mg (n=82)   | 10 mg (n=80)   | 20 mg (n=82)   | 40 mg (n=79)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------|--------------------------------|-----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| Subjects with AEs (all causality)                   | 65 (79.3)        | 288 (89.2)*                    | 72 (87.8)       | 72 (90.0)      | 69 (84.1)      | 75 (94.9)†     |
| Subjects with AEs (possibly related to study drug)  | 28 (34.1)        | 185 (57.3)‡                    | 34 (41.5)       | 53 (66.3) ‡    | 46 (56.1) †    | 52 (65.8)‡     |
| Discontinuations due to AEs                         | 13 (15.9)        | 36 (11.1)                      | 13 (15.9)       | 7 (8.8)        | 9 (11.0)       | 7 (8.9)        |
| Subjects with SAEs                                  | 12 (14.6)        | 42 (13.1)                      | 14 (17.1)       | 10 (12.5)      | 11 (13.4)      | 7 (8.9)        |
| Subjects with SAEs (possibly related to study drug) | 2 (2.4)          | 8 (2.5)                        | 0 (0.0)         | 2 (2.5)        | 4 (4.9)        | 2 (2.5)        |
| Deaths (all causality)                              | 1 (1.2)          | 2 (0.6)                        | 0 (0.0)         | 1 (1.3)        | 1 (1.2)        | 0 (0.0)        |
| Deaths (possibly related to study drug)             | 0 (0.0)          | 1 (0.3)                        | 0 (0.0)         | 0 (0.0)        | 1 (1.2)        | 0 (0.0)        |

*p vs placebo = 0.035; †p vs placebo &lt; 0.01; ‡p vs placebo &lt; 0.001

Headache was the most commonly reported AE related to study drug across the 5 treatment groups. The  common  AEs  that  were  reported  in  a  numerically  greater  proportion  of  subjects  in  tadalafil treatment  groups  combined  compared  with  placebo,  or in  tadalafil  20  mg  and/or  tadalafil  40  mg treatment groups compared with placebo included: headache, diarrhoea, nausea, back pain, dizziness, dyspepsia,  flushing,  myalgia,  nasopharyngitis,  dyspnoea,  pain  in  extremity,  muscle  spasms,  upper respiratory tract infection, epistaxis, cough, palpitations, arthralgia, chest pain, vomiting, fatigue, nasal congestion,  oedema,  bronchitis,  rash,  gastroesophageal  reflux  disease,  contusion,  hypoaesthesia, respiratory tract infection, and dry mouth.

PAH extension Trial (LVGX)

Table 10 - Overview of patients with treatment emergent adverse events (study LVGX - interim report data cut-off: 4 October 2007)

| Variable *a                                           | T20 (n=63)   | T40 P:Pla (n=75)   | T40 P:T.2.5-20 (n=150   | T40 P:T40 (n=69)   | All T40 (n=294)   | TOTAL (N=357)   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------|--------------------|-------------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-----------------|
| Subjects with AEs (all causality)                     | 56 (88.9)    | 64 (85.3)          | 131 (87.3)              | 61 (88.4)          | 256 (87.1)        | 312 (87.4)      |
| Subjects with AEs (possibly related to study drug) *c | 27 (42.9)    | 38 (50.7)          | 70 (46.7)               | 31 (44.9)          | 139 (47.3)        | 166 (46.5)      |
| Discontinuations due to AEs                           | 5 (7.9)      | 4 (5.3)            | 14 (9.3)                | 6 (8.7)            | 24 (8.23)         | 29 (8.1)        |
| Subjects with SAEs                                    | 13 (20.6)    | 20 (26.7)          | 40 (26.7)               | 10 (14.5)          | 70 (23.8)         | 83 (23.2)       |
| Subjects with SAEs (possibly related to study drug)   | -            | -                  | -                       | -                  | -                 | 10 (2.8)        |
| Deaths (all causality) *b                             | 2 (3.2)      | 2 (2.7)            | 5 (3.3)                 | 2 (2.9)            | 9 (3.1)           | 11 (3.1)        |
| Deaths (possibly related to study drug)               | 1 (1.6)      | 0 (0.0)            | 0 (0.0)                 | 0 (0.0)            | 0 (0.0)           | 1 (0.3)         |

T2.5-20 = Tadalafil 2.5-20mg; T20 = Tadalafil 20mg; T40= Tadalafil 40mg.

*a - Subjects may be counted in more than one category.

*b - Deaths are also included as serious adverse events and discontinuations due to adverse events.

*c - Includes events that were considered possibly related to study drug as judged by the investigator.

Clinical Pharmacology studies (67 pooled studies)

The results from 67 clinical pharmacology studies were pooled. Summaries of treatment-related AEs reported in ≥ 2% of subjects in the tadalafil dose groups combined were provided in this application. Treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in 74.8% (1536/2053) of tadalafil-treated subjects and 44.4% (572/1289) of non-tadalafil-treated subjects. The most common AEs for tadalafil-treated subjects were headache, followed by back pain, myalgia and dizziness.

##  Serious adverse events, deaths and other significant adverse events

Deaths

There were three deaths during the LVGY study. Of these deaths, 2 (0,6%) occurred in the combined tadalafil  groups and 1 death (1,2%) occurred in the placebo group. The mortality rate during Study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

LVGY was 2.2 subjects per 100 person-years for the combined tadalafil dose group and 4.3 subjects per  100  person-years  for  the  placebo  treatment  group.  The  three  deaths  occurred  in  1  patient randomised to placebo (death due to PAH), 1 death in the tadalafil 10 mg group (sudden death) and 1 death in the tadalafil 20 mg group (histiocytosis haematophagic syndrome). One death (Subject in the tadalafil 20 mg group) was considered by the investigator to be possibly related to treatment.

Eleven  (3.1%)  of  357  subjects  died  during  the  LVGX  reporting  period,  which  corresponds  to  a mortality rate of 4.6 per 100 person-years (combined tadalafil dose group). Of these, 10 were WHO Functional Class III and 1 was WHO Functional Class IV at baseline of Study LVGY. The SAEs that resulted in death were right ventricular failure (2 subjects: tadalafil 40 mg), sudden cardiac death (2 subjects: tadalafil 40 mg), pneumonia (2 subjects: tadalafil 40 mg), lung adenocarcinoma (1 subject: tadalafil 40 mg), cardiac arrest (1 subject: tadalafil 40 mg), myocardial infarction (1 subject: tadalafil 40  mg),  death  (1  subject:  tadalafil  20  mg),  and  sudden  death  (1  subject:  tadalafil  20  mg).  The  one death reported as 'death' was considered by the investigator as being possibly related to study drug

## Serious adverse events

SAEs rates, including SAEs of cardiovascular nature, were relatively low and similar in the placebo and sildenafil groups in the LVGY study.

There were a total of 83 (23.2%) patients with SAEs during the reported period of trial LVGX study. Eleven patients died due to SAEs. Fourteen SAEs in 10 patients were considered by the investigator to be treatment-related of which 1 was fatal.

## Other significant adverse events

The incidence of bleeding events was similar in the placebo and tadalafil groups in study LVGY. In study LVGY no cases of cataracts of macular degeneration were reported. However, in study LVGX, 5 (1.4%) subjects had cataract: 2 of 63 (3.2%) patients on tadalafil 20 mg and 3 of 294 (1%) patients on  tadalafil  40  mg.  Therefore,  no  dose-trend  is  apparent  for  the  development  of  cataracts.  In  study LVGX, 4 patients had macular degeneration: 1 of 63 (1.6%) patients on tadalafil 20 mg and 3 of 294 (1%) patients on tadalafil 40 mg. Therefore, no dose-trend is apparent for the development of macular degeneration.  Most  patients  had  concomitant  predisposing  risk  factors  for  these  ocular  events.  In addition,  the  rate  of  ocular  events  seen  in  study  LVGX  may  be  within  expected  in  the  general population.

##  Laboratory findings and vital sign data

The following parameters were assessed in Study LVGY and Study LVGX: haematology, coagulation (including  INR),  urinalysis,  and  serum  chemistry  panel  (including  AST/ALT).  For  every  parameter assessed, there were minimal mean differences and minimal differences across treatment groups.

Review  of  vital  sign  data  did  not  show  evidence  of  clinically  meaningful  changes  associated  with tadalafil treatment.

##  Safety in special populations

In  clinical  study  LVGY  in  PAH,  there  was  a  higher  number  of  patients  of  75  years  or  older  who experienced AEs in the tadalafil groups than in the placebo group (91.3% vs. 72.7%). Nevertheless, these  rates  are  similar  to  the  tadalafil  89.2%  vs  placebo  79.3%  AE  rates  seen  in  the  whole  LVGY study population. One pregnancy case with positive outcome was reported during tadalafil studies in PAH.

##  Immunological events

One case of drug hypersensitivity was reported in study LVGY in one patient randomised to tadalafil 40 mg, which leaded to drug discontinuation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

##  Safety related to drug-drug interactions and other interactions

Subgroups  analyses  were  made  in  studies  LVGY  and  LVGX  including  bosentan  use,  CYP3A4 inhibitor  use,  and  use  of  synthetic  estrogens.  Patients  on  bosentan  plus  placebo  showed  a  trend towards a higher incidence of AEs than patients on placebo alone (84.4% vs 73.0%) (see table below). The most commonly reported AE of headache was greater in placebo subjects within the bosentan subgroup (20%) than in placebo subjects within the non-bosentan subgroup (8%).

In  Study  LVGY,  AEs  rates  where  similar  in  patients  on  tadalafil  irrespectively  on  the  use  of concomitant bosentan. All placebo patients treated  with CYP3A4 inhibitors had 85% of patients in concomitant treatment with tadalafil and CYP3A4 inhibitors had at least one AE. Events reported for at least 2 subjects in any tadalafil treatment group plus CYP3A4 inhibitors included nasal congestion, upper respiratory tract infection, anaemia, diarrhoea, headache, muscle spasms and nausea.

In  study  LVGX,  AEs  rates  where  similar  in  patients  on  tadalafil  irrespectively  on  the  use  of concomitant  bosentan.  As  with  Study  LVGY,  in  both  bosentan  subgroups,  the  most  commonly reported  TEAE  was  headache.  All  patients  treated  concomitantly  with  tadalafil  and  CYP3A4 inhibitors had at least one AE, with the most commonly reported AE being headache.

##  Discontinuations due to AEs

The rates of patients with AEs leading to discontinuation in study LVGY was numerically higher in the  placebo  group  than  in  the  tadalafil  10  mg,  20  mg  and  40  mg  groups.  Rates  of  AEs  leading  to discontinuation showed a trend to decrease with increased tadalafil doses. In study LVGX, rates of AEs leading to discontinuation was similar in the 20 mg and 40 mg tadalafil groups. Most of these AEs were related to the disease.

##  Post-marketing experience

Tadalafil was first approved in Australia on 15 October 2002 for the treatment of ED. Tadalafil has been  approved  for  the  treatment  of  ED  in  114  countries  and  is  marketed  in  approximately  105 countries  as  of  15  October  2007.  As  of  30  September  2007,  approximately  12.9  million  patients worldwide have been exposed to tadalafil. According to the MAH, the numbers and types of reactions reported  for  the  time  period  of  16  October  2006  to  15  October  2007  were  consistent  with  the information provided in the 2 previous 6-month reporting periods (16 October 2005 to 15 April 2006; 16 April 2006 to 15 October 2006).

Although this is the first submission of a dossier for the indication of PAH, reports from regulatory authorities and spontaneously reported AEs in patients receiving tadalafil for PAH have been reported to Lilly as off-label use with commercially available product. A total of 7 cases have been identified within reporting PAH as the primary indication for use. The reported events included mania, physician prescribed overdose, QT prolongation, blood potassium abnormal, nausea, pain in the extremity, and burning sensation.

## Discussion on clinical safety

Body of safety data in the present application comprises the pivotal clinical trial LVGY (405 subjects; ITT population) and its extension (LVGX) in patients with PAH and also in the exposure and safety data from 2,157 patients enrolled in 67 clinical pharmacology studies.

The safety population included in the pivotal clinical trial LVGY is limited, comprising 405 subjects in  the  intent-to-treat  (ITT)  population of which 402 had exposure data (placebo: 82, tadalafil: 320). Interestingly, 82 patients with PAH have exposure data for more than 1 year (interim report LVGX).

The proportion of patients in the pivotal trial LVGY with any treatment emergent adverse event was higher in the tadalafil groups (any dose) as compared to placebo and also in the tadalafil 40 mg group

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with  respect  to  placebo.  Most  of  the  AEs  listed  in  the  LVGY  and  LVGX  studies  were  reported  in previously completed clinical studies for the ED indication. There was a dose-trend for AEs related to tadalafil from 41.5% for the 2.5 mg dose to 65.8% with the 40 mg dose. Most of these AEs were of mild to moderate intensity, and associated with PDE5 inhibition (i.e.: headache, back pain, dizziness, dyspepsia, flushing, myalgia, and nasal congestion).

In terms of deaths per 100 person-years, the mortality rate during Study LVGY was 2.2 subjects per 100 person-years for the combined tadalafil treatment group and 4.3 subjects per 100 person-years for placebo,  whereas  the  interim  mortality  rate  in  long-term  extension  Study  LVGX  was  4.6 per 100 person-years (combined dose group). These mortality rates are lower than those reported in the recent literature for patients with PAH. Median survival time has been estimated to be 3.6 to 5 years for  patients  with  PAH,  and  the  estimated/observed  1-year  survival  rates  have  been  quoted  as  about 84% (Barst, et al. 2004; Thenappan, et al. 2007; Humbert, et al. 2006).  The incident cases within the French registry (Humbert, et al. 2006) had a greater incidence of WHO Functional Class III and IV (poorer prognosis) than the mainly prevalent cases with mainly Functional Class II and III included in Study  LVGY,  which  may  explain  the  lower  mortality  rates  in  study  LVGY  as  compared  with literature.  This finding appears to be supported by Study LVGX, since 10 of the 11 subjects who died were WHO Functional Class III and 1 was WHO Functional Class IV at baseline.

SAEs rates, including SAEs of cardiovascular nature, were relatively low and similar in the placebo and sildenafil groups in the LVGY study. The incidence of bleeding events was similar in the placebo and tadalafil groups in study LVGY. With regard to the reported events of macular degeneration and cataract, most patients had concomitant predisposing risk factors for these ocular events. In addition, the rate of ocular events seen in study LVGX may be within that expected in the general population. A causal relationship between tadalafil and cases of cataracts cannot be confirmed nor ruled out with the information available. These issues have been addressed in the RMP and in the SPC.

Concomitant use of bosentan seemed to be associated with a trend of increased AEs as compared to placebo in study LVGY. In patients already being treated with bosentan, the addition of tadalafil did not  increase  total  number  of  AEs  compared  with  bosentan  plus  placebo  (study  LVGY)  or  between patients receiving tadalafil plus bosentan or tadalafil alone in study LVGX. The addition of a CYP3A4 inhibitor to placebo or tadalafil seems to be associated with an increase in the number of patients with AEs,  although  the  results  are  limited  due  to  the  small  proportion  of  patients  with  concomitant treatment with CYP3A4 inhibitors (studies LVGY and LVGX). An adequate drug interaction study program has been already performed with tadalafil and the SPC reflects the information available from these studies.

In  conclusion,  the  safety  profile  of  tadalafil  in  PAH  is  considered  acceptable  and  in  line  with  what would be expected from the ED indication. However, the MAH should submit PSURs every 6 months.

## 1.4 Risk Management Plan

An updated Risk Management Plan (RMP) was submitted in this variation application. The EU-RMP version 1.3 was agreed by the CHMP. A summary of the RMP is provided in the table below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety Concern                                 | Proposed Pharmacovigilance Activities (Routine and Additional)                       | Proposed Pharmacovigilance Activities (Routine and Additional)                    | Proposed Risk Minimization Activities (Routine and Additional)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Important Identified Risks For All Indications | Important Identified Risks For All Indications                                       | Important Identified Risks For All Indications                                    | Important Identified Risks For All Indications                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Priapism                                       | Activity  routine pharmacovigila nce activities  targeted follow-up investigations | Milestone  Not applicable (NA); ongoing  Ongoing activity on case-by-case basis | Activity  Specific label text in the SPC under Special Warnings and Precautions (Section 4.4) includes 'Patients who experience erections lasting 4 hours or more should be instructed to seek immediate medical assistance.'  Priapism and Prolonged erections are listed in the SPC as undesirable effects under Section 4.8.  The package leaflet, instructs patient to inform their doctor before taking ADCIRCA if they have 'any deformation of your penis, or unwanted or persistent erections lasting more                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Hypotension/ Increased Hypotensive Effect      | Activity  routine pharmacovigila nce activities  targeted surveillance term        | Milestone  NA; ongoing  Ongoing activity on case-by-case basis                  | than 4 hours.' Activity  Specific label text in the SPC under Special Warnings and Precautions (Section 4.4) includes 'As with other PDE5 inhibitors, tadalafil has systemic vasodilatory properties that may result in transient decreases in blood pressure. Physicians should carefully consider whether their patients with certain underlying conditions, such as severe left ventricular outflow obstruction, fluid depletion, autonomic hypotension or patients with resting hypotension, could be adversely affected by such vasodilatory effects.' and 'In patients who are taking alpha 1 blockers concomitant administration of ADCIRCA may lead to symptomatic hypotension in some patients. Therefore, the combination of tadalafil and doxazosin is not recommended.'  Also see SPC Section 4.5 (Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction) for Nitrates, Anti-hypertensives, and Alcohol.  Hypotension has been listed in the SPC as an undesirable effect under Section 4.8.  The package leaflet, instructs patient not to take ADCIRCA if they 'are taking any form of nitrates such as amyl nitrite…' or 'have low blood pressure.'  The package leaflet under Before you take ADCIRCA (Section 2), instructs patients to tell the doctor if they are taking, 'nitrates, alpha- blockers, or tablets for erectile dysfunction (PDE5 inhibitors)'  The package leaflet under Possible Side Effects (Section 4) includes, 'low blood pressure' |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Important Potential Risks                                                | Important Potential Risks                                                                                                 | Important Potential Risks                                                                          | Important Potential Risks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Important Potential Risks Identified for All Indications                 | Important Potential Risks Identified for All Indications                                                                  | Important Potential Risks Identified for All Indications                                           | Important Potential Risks Identified for All Indications                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Non-Arteritic Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy (NAION)                 | Activity  routine pharmacovigila nce activities  targeted follow-up investigations  Observational case crossover study | Milestone  NA; ongoing  Ongoing activity on case-by-case basis  Planned study; ongoing activity | Activity  Specific label text in the SPC under Contraindications (Section 4.3) includes 'ADCIRCA is contraindicated in patients who have loss of vision in one eye because of non- arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION), regardless of whether this episode was in connection or not with previous PDE5 inhibitor exposure.'  Specific label text in the SPC under Special Warnings and Precautions (Section 4.4) includes 'Visual defects and cases of NAION have been reported in connection with the intake of ADCIRCA and other PDE5 inhibitors. The patient should be advised that in case of sudden visual defect, to consult a physician immediately. Patients with known hereditary degenerative retinal disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa, were not included in the clinical trials, and use in these patients is not recommended.'  NAION, and sudden vision loss has been listed in the SPC as an undesirable effect under Section 4.8.  The package leaflet, instructs patient not to take ADCIRCA if they 'have ever had loss of vision - a condition described as 'stroke of the eye' (non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy - NAION).'  The package leaflet under Possible Side Effects (Section 4) includes, 'Partial, sudden, temporary or permanent decrease or loss of vision in one or |
| Sudden Hearing Loss                                                      | Activity  routine pharmacovigila nce activities  targeted follow-up investigations                                      | Milestone  NA; ongoing  Ongoing activity on case-by-case basis                                   | both eyes.' Activity  Sudden deafness has been listed in the SPC as an undesirable effect under Section 4.8.  The package leaflet under Possible Side Effects (Section 4) includes 'Sudden decrease or loss of hearing has also been reported.'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Important Potential Risks Identified for Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension | Important Potential Risks Identified for Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension                                                  | Important Potential Risks Identified for Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension                           | Important Potential Risks Identified for Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Increased uterine bleeding (menorrhagia/ vaginal hemorrhage)             | Activity  routine pharmacovigila nce activities  targeted surveillance term                                             | Milestone  NA; ongoing  Ongoing activity on case-by-case basis                                   | Activity  Increased uterine bleeding has been listed in the SPC as an undesirable effect under Section 4.8. A special footnote has been entered under the the Undesirable Effects table in the SPC to further explain that the term Increased uterine bleeding refers to reports of abnormal /excessive menstrual bleeding conditions such as menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, menometrorrhagia, or vaginal haemorrhage.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.5. Similarity with authorised orphan medicinal products

According  to  Article  3  of  the  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  847/2000,  for  the  purposes  of  the implementation  of  Article  8,  'Similar  active  substance'  means  an  identical  active  substance,  or  an active substance with the same principal molecular structural features (active moiety) and which acts via  the  same  mechanism.  Thus  the  similarity  assessment  takes  into  account  molecular  structural features, mechanism of action and therapeutic indication.

Having  considered  the  arguments  presented  by  the  MAH  of  Adcirca  on  17 October  2008,  it  is concluded that the mechanism of action of tadalafil is considered to be similar to that of sildenafil, and distinct from that described for bosentan, sitaxentan, iloprost and ambrisentan. However, tadalafil does not share the same principal molecular structural features as sildenafil, bosentan, sitaxentan, iloprost and ambrisentan and the differences in molecular structure are not only minor.

As  defined  in  Article  3  of  Commission  Regulation  (EC)  No  847/2000,  Adcirca  is  not  considered similar to the authorised orphan medicinal products Revatio, Tracleer, Thelin, Ventavis and Volibris.

Therefore, with reference to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No. 141/2000, the existence of any market exclusivity for Revatio, Tracleer, Thelin, Ventavis and Volibris in the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension, does not prevent the granting of the change of indication of Adcirca.

## 1.6. Benefit/Risk Assessment and Recommendation

Pulmonary  Arterial  Hypertension  (PAH)  is  a  rare  condition  that  is  characterised  by  vascular proliferation and remodelling of the small pulmonary arteries. PAH leads to an increase in pulmonary artery  pressure  and  pulmonary  vascular  resistance  and  eventually  right  ventricular  heart  failure  and death.

Currently  conventional  treatment  for  patients  with  primary  and  secondary  PAH  includes  calciumchannel  blockers,  anticoagulants,  diuretics  and  oxygen.  In  addition,  other  medicinal  products  are currently authorised in the European Union (EU) for the treatment of PAH, such as oral endothelin-1 receptor  antagonists,  intravenous,  inhaled  or  subcutaneous  prostacyclin  and  a  phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor. As a last alternative, a lung or heart/lung transplant may be offered to the patient.

## Benefits

The pivotal study has shown a statistically significant effect of tadalafil 40 mg versus placebo on the 6-Minute Walk test at week 16, the main endpoint defined in this application, which has already been used for the evaluation of PAH products until now. Additional comparisons at week 12 also showed a significant improvement in 6MWD with respect to placebo for 40 mg. The magnitude of the effect observed  in  the  subgroup  of  naïve  patients  without  concomitant  bosentan  (tadalafil  40  mg  versus 'pure'-placebo  patients:  44  m  improvement)  seems  to  be  similar  to  that  observed  with  other authorised  products  for  PAH  versus  placebo.  However  given  the  heterogenicity  of  the  population included in the pivotal trial (different PAH aetiologies and functional classes, naïve/pretreated patients with bosentan) the results on 6MWD in the overall study population (26 m median improvement) were of  a  small  magnitude  and  difficult  to  interpret.  The  MAH  provided  the  percentage  of  patients improving more than 10 percent in the 6MW test at week 16 compared to baseline in the absence of clinical deterioration as defined by the MAH (ITT analysis, LOCF) and/or the percent of patients with deterioration in the 6MW test by at least 15% with respect to baseline confirmed by two consecutive 6-MWT, performed on different days. This analysis confirmed the superiority of tadalafil 40 mg over placebo in the study population not receiving concomitant bosentan.

The results on the 6MW test and ancillary responders' analyses were inconclusive for the subgroup of patients pretreated with bosentan, probably due to an identified pharmacokinetic interaction between tadalafil  and  bosentan,  leading  to  a  lower  tadalafil  systemic  exposure,  and  therefore,  this  issue  was acknowledged in the SPC. With respect to the aetiology, the subgroup analysis shows a significant effect of tadalafil on 6MWD both in patients with idiopathic and connective-tissue disease pulmonary

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

hypertension like in other. Unlike other PAH products tadalafil showed a greater effect on connectivetissue disease than on idiopathic PAH. Regarding functional classes, only a modest effect of tadalafil on 6MWD was observed on the patients classified as functional classes I and II what is in line with previous findings for other PAH products.

## Risks

There  are  no  major  non-clinical  safety  issues  that  could  preclude  the  marketing  authorization  of tadalafil for the treatment of PAH. In relation to clinical safety the AEs reported were similar to those described with sildenafil, the other PDE5 inhibitor authorised for this indication. Overall the safety profile  of  tadalafil  is  considered  acceptable  and  in  line  with  what  would  be  expected  from  the  ED indication.

## Balance and Recommendation

The benefit risk assessment for Adcirca in the proposed indication is considered positive.

## Changes to the Product Information

The following indication is agreed:

'ADCIRCA  is  indicated  for  the  treatment  of  pulmonary  arterial  hypertension  (PAH)  classified  as WHO functional class II and III, to improve exercise capacity (see section 5.1).

Efficacy has been shown in idiopathic PAH (IPAH) and in PAH related to collagen vascular disease.'

In order to allow more suitable pack sizes for the use in the PAH indication, the pack sizes of Adcirca have been consequently changed from 2, 4, 8 and 12 tablets to 28 and 56 tablets.

As a consequence, changes were made to sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.8, 4.9, 5.1, 5.2 and 6.5 of the SPC, Annex IIIA and the Package Leaflet.

In  addition,  the  conditions  or  restrictions  regarding  supply  and  use  imposed  on  the  marketing authorisation  holder  in  Annex  II  have  been  changed  to  'Medicinal  product  subject  to  restricted medical prescription'. A statement to that effect has also been added to section 4.2 of the SPC where it is  indicated that treatment should only be initiated and monitored by a physician experienced in the treatment of PAH.

## User consultation

User  testing  for  the  Package  Leaflet  proposed  in  the  PAH  indication  was  included  in  the  variation application. It was conducted in two rounds of testing in 2x10 subjects, plus a focus test in a further 10 subjects (total 30 subjects) to meet the pass criteria for readability testing for all 16 questions posed (correct  answer  by  at  least  90%  of  the  subject;  'MHRA  Guidance  on  the  User  Testing  of  Package Leaflets', June 2005, updated March 2007; 'Draft EC guideline on the readability of the Label and Package Leaflet of Medicinal Products for Human Use, September 2006).

In round 1, information for 15 of 16 questions was found by at least 90% of the subjects. Question 9 was answered by only 80% of the subjects and was rephrased for the Round 2.

In round 2, the rephrased question 9 ('If you already have problems with your blood pressure, what should you do before taking these tablets?') had a positive impact on subject's understanding as 19/20 (95%) subjects gave the model answer for the desired subsection.

The  package  leaflet  for  Adcirca  was  therefore  considered  to  meet  the  pass  criteria  for  readability testing for all 16 questions posed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## II. CONCLUSION

On 22 October 2009 the CHMP considered this Type II variation to be acceptable and agreed on the amendments  to  be  introduced  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics,  Annex  II,  Labelling  and Package Leaflet.