---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:18:19
document_pages: 27
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/focetria-h-c-710-sw-0024-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: focetria-h-c-710-sw-0024-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 6.2116731
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 17:24:05.046813
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

24 June 2010 EMA/CHMP/326579/2010 Evaluation of Medicines for Human Use

Medicinal product no longer authorised CHMP assessment report for the re-assessment of the specific obligations and the benefit/risk profile Invented name/Name: Focetria International non-proprietary name/Common name: Influenza vaccine (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted) a/california/7/2009 (H1N1)v like strain (x-181) AUTHORISED UNDER EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES EMEA/H/C/710/SW/24 Indication summary (as last approved): Prophylaxis of pandemic influenza in an officially declared pandemic situation Marketing Authorisation Holder: Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics S.r.l. CHMP Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted.

<!-- image -->

| Indication summary (as last approved):   | Prophylaxis of pandemic influenza in an officially declared pandemic situation   |
|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Marketing Authorisation Holder:          | Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics S.r.l.                                         |

7 Westferry Circus ● Canary Wharf ● London E14 4HB ● United Kingdom

Telephone

+44 (0)20 7418 8400

Facsimile

+44 (0)20 7418 8613

E-mail

info@ema.europa.eu

Website

www.ema.europa.eu

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I RECOMMENDATION

Based on the review of the data submitted by the MAH as evidence of compliance with the specific obligations  and  having  re-assessed  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  the  medicinal  product  further  to  the provision of comprehensive data on efficacy and safety such that the grounds set out in Part II.6 of Annex I  of  Directive  2001/83/EC  are  no  longer  applying  to  maintain  the  MA  under  Article  14(8)  of Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  the  CHMP  recommends  to  change  the  status  of  the  marketing authorisation outside the scope of Art. 14(8) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 for Focetria (Influenza vaccine (H1N1)v (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted).

This  implied  that,  pursuant  to  article  14  (8)  of  regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  the  Marketing Authorisation  Holder  (MAH)  committed  to  complete  ongoing  studies,  or  to  conduct  new  studies,  as listed under Specific Obligations (SOBs) in Annex II.C of the MA. Therefore, the recommendation to grant  the  MA  under  exceptional  circumstances  was  made  on  the  basis  of  the  MAH  undertaking  to submit  the  2  Specific  Obligations  (SOBs)  and  16  Follow-up  Measures  (FUMs)  listed  in  the  Letter  of Undertaking dated 22 February 2007.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  CHMP  in  making  this recommendation  has  taken  into  consideration  that  comprehensive information  on  clinical  safety  and  efficacy  have  now  been  provided  and  that  specific  procedures  in particular concerning safety are no longer required such that the grounds to maintain the licence under exceptional circumstances are no longer considered to apply. In  addition  the  CHMP,  having  reviewed  all  relevant  clinical  data  within  the  context  of  Article  21  of Commission  Regulation  (EC)  1234/2008,  considers  that  adequate  information  has  been  supplied  to recommend a change of the indication outside of the restricted clinical setting of a pandemic and that the  temporary  and  exceptional  nature  concerning  the  approval  of  the  variation  introducing  the pandemic strain change no longer applies. As a result of the above the recommended indication should read as follows: Prophylaxis of influenza caused by A(H1N1) 2009 virus (see section 4.4 of the SmPC). Focetria should be used in accordance with Official Guidance thus allowing for further use of vaccine within the EU regardless of whether or not the current WHO pandemic phase is maintained or altered during the coming year (see section III.3 for more details). II BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT Focetria is an inactivated monovalent H1N1v influenza vaccine, adjuvanted with MF59C.1. The CHMP recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation for Focetria under exceptional circumstances, because at the time point of authorisation the stage of knowledge of comprehensive scientific  information  required  for  the  vaccine  containing  the  actual  pandemic  strain  could  not  be gathered. The  reason  for  the  CHMP's  recommendation  that  a  MA  under  exceptional  circumstances  should  be granted initially  was  due  to  the  provision  of  limited  safety  and  immunogenicity  data  generated  with vaccine  construct  including  potential  influenza  pandemic  (mock-up)  strain,  A(H5N1).  This  A(H5N1) strain was not circulating in humans and the mock-up vaccine was not intended for use until, firstly the specific  influenza  virus  strain  would  be  identified  and  included  in  the  vaccine  and,  secondly  the influenza pandemic officially declared (as described in the Annex II.B of the MA).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The initial indication for use of Focetria was as follows:

'Prophylaxis of influenza in an officially declared pandemic situation (see sections 4.2 and 5.1).

Pandemic influenza vaccine should be used in accordance with Official Guidance.'

Following the onset of the (H1N1)v pandemic and the declaration of WHO Phase 6 in June 2009, the MAH  applied  for  a  variation  (PU-05)  to  change  the  pandemic  vaccine  strain  composition  from A/Vietnam/1194/2004  (H5N1)  to  A/California/7/2009  (H1N1)v  like  strain  (X-179A)  recommendation for the approval of the PU-05 was adopted by the CHMP on 24 September 2009.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The revised indication for use of Focetria was as follows: 'Prophylaxis  of  influenza  in  an  officially  declared  pandemic  situation  (see  sections  4.2  and  5.1). Focetria should be used in accordance with Official Guidance.' Therefore,  the  variation(s)  to  the  terms  of  the  marketing  authorisation  for  the  medicinal  product \"Focetria - A/Viet Nam/1194/2004 (H5N1) virus surface inactivated antigen\" should exceptionally be accepted, on a temporary basis, in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1085/2003, and Decision C(2007)2025 should be amended accordingly. The  strain  change  recommendation  was  made  from  A(H5N1)  to  (H1N1)v  on  the  basis  of  the  MAH undertaking 6 Specific Obligations (SOBs) which cover for the 2 SOBs previously adopted, as well as 5 additional  Follow-up  Measures  (FUMs)  that  were  listed  in  the  Letter  of  Undertaking  dated  24 September 2009. It should be noted that at time of the variation to include the (H1N1)v strain in the A(H5N1) mock-up vaccine, the CHMP was confronted with an unprecedented situation to recommend the authorisation of a vaccine to be used in a mass vaccination campaign with limited data in accordance with Article 8 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1085/2004 (repealed by Article 21 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1234/2008). Therefore at that time CHMP identified a series of Specific Obligations  to be addressed by MAH. It  should  also  be  noted  that  some  of  these  measures  exceeded  the  standard  pre-authorisation requirements  established  for  seasonal  influenza  and  other  vaccines  but  both  were  considered necessary from a public health perspective in the unprecedented circumstances of the Pandemic. The application for a change of the status of the  Marketing Authorisation outside the scope of Art. 14 (8) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 was received on 16 April 2010 and contained: -Listings of SOBs and FUMs for which full or partial responses have been made to date -Listing of variations completed and ongoing to date -List of outstanding issues in the revised Letter of Undertaking dated 22 April 2010. -The current Product Information showing all the changes that have been implemented thus far.

This re-assessment of the benefit risk of Focetria has reviewed the status of fulfilment of the original and additional SOBs/FUMs based on the extensive experience gained during the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## III SCIENTIFIC  DATA  PROVIDED  BY  THE  MARKETING  AUTHORISATION  HOLDER  SINCE THE GRANTING OF THE MA UNDER EXCEPTIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES

## III.1 List of all Specific Obligations and Follow-up measures submitted since the granting of the MA under exceptional circumstances

In  light  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation  under  exceptional  circumstances  in  the  EU  and  pursuant  to Article 14(8) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 the MAH agreed to provide CHMP with responses to 6 Specific Obligations (SOBs). These have been addressed as follows (please see the Appendix and the individual assessment reports for full details).

<!-- image -->

Study V111\\_04 was designed to assess the immunogenicity and safety of 2 injections of 7.5 μ g HA A/H1N1 2009 in adult and elderly subjects previously exposed to 2009/10 northern hemisphere (NH) formulation of seasonal influenza vaccine and in those not yet vaccinated.

Medicinal product no longer authorised III.1.1. SOB Clinical SOBs The clinical SOBs concerned reporting of safety and immunogenicity data from clinical studies with the pandemic vaccine and required reporting of post-dose 1 and post-dose 2 data (with or without longerterm follow-up and responses to further doses, according to individual protocols) from the ongoing and planned studies that were listed at the time of the strain change variation. In most of the cases the data were provided as variations in order to insert the relevant information in the SmPC. SOB 027 SOB27 concerned studies V111\\_02 and V111\\_04 performed in adult and elderly subjects. Study V111\\_02 was a randomised, single-blind, dose-ranging study in adult and elderly subjects. The objectives of the study were to identify the preferred vaccine formulation, dosage and schedule of the egg-derived (H1N1)v monovalent vaccine in healthy adults. On 12 October 2009 the MAH submitted variation II/11 to update sections 4.2, 4.4, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product  characteristics  to  reflect  immunogenicity  and  safety  results  of  study  V111\\_02. Based on the post-dose 1 data, inclusion of advice regarding the possibility of using a single dose in adults aged 18-60 years was deemed appropriate in the SPC. Further clarity regarding the posology recommendation was made in the scope of variation II 15 submitted on 17 November 2009 with a commission decision on the 27 November 2009. Considerations were made on the possibility of using a single half dose, however CHMP agreed that this posology was not appropriate. Please refer to the AR of variation II/11 that has already been issued for details of the data provided. This variation was approved on 11 November 2009 by the European Commission.

On 13 November 2009 the MAH submitted variation II/013 to update section 4.5 of the summary of product characteristics regarding administration of Focetria with seasonal influenza vaccine based on results post-dose 1 obtained from study V111\\_04.

The results in adults aged 18 to 60 years indicated that Focetria may be administered concomitantly with seasonal influenza vaccine. These  results also indicated that previous administration of adjuvanted  or  non-adjuvanted  seasonal  vaccines  and  Focetria  did  not  interfere  with  the  immune

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

response to Focetria. Please refer to the AR of variation II/13 that has already been issued for details of the data provided.

This variation was approved on 27 November 2009 by the European Commission.

On 29 January 2010 the MAH submitted variation II/20 to update sections 4.2, 4.5, 4.8 and 5.1 of the SPC to include safety and immunogenicity information following assessment of the H1N1 data available with Focetria in children, adults and the elderly.

Medicinal product no longer authorised This  update  was  based  on  further  results  obtained  from  studies  V111\\_02,  V111\\_04  and  V111\\_03 (please refer to SOB 028). Regarding study V111\\_02, the post-dose 2 data did not allow to modify the previous  recommendations  of  administering  one  full  dose  in  adults  aged  18-60  and  two  full  doses above  60.  With  regards  to  study  V111\\_04,  all  data  presented,  which  included  post-dose  2  results, supported  the  previous  observation  that  Focetria  may  be  co-administered  with  non  adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine. The assessment of study V111\\_03 with a view to establishing any impact on posology were made in parallel  in  the  context  of  variation  II/19  (please  refer  to  SOB  028).  However  available  safety  and immunogenicity data from study V111\\_03 was included in the SmPC within the scope of II 20 in order to make it available to prescribers. Please refer to the AR of variation II/20 that has already been issued for details of the data provided. Following  variation  II/20  which  received  a  positive  opinion  on  17  February  2010,  SOB  027  was considered fulfilled. SOB 028 SOB 028 concerns study V111\\_03, a randomized, single-blind, dose-ranging study in infants, children and  adolescents  from  6  months  to  17  years  of  age  aimed  to  evaluate  immunogenicity,  safety  and tolerability  of  different  formulations  of  adjuvanted  and  non-adjuvanted  egg-derived,  inactivated (H1N1)v monovalent influenza virus vaccine in healthy subjects. On 17 November 2009 the MAH submitted variation II/015 to update sections 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product characteristics to reflect the available immunogenicity and safety clinical trial data available in children and adolescents, as requested by the CHMP. Variation II/015 was approved on 27 November 2009 by the European Commission. Preliminary  results  from  study  V111\\_03  showed  that  the  CHMP  criteria  were  met,  and  in  particular results  were  considered  relevant  for  children  and  adolescents  aged  9-17  years.  The  data  presented were in favour of the use of a single full dose of Focetria in subjects aged 9-17 years. This was in line with the results seen in adults.

On 16 December 2010 the MAH submitted variation II/18 to update section 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product characteristics regarding administration of Focetria to children of 3 to 8 years of age  based  on  results  from  study  V111\\_03.  Data  at  day  22  and  day  43  in  cohort  1  (children  and adolescents  aged  9-17  years  of  age)  and  cohort  2  (children  aged  3-8  years  of  age)  were  provided within  this  variation.  The  results  obtained  were  considered  relevant  for  an  update  of  the  posology related to children aged 3-8 years. The data presented were reassuring regarding the effect of a single full dose of Focetria in subjects aged 3-8 years. However, preliminary data indicated that there was a further immune response to a second dose. Please refer to the AR of variation II/18 that has already been issued for details of the data provided.

This variation was approved on 23 December 2009 by the European Commission.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

On the 8 January 2010, the MAH submitted variation II/19 to update section 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product characteristics regarding administration of Focetria to children of 12 to 35 months of age based on results from cohort 3 (1 to 3 years) and cohort 4 (6 to 11 months) of study V111\\_03.

Variation II/19 was reviewed in parallel to this procedure. In light of the availability of all the relevant data on the different age groups concerning immunogenicity and safety the CHMP made considerations on the whole data set in order to give a posology recommendation in children. The CHMP reviewed the data on children aged 3-8 years in light of the availability of the full data set in this age group and the overall data set in children. In this age group all CHMP criteria were met after a single dose of the adjuvanted  vaccine.  A  further  immune  response  to  a  second  dose,  in  terms  of  GMT  values,  was observed. The clinical significance of this increase is not known at present. It is the CHMP opinion that overall data on immunogenicity support the use of a single dose of the adjuvanted vaccine in the agestratum 3-8 years, in line with the current posology recommended for influenza seasonal vaccines. The relevant SmPC sections have been updated to reflect the CHMP opinion. Of note the posology for 3-8 years old is in line with that of the existing posology for 9-17 year olds.

It should be noted that the CHMP in 2003 foresaw the need for effectiveness data, in the context of the development of mock-up vaccines to be used in a pandemic situation. It should also be acknowledged that  this  goes  beyond  standard  requirements  for  seasonal  influenza  and  certain  other  vaccines, whereby immunogenicity data serves as a surrogate marker of efficacy for the assessment of the initial authorisation and clinical data on effectiveness is collected in the post marketing phase. The approach taken for the pandemic vaccines was at the time considered to be appropriate in consideration of all the uncertainties to be faced in a Pandemic context e.g. the virulence of the agent concerned, use in naive population sub-groups and anticipated high morbidity and mortality rates etc.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In the 12 to 35 months age stratum immunogenicity results for the adjuvanted vaccine met all three CHMP criteria as early as 3 weeks after the first vaccination, achieving the HI seroprotection threshold of 1:40. Final  data  related  to  the  effect  of  the  second  dose  in  the  age  group  12  to  35  months  have  been assessed  as  well  as  overall  immunogenicity  data  in  children  aged  6-11  months.  Immunogenicity provided  by  one  full  dose  of  Focetria  has  been  shown  to  induce  a  satisfactory  immune  response, achieving  the  HI  seroprotection  threshold  of 1:40.  A  further  dose  has  been  shown  to  augment  the immune response. This information has been mentioned in the relative sections of the SmPC and the PL has been updated accordingly. Please refer to the AR of variation II/19 for details of the data provided. All critical clinical data post dose 1 and post dose 2 are now submitted from study V111\\_03. Long term ancillary data are expected in August 2011. Therefore this obligation is considered sufficiently fulfilled and it can be perused in context of a FUM. SOB 029 SOB  29  concerns  the  commitment  to  submit  the  protocol  and  provide  the  results  of  the  clinical effectiveness  studies  carried  out  in  accordance  with  the  study  protocols  published  by  ECDC.  PASS studies covering both safety and efficacy are being carried out to address this commitment (see also SOB 030). In fulfilment of this SOB the protocol has been submitted and agreed upon by CHMP and the study is ongoing.  An interim report is expected by August 2010.

Overall,  the  vaccine  has  shown  to  be  highly  immunogenic  and  besides  this,  reassuring  data  from independent evaluation of field H1N1 vaccine effectiveness suggests that vaccination campaigns have been effective. The CHMP considers therefore that any remaining data can be collected in the context of a FUM.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacovigilance SOBs

It should be noted that the listed Pharmacovigilance SOBs exceed standard pre-authorisation requirements for seasonal influenza and other vaccines.

## SOB 030

SOB 30 concerns the commitment to submit the protocol and the results of a prospective cohort safety study in  at  least  9,000  patients  in  different  age  groups,  including  immunocompromised  subjects,  in accordance with the protocol submitted with the Risk Management Plan.

This SOB represents a commitment to implement a pregnancy registry. In fulfilment of this SOB the protocol has been submitted and reviewed by the CHMP and the registry has been established.

Medicinal product no longer authorised PASS studies are being carried out to address these commitments (SOB 029 and SOB 030). Study V111\\_05  is    entitled  'Observational  cohort  study  for  the  evaluation  of  safety  and  effectiveness  of adjuvanted,  egg-derived  inactivated  novel  swine  origin  A/H1N1  subunit  pandemic  influenza  vaccine after the onset of the pandemic'. In fulfilment of this SOB the MAH has submitted the protocol which has been reviewed by CHMP and the study is ongoing. The MAH has recently submitted data on 8274 enrolled subjects in this study collected through active surveillance  in  the  3-week  post-vaccination.  Additional  data  from  study  V111\\_09,  a  prospective observational  study  of  safety  and  occurrence  of  influenza-like  illness  following  administration  of Focetria, has also been provided including a report on 1000 enrolled patients. The enrolled paediatric population in these studies is less than expected due to immunisation policy at Member state level, in particular for the study V111\\_05.  Approximately 1100 out of more than 4000 planned children have been studied in study V111\\_05 and 10 out of 1000 enrolled subjects in V111\\_09 study are children. In general, the adverse events patterns observed in these studies are similar and can be considered in line  with  the  post  marketing  surveillance  data.  Overall,  no  particular  new  safety  concern  has  been identified from these interim reports from the two PASS studies. Taking into consideration that the protocol has been submitted and agreed by CHMP and that the study is ongoing and that data received to date via interim reports and also safety data generated through post  marketing  surveillance  are  extensive  and    reassuring  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  remaining data from this study can further  be pursued as a FUM. It is of note that the requirements for this PASS study goes beyond current standard requirements for safety data for standard seasonal influenza vaccines and was requested  in consideration of the exceptional circumstances of a mass vaccination campaign  in  the  context  of  a  pandemic  with  an  unknown  future  development  based  on  the  actual epidemiological  development  of  the  2009  H1N1  pandemic  and  having  considered  the  totality  of  the adult  data  as  described  above  the  CHMP  considers  that  any  remaining  data  can  be  collected  in  the context of a FUM. SOB 031

The  MAH  has  provided  a  first  report  and  more  recently  a  second  interim  report  on  1324  women enrolled.

According  to  the  latest  weekly  update  (9  April  2010)  1534  subjects  were  enrolled  in  the  registry. Among 1478 recorded subjects (666 vaccinated and 787 unvaccinated) 51 SAE reports were received (28 vaccinated and 23 were unvaccinated). The study is ongoing, although the accrual rate seems to be  slowed  down  when  compared  with  the  accrual  plan  proposed  by  the  MAH.  Overall  from

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

pharmacovigilance monitoring and data collected so far from the registries no safety signal has been detected.

Overall taking into consideration the protocol has been submitted and agreed by CHMP and the study is  ongoing  and  also  taking  into  consideration  that  that  these  data  are  not  normally  requested,  the CHMP considered that these data can be pursued as a FUM.

## SOB 032

Medicinal product no longer authorised This  SOB  represents  the  commitment  to  establish  the  mechanism  to  promptly  investigate  issues affecting  the  benefit-risk  balance  of  the  vaccine.  The  MAH  has  established  routine  and  enhanced Pharmacovigilance  activities  both  described  in  the  risk  management  plan  and  including  weekly signalling, evaluation of signals, monthly S-PSUR. In addition for investigating emerging benefit risk issues after the start of the vaccination campaign the MAH has provided different sources that will be use to investigate issues affecting the benefit risk balance of the vaccine. The method used to analyze the  different  databases  as  well  as  the  protocols  of  the  studies  have  been  reviewed  and  considered acceptable by the CHMP. Conclusion on SOBs The Specific Obligations concerning the evaluation of safety and effectiveness as introduced during the initial  authorisation  and  the  variation  in  order  to  introduce  the  pandemic  (H1N1)v  strain  have  been sufficiently addressed to conclude on the maintenance of a positive risk/benefit for the use of Focetria in the current epidemiological situation. The CHMP considers that the MAH has now provided sufficient comprehensive  safety  and  efficacy  data  such  that  grounds  to  maintain  the  MA  under  exceptional circumstances are no longer applicable. In addition specific procedures concerning safety are no longer required in context Article 14 (8) of regulation (EC) No 726/2004 as these can be achieved in context of the conventional Risk Management Plan. III.1.2. Follow-Up Measures Please see the documents in the Appendix for a full listing of completed, ongoing and unfulfilled FUMs. Please consult the separate assessment reports that have already been issued for full details. Quality FUMs Follow-up measure fulfilled FUM 3 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine)

The MAH committed to complete the stability study for the H5N1 strain to support the stability claim for the Monovalent Pooled Harvest of a shelf-life of 1 year at 2-8° C, and to report any confirmed outof-specification results or unexpected trends. Furthermore, the results of the SDS-PAGE - obtained at 0 and  12  months  were  to  be  provided.  On  18  October  2007  the  CHMP  concluded  that  the  MAH  had adequately addressed the request and that a shelf-life of one year at 2-8° C for the Monovalent Pooled Harvest was acceptable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## FUM 4 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine)

The MAH was requested to provide data on compatibility of the components of the vials with the final product.  On  30  June  2008,  the  MAH  provided  the  requested  information.  The  compatibility  of  the components of the vial with the final product was discussed by the MAH adequately and the stability data provided (18 months for vials and 24 months for syringes) confirmed the good stability of the product.

## FUM 5 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine)

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  MAH  committed  to  develop  a  suitable  procedure  and  specification  for  polydispersity  to  further assure  the  consistency  of  the  Drug  Product.  The  MAH  position  that  the  current  procedures  and  the specifications for the Drug Product were sufficient and complied with International Standards was well documented and endorsed by the CHMP on 24 April 2008. FUM 6 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The MAH committed to complete the stability study for the H5N1 strain to support the proposed shelf life of 1 year at 2-8° C for the Drug Product in pre-filled syringes and in mono- and multi-dose vials to report any confirmed out-of-specification results or unexpected trends. Based on the data provided by the  MAH,  the  CHMP  concluded  on  24  April  2008  that  a  shelf-life  of  18  months  at  2-8°  C  may  be assigned to the H5N1 Drug Product in pre-filled syringes and that a shelf life of 12 months at 2-8° C may  be  assigned  to  the  influenza  Drug  Product  in  mono-dose  vials  and  in  multi-dose  vials.  The currently approved shelf life for pre-filled syringes and multi-dose vials is 12 months at 2-8° C. FUM 26 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The MAH committed to provide the final report concerning the re-validation of ability of formaldehyde to inactivate avian leucosis virus. Based on the data provided by the MAH, the CHMP considered that this FUM was fulfilled on 20 November 2008. FUM 33 The MAH was requested to provide the revalidation report on the SRD assay performed with the new reference antigen (X-179). On 19 November 2009 CHMP concluded that the data provided indicated that the SRD test was validated for the evaluation of X-179 (H1N1) influenza vaccine antigen content. FUM 41 The MAH committed to provide additional data on in-use stability of the MDV. The results provided regarding the 'worst case scenario', where most of the doses were withdrawn within the first 8 hours, indicated  that  the  product  was  within  specifications  after  24  hours.  Thus,  the  FUM  41  has  been satisfactorily addressed by the MAH and the commitment from variation II-16 to support the 24h inuse shelf life was considered fulfilled by the CHMP in April. Follow-up measure partially fulfilled/ongoing evaluation FUM 7 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine)

The  MAH  committed  to  present  proposals  for  alternative  and  faster  assays  for  testing  extraneous agents on influenza seed virus. A request for a delay to submit this FUM was submitted on 16 March 2009 and based on the justification provided the request was considered acceptable by the CHMP. The submission is planned for December 2010..

## FUM 8 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine)

The MAH committed to present the results of the HPLC assay for the determination of the HA content. Based on results, the HPLC assay developed by the MAH was considered suitable for the determination of the HA content of seasonal influenza vaccines.  However, the MAH was requested to provide further

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

information  regarding  the  validation  of  the  method.  The  responses  of  the  MAH  are  awaited  for December 2010.

As  FUM  7  and  8  are  related  to  the  H5N1  mock-up  vaccine,  they  are  considered  more  relevant  for Foclivia, Novartis Influenza vaccine H5N1 (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted), and are no more requested for Focetria (H1N1)v.

## Follow-up measures currently under evaluation

FUM 43

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH committed to provide stability data, both accelerated and at 2-8°c for X-179 derived vaccines and for X-181 derived vaccines. Data on accelerated and real time stability, both on X-179 and X-181 derived vaccines are been provided and evaluated as they became available. Non-clinical FUMs Follow-up measure fulfilled All non-clinical FUMs have been fulfilled by the MAH. FUM 34 Following variation II/05 and in order to confirm the immunogenicity of Focetria vaccine formulations, the MAH was asked to present the final report of the Focetria mouse study n° BB-0910. This study performed  in  mice  aimed  at  confirming  the  immunogenicity  of  vaccine  formulation  containing A(H1N1)v  antigens  made  using  the  Focetria  process,  with  and  without  MF59  adjuvant,  when administered using different regimens. The CHMP was of the view that the report provided confirmed the immunogenicity of Focetria formulation in mice even after a single dose. FUM 38 The  MAH  submitted  an  update  of  the  non  clinical  sections  with  data  related  to  the  dossier  of  the monovalent influenza vaccine Aflunov (surface antigen, inactivated, influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF59C.1).  The  non-clinical  package  for  Focetria  was  found  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  relevant pertinent guidelines. Clinical FUMs Follow-up measures fulfilled FUM 9 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The MAH committed to perform a study evaluating Cell-Mediated Immunity (CMI) response to H5N1 vaccine and to submit a final report.

The MAH submitted a clinical study report for the trial V87P2, including a 6-month follow-up after the booster vaccination. Study V87P2 was a phase II, randomised, controlled, observer-blind, single-centre study  with  the  aim  to  evaluate  CMI,  immunogenicity  and  safety  of  two  injections,  administered  3 weeks apart, and a booster injection 6 months after the second injection, of two Fluad- H5N1 influenza vaccines  containing  7.5 μ g  or  15 μ g  of  H5N1  influenza  antigen  and  of  a  non-adjuvanted  influenza vaccine containing 15 μ g of H5N1 influenza antigen, in adults.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The primary aim was to investigate CMI after six months from the priming and following the booster dose. Results showed a strong CMI response for the adjuvanted formulation and enhancement of the response following the booster dose.

Observations on safety were considered of limited value due to the small number of study subjects. Nevertheless,  these  observations  contributed  to  the  total  amount  of  information  to  be  evaluated  in RMP and PSURs.

FUM 9 was considered fulfilled by the CHMP.

Medicinal product no longer authorised FUM 10 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The  MAH  committed  to  review  and  re-code  the  data  available  from  clinical  studies  used  for development of Focetria using the same MedDRA coding system on adverse events. The MAH provided the list of AEs previously coded with the COSTART Thesaurus recoded by MedDRA for  all  concerned studies on 30 June 2008. The MAH also provided comments on the frequencies of events. After reviewing the data, the CHMP considered the FUM fulfilled. FUM 13 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The MAH committed to provide the final study report and to assess the persistency of antibody titres among vaccines at 6 and 12 months from vaccination with Focetria H5N1 (study V87P1). Study V87P1 was a phase II, randomized, controlled, observer-blind, multi-centre study that aimed to compare the two initial formulations of vaccines including different amount of H5N1 antigen in adults and elderly subjects. Following the submission of the results of this study, the CHMP concluded that a substantial immune response and a satisfactory safety profile of the pandemic vaccine Focetria H5N1 were confirmed. Follow-up measures partially fulfilled FUM 12 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The MAH committed to provide a detailed plan indicating the general strategy and the clinical trials to be performed in children and risk groups with Focetria H5N1. The MAH provided information on the strategy for clinical trials in children and risk group. Further information related to the studies protocols was then requested. However, taking into consideration the WHO Phase 6 declaration in June 2009, other studies have been performed in children with the current (H1N1)v vaccine. FUM 14 (H5N1 Mock-up vaccine) The  MAH  committed  to  explore  alternative  and/or  condensed  vaccination  schedules  with  Focetria H5N1. In order to comply with this commitment, the MAH submitted the protocol of study V87P12, a phase III, randomized, open-label, single-centre study to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of a FLUAD-H5N1  influenza  vaccine  in  adult  subjects  using  four  different  vaccination  schedules.  The protocol was considered in line with the CHMP guidelines. The results of the study have been submitted and are under assessment.

<!-- image -->

As FUM 12 and 14 are related to the H5N1 mock-up vaccine, they are considered more relevant for Foclivia, Novartis Influenza vaccine H5N1 (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted), and are no more requested for Focetria (H1N1)v.

## FUM 36

The  MAH  committed  to  submit  the  dates  for  which  the  final  H1N1  clinical  study  reports  will  be available. The timelines provided by the MAH were discussed by the CHMP and further information was requested on 18 February 2010.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## FUM 40

Following  variation  II/11,  the  MAH  committed  to  provide  the  validation  reports  for  HI  and  MN  for H1N1v.

The MAH provided validation reports for both testes which fulfil several validation criteria. However, there were some other parameters and issues which should also have been taken into consideration for future serological determinations and a Request for Supplementary Information was addressed to the MAH  on  18  March  2010.  The  MAH  was  requested  to  provide  additional  data  as  regards  the  2009 pandemic H1N1 strain. Since the influenza vaccines for the season 2010-2011 will include the 2009 pandemic H1N1v strain, and the MAH will perform a small clinical trial to assess immunogenicity of the new formulation, serological assays should be re-assessed on that occasion, at the latest. The MAH was also requested to include the re-testing of seronegative children sera from Focetria clinical trials. Provided the requested information, the FUM 40 can be considered fulfilled.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Follow-up measure currently under evaluation FUM 35 Following variation II/05, the MAH was requested to provide the final study report of study V87P13 on data collected with the Focetria H5N1. This study was a phase III, randomized, controlled, observerblind,  multicentre  study  to  evaluate  the  safety,  tolerability  and  immunogenicity  of  two  doses  of  a Fluad-H5N1 in adult and elderly subjects. Furthermore, the MAH committed to provide a completed pooled analysis of safety data for the H5N1 mock up vaccine. Overall,  3481  subjects  (3089  non-elderly  adults  and  392  elderly  adults)  were  enrolled  in  the  four Fluad-H5N1 studies included in the pooled Fluad-H5N1 safety analysis. The pooled Fluad-H5N1 safety set consisted of 3011 non-elderly adults aged 18 to 60 years and 387 elderly adults aged &gt;60 years. Data provided in this analysis confirmed the well known safety profile for both 7.5 µg Fluad-H5N1 and 15 µg Fluad-H5N1 groups. No new concern was raised from this analysis.  The Final Report including data at six months follow up and responses to Rapporteur's comments is awaited by 30 April 2010. Pharmacovigilance FUMs Follow-up measures fulfilled FUM 15 The MAH committed to update the risk management plan submitted with the MAA of Focetria taking into  account  the  CHMP  recommendations  for  the  Pharmacovigilance  plan  for  Pandemic  Influenza vaccines. FUM 16 The  MAH  committed  to  present  the  pandemic  vaccine  monitoring  board  in  the  first  PSUR.  This monitoring board was presented by the MAH and considered acceptable by the CHMP. FUM 17

Whenever the core CHMP recommendation for the pandemic influenza vaccines would be updated the MAH committed to update the pharmacovigilance plan.

## sPSUR

At the time of the MA, the MAH committed to provide sPSUR on a monthly basis. Six monthly sPSURs have already been submitted by the MAH. The SmPC was updated within variation II/18. The SmPC updating related to II/20 variation is currently under EC approval.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  marketing  Authorisation  holder  will  continue  to  submit  periodic  safety  update  reports  on  a  6month  cycle.  The  MAH  has  also  committed  to  submit  on  a  monthly  basis  a  frequency  table  of  all spontaneous cases, a frequency table of all spontaneous adverse reactions and a line listing of Adverse events of special interest.

## Follow-up measures partially fulfilled

## FUM 37

Following variation II/05, the MAH committed to provide an update of the RMP. An updated version (1.7) of the RMP has been submitted on 13 April 2010 and is under evaluation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised III.1.3. Variations Please see the documents in the Appendix for a full listing of completed and ongoing variations. Variations already completed are as follows: H5N1 Mock-up vaccine Quality Variation: II/0001 On 23 July 2009 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion to allow changes to the Drug Substance and Drug Product already approved for the MF59-adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine (Fluad), with the aim to increase flexibility in production and logistic. These changes included additional buildings at the Siena site, improvements of operative flows of the Bulk Monovalent Pools, rationalization of the quality tests on the Drug Product and  addition of the second manufacturing line for MF59C.1 at the Marburg site (variation I/0001). This variation received a positive Commission Decision on 12 August 2008. Focetria (H1N1)v Quality variations: II/0006, II/0007, II/0008, II/0016, II/0014 On 15 October 2009 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion to allow changes in two of the analytical methods  used  for  control  of  critical  steps  of  the  adjuvant  MF-59C  (variation  I/0006),  this  variation received a positive Commission Decision on 20 October 2009. On 15 October 2009 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion to allow the addition of a new manufacturing line (Line 3) for the manufacture of the adjuvant MF-59, in the Novartis Marburg facility in Germany (variation I/0007), this variation received a positive Commission Decision on 20 October 2009.

On 22 October 2009 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion to allow to change the reassortant derived from A/Calirfornia/7/2009 (H1N1)v strain from X-179A to X-181 for the manufacturing process of the vaccine  substance  (variation  I/0008),  this  variation  received  a  positive  Commission  Decision  on  11 October 2009.

On  17  December  2009  the  CHMP  adopted  a  positive  opinion  to  allow  the  change  of  the  product information to include the shelf life of a multidose vial after first dose withdrawal (variation I/0016), this variation received a positive Commission Decision on 23 December 2009.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

On 18 February 2010 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion to allow the implementation of the new \"rapid sterility test\" to be used as the primary sterility test for drug substance and drug product testing (release  and  in-process)  at  Novartis  Rosia  (variation  I/0014),  this  variation  received  a  positive Commission Decision on 02 March 2010.

## Clinical variations : II/0009, II/00010, II/00011, II/00013, II/00015

Medicinal product no longer authorised Three variations received a positive opinion on 22 October 2009 and a positive Commission Decision on  11  November  2009.  The  data  comprised  safety  and  immunogenicity  data  from  various  clinical studies. Variation II/0009 - Update of section 5.1 of the SmPC with H5N1 data on persistence of antibodies in elderly subjects Variation II/0010 -  Update of section 4.8 of the summary of product characteristics to include the latest H5N1 safety information available as requested by the CHMP. Variation II/0011 - Update of sections 4.2, 4.4, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product characteristics to  reflect  immunogenicity  and  safety  results  of  a  H1N1  study  in  adults  as  requested  by  the  CHMP. (study V111\\_02) Two variations (variation II/0013 and II/0015) received a positive opinion on 11 November 2009 and a positive Commission Decision on 27 November 2009. Variation II/0013 -  Update  of  section  4.5  of  the  summary  of  product  characteristics  regarding administration of Focetria with seasonal influenza vaccine based on results in adults as requested by the CHMP. (Study V111\\_04) Variation II/0015 - Update of sections 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the summary of product characteristics to reflect the currently immunogenicity and safety clinical trial data available in children and adolescents, as requested by the CHMP (study V111\\_03) One variation received a positive opinion on 17 December 2009 and a positive Commission Decision on 23 December 2009. Variation II/0018 - Update of section 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the SPC regarding administration of Focetria to children of 3 to 8 years of age based on results of a study in children as requested by the CHMP (study  V111\\_03).  Section  4.8  was  updated  to  include  Adverse  Drug  Reactions  reported  in  Post Marketing Surveillance for Focetria further to the assessment of sPSUR 1 and 2. The ongoing variations at the time of requesting this switch to full MA are as follows:

One  variation  received  a  positive  opinion  on  17  February  2010.  Variation II/0020 concerned  the update of sections 4.2, 4.5, 4.8 and 5.1 of the SmPC to include safety and immunogenicity information following  assessment  of  the  H1N1  data  available  with  Focetria  in  children,  adults  and  the  elderly (Studies V111\\_02, V111\\_03 and V111\\_04). The change of the age cut-off for adult population from 18-60 to 18-65 was not approved by the CHMP. However, the addition of a statement regarding coadministration with trivalent seasonal vaccine non adjuvanted in adult population (18-60 years of age) was approved.

Variation II/0019 related  to  the  update  of  sections  4.2,  4.8  and  5.1  of  the  summary  of  product characteristics  regarding  administration  of  Focetria  to  children  of  12  to  35  months  of  age  as  a  one dosing schedule based on results of a study in children (Study V111\\_03). A request for supplementary

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

information  was  adopted  at  the  February  CHMP.  Following  the  assessment  of  the  responses  by  the MAH, a final recommendation was adopted at the April CHMP.

Variation II/0017 to update the Detailed Description of the Pharmacovigilance System to version 11.1 was considered approvable by the CHMP and received a positive opinion on 18 March 2010.

## III.2  Other Scientific Data provided relevant for the assessment of the benefit/risk balance

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised III.2.1. Quality There  are  still  some  on-going  commitments  that  the  MAH  needs  to  address  and,  in  view  of  their specific nature, the proposed timelines are considered to be reasonable. Data on accelerated and real time stability, both on X-179 and X-181 derived vaccines has been provided and is under assessment. The  relevant  quality  data  generated  as  part  of  the  H5N1  mock-up  marketing  authorisation  were considered  supportive  for  the  H1N1v  pandemic  strain  version  of  Focetria.  Quality  data  required specifically for the strain change (X-179A vaccine virus) were provided on 14 August and 4 September 2009 and satisfactorily demonstrated the quality of the vaccine. An additional strain change from H1N1 X-179A  to  H1N1  X-181  vaccine  virus  was  submitted  on  14  October  2009.  In  this  case  the documentation presented by the Applicant also supported satisfactorily the variation. Since the pandemic strain change, an additional adjuvant manufacturing line has been introduced at Marburg site. Changes to the manufacturing process have also been done regarding a) two analytical methods for the control of MF59C.1 adjuvant; b) the switch from the classic sterility test to a new, rapid version. In conclusion, the CHMP considered that from a quality perspective there are no outstanding concerns regarding conversion to a full MA. III.2.2. Non-Clinical Regarding non-clinical data provided to support the dossier of Focetria, the applicant compiled data emerging from non-clinical studies with the adjuvant alone and in combination with different antigens performed over the last 15 years. The non-clinical data supporting the approval of Fluad and the MF59 non-clinical data package represented the principal support to the (H1N1)v Focetria application. The challenge testing in the ferret showed that the formulation of vaccine containing either 7.5 μ g or 15 μ g of A/NIBRG-14 (H5N1) antigen per dose is both immunogenic and efficacious in reducing the viral load and viral shedding. The various disease markers indicated the protective effects of mock-up vaccination with the formulation of the vaccine used.

Immunogenicity studies in young and old mice with H1N1v formulation showed that immunisation with both  adjuvanted  candidate  vaccine  and  non-adjuvanted  vaccine,  elicited  a  dose-related  antigenspecific  antibody  response,  regardless  of  the  serologic  status  at  baseline.  The  presence  of  MF59 adjuvant resulted in a more immunogenic product, in both young and old mice.

Non-clinical safety data have revealed no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety pharmacology, acute and repeated dose toxicity, local tolerance, embryo-foetal and postnatal toxicity (up to the end of the lactation period).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  MAH  has  responded  to  all  non-clinical  FUMs.  There  are  no  outstanding  issues  on  non-clinical matter.

## III.2.3. Clinical

Clinical SOBs and FUMs are given in section III.1 as well as in the Appendix of the report.

Medicinal product no longer authorised III.2.3.1 Clinical Pharmacology and Clinical Efficacy The  assessment  of  the  expected  safety  and  potential  protective  efficacy  of  Focetria  (H1N1)v  was initially  based  on  the  data  obtained  with  the  mock-up  containing  influenza  A(H5N1)  strains.  Clinical trials on protective efficacy for the mock-up vaccine were not possible as the strain causing the current pandemic  as  well  as  the  subjects  with  a  corresponding  infection  were  not  present  at  that  time. Therefore a detailed characterisation of the immunological response has been performed. Immunogenicity of the mock-up strain A/Vietnam/1194/2004 (H5N1) was determined in 458 subjects (297 adults; 161 elderly). For 7.5 μ g  and  15 μ g  HA  group,  seroconversion rate and seroconversion factor in the adult and the elderly population were in compliance with CHMP requirements. In both age groups,  the  GMTs  induced  by  Focetria  (7.5 μ g  HA)  were  non-inferior  to  the  GMTs  induced  by  the vaccine containing 15 μ g HA. Seroprotection rates in adults and elderly calculated using the SRH assay met the set CHMP requirements. These results were supported also by the microneutralisation assay. A clinical trial submitted post core-dossier authorisation was conducted with a H5N1 vaccine combined with  MF59C.1  adjuvant  in  471  children  from  6  months  to  17  years  of  age.  The  results  indicated  a substantiated immune response. No further data on clinical efficacy regarding H5N1 strain are awaited. The  SOBs  concerning  data  from  sponsored  clinical  studies  with  the  monovalent  (H1N1)v  vaccine required  reporting  of  post-dose  1  and  post-dose  2  data,  with  or  without  longer-term  follow-up  and responses to further doses, according to individual protocols, from the ongoing and planned studies that were listed in the letter of undertaking agreed at the time of the strain change variation. Data  coming  from  post-approval  studies  support  the  use  of  a  single  dose  of  the  adjuvanted  H1N1 vaccine in subjects from 9 to 60 years regardless of their serostatus at baseline and seasonal influenza vaccination  history.  In  elderly  (&gt;  60  yrs),  all  three  CHMP  criteria  required  for  pandemic  vaccines differently  from  the  seasonal  requirements,  were  met  only  after  the  second  dose.  These  data  are currently reflected in the relevant posology section of the SmPC.

In children aged 3-8 years all CHMP criteria were met after a single dose of the adjuvanted vaccine. A further  immune  response  to  a  second  dose,  in  terms  of  GMT  values,  was  observed.  The  clinical significance  of  this  increase  is  not  known  at  present.  It  is  the  CHMP  opinion  that  overall  data  on immunogenicity support the use of a single dose of the adjuvanted vaccine in the age-stratum 3-8 years, in line  with  the  current  posology  recommended for influenza seasonal vaccines. The relevant SmPC sections have been updated to reflect the CHMP opinion.

In the 12 to 35 months age stratum immunogenicity results for the adjuvanted vaccine met all three CHMP criteria as early as 3 weeks after the first vaccination, achieving the HI seroprotection threshold of 1:40.

Final  data  related  to  the  effect  of  the  second  dose  in  the  age  group  12  to  35  months  have  been recently assessed as well as overall immunogenicity data in children aged 6-11 months.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Immunogenicity provided by one full dose of Focetria has been shown to induce a satisfactory immune response,  achieving  the  HI  seroprotection  threshold  of 1:40.  A  further  dose  has  been  shown  to augment the immune response. This information has been mentioned in the relative sections of the SmPC.

When studied, immunogenicity of the non-adjuvanted vaccine was found to be inferior in comparison to the adjuvanted vaccine.

Administration of the half dose in children induced a good immune response; however this response was systematically lower than the full dose.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  summary, immunogenicity data with Focetria (H1N1)v covering subjects from 6 months to &gt; 60 years old are currently available. However, no data are available in subjects under 6 months of age. This  is  in  accordance  with  the  decision  of  the  PDCO,  which  modified  the  standard  PIP  requesting waivers for this age group. III.2.3.2 Clinical Safety SOBs and FUMs related to pharmacovigilance and risk management are listed in section III.1 and in the Appendix of the report. Safety data from ongoing clinical studies Clinical trials with H5N1 strain The  database  on  safety  on  Focetria  H5N1  has  been  increased  with  the  submitted  results  of  study V87P13 (H5N1 Safety Study): 'A Phase III, Randomized, Controlled, Observer-Blind, Multicentre Study to  Evaluate  the  Safety,  Tolerability  and  Immunogenicity  of  Two  Doses  of  a  Monovalent  A/H5N1 Influenza  Vaccine  Adjuvanted  with  MF59  (Fluad-H5N1),  in  Adult  and  Elderly  Subjects'.  The  pooled analysis  of  safety  of  the  entire  safety  database  did  not  show  reason  for  concern  or  previously unexpected events. Focetria was initially approved based on the information collected in trials conducted with the (H5N1) strain.  However,  data  generated  with  Focetria  including  a  H5N1  strain  cannot  entirely  predict  the safety profile of Focetria including the influenza A(H1N1)v strain since there remains a possibility of ADRs associated with the antigenicity of a specific influenza strain.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical trials with H1N1 strain

## Study V111\\_03 in children

Safety  data  after  first  and  second  dose  of  Focetria  H1N1  (both  half  and  full  dose)  in  children  and adolescents 6 months -17 years of age suggested a comparable safety profile with that reported for the H5N1 mock-up vaccine formulation. The use of half dose of vaccine was associated with a slight reduction  of  local  reactogenicity  in  subjects  of  any  age.  Reactogenicity  after  the  second  dose  was generally lower compared to the first dose.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The data provided in children 12 to 35 months confirmed that vaccine, at any dose of antigen and adjuvant, is  generally safe. This was also observed in children aged 6 -11 months. No death and no related severe AE were reported. Study V111\\_04 in adults and the elderly Results  in  adults  aged  18  to  60  years  after  first  and  second  dose  indicated  that  Focetria  may  be administered  concomitantly  with  seasonal  influenza  vaccine.  Results  in  adults  also  indicated  that previous  administration  of  adjuvanted  or  non-adjuvanted  seasonal  vaccines  and  Focetria  did  not interfere with the immune response to Focetria. The product information was updated to reflect these findings. Study V111\\_02 in adults and the elderly subjects The safety  observations  were  in  line  with  the  profile  of  Focetria.  A  reduced  local  reactogenicity  but comparable  systemic  reactogenicity  was  observed  in  adults  receiving  the  half  dose.  In  elderly  the differences were even lower. The CHMP considered there was no relevant advantage in terms of safety with the 0.25 ml vs. 0.5 ml. All the available data on safety from clinical studies and routine use suggest that there is no undue risk associated with use of Focetria. These data have been assessed and reflected in the SmPC by means of a series of variations as considered necessary. Based on the current available data also coming from post-marketing surveillance, the Focetria safety profile could be considered similar to the adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine. In the context of the RMP and as for any other vaccine the safety profile will continue to be monitored. Post-Marketing Experience

According  to  the  MAH  about  85  million  doses  were  distributed  worldwide  from  the  launch  to  22 February 2010 (data lock point of the fifth sPSUR). The MAH provided an exposure estimation of more than 7 million vaccinated subjects in the EEA. This was in line with the estimation of at least 6.5 million vaccinated subjects in the EEA which was published by the European Medicines Agency within the last Pandemic Pharmacovigilance weekly report (24 March 2010). Age and risk group-stratified exposure data are not currently available.

As of 22 February 2010 the safety database of the MAH contains 4,721 spontaneous reports, of which 781  were  serious  (33  fatal).  As  of  14  March  2010,  a  total  of  2,947  reports  had  been  received  by Eudravigilance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The majority of ADR reports related to the post-vaccination signs and symptoms were reported from clinical  studies  and  already  listed  in  the  SmPC.  These  have  included  headache,  nausea,  dizziness, fever,  myalgia/arthralgia,  fatigue,  malaise,  chills,  sweating,  allergic  ADRs  (including  dyspnoea  and generalised rashes), and injection site reactions (including pain, swelling and localised paraesthesia or numbness). The available data do not allow for an assessment of any change in the expected severity or frequency of such events as compared to the clinical studies.

Moreover, from post-marketing surveillance further ADRs have been identified and have been included in  the  SPC:  lymphadenopathy,  palpitation,  tachycardia,  asthenia,  muscular  weakness,  pain  in  the extremity, Cough and diarrhoea. In the fifth sPSUR the AEs vertigo has been found to occur frequently and the MAH has been requested to submit to include it in the SmPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Fatal cases Overall,  33  fatal  cases  have  been  reported  in  the  fifth  sPSUR,  3  of  which  were  non-medically confirmed. In 7 cases the death were assessed as unexplained and the MAH has been requested to follow up the unexplained deaths. The majority of deaths, mainly occurred in elderly, seemed to be likely related to severe underlying conditions. There was no clear evidence suggesting that the vaccine contributed to the subjects' death. Other AE under close monitoring During the review of the sPSURs the MAH was asked to provide reviews of cases of disturbance in consciousness,  cardiac  disorders  (e.g.  arrhythmia),  eye  disorders,  infections  (e.g.  herpes  virus, pneumonia), convulsions, peripheral neuropathies, arthritis, peripheral oedema and pregnancy-related outcomes. These analyses have revealed no specific safety signals or cause for concern. Adverse Events of special interest The main issues concerned cases of anaphylaxis and GBS. With regards to anaphylaxis the MAH was requested to provide a review of all anaphylaxis case (as SMQ)  and  to  analyse  them  according  the  standard  case  definitions  and  guidelines  by  Brighton Collaboration Anaphylaxis Working Group. Up to the data lock point of 22 February 2010, a total of 245  cases  were  retrieved  using  the  narrow  SMQs  'Anaphylactic  reaction'  and  'Angioedema'. Furthermore,  43  cases  were  found  to  meet  BC's  anaphylaxis  case  definitions  based  on  evidence available in the narratives. Of these anaphylaxis cases, 9 met the definition at BC level 1; 27 at BC level 2 and 7 at BC level 3. In addition, 12 cases were found meeting the definition at BC level 4 being reported anaphylaxis with insufficient evidence to meet the case definition. In other words, these cases were 'unevaluable' using BC  based  on  evidence  in  the  narratives.  190  cases  (~78%  of  the  total)  were  found  not  to  be anaphylaxis (at level 5).

Regarding GBS, cumulatively 21 cases of GBS were included in the sixth sPSUR. Following an analysis performed by the assessors a signal (although weak) of an increased number of observed cases after vaccination with Focetria has emerged. Similar signals has been noted with (H1N1)v vaccines other than Focetria in the context of observed to expected (O/E) analyses performed in Germany, Sweden and United Kingdom.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

On 31 March 2010 the EMA convened an expert meeting to discuss the current O/E analyses of GBS and  the  ongoing  surveillance  systems  and  studies  within  Europe,  Canada  and  the  United  States  to assess GBS following vaccination. It was agreed that, based on results of O/E analyses performed in five  countries,  the  currently  available  data  are  reassuring  and  there  is  no  indication  of  a  risk  of  a similar magnitude as that found in the pandemic situation of 1976. Taking into consideration the level of  evidence  currently  available,  a  possible  association  between  the  pandemic  A/H1N1  vaccines  and GBS cannot conclusively be ruled out but, if there is an increased risk, the relative risk in vaccinated individuals  as  compared  to  non-vaccinated  ones  would  probably  lie  between  1  and  2  (i.e.  a  similar magnitude found in some studies of seasonal influenza vaccines).

Incidence  of  miscarriage  in  the  general  population  is  about  4%  (lowest  risk  in  the  population)  and around 10 to 12% according to published data from the literature (Lancet 19 December 2009; 374: 2115-22). In the 11th Pandemic Pharmacovigilance weekly update on 17th of February, the incidence of miscarriage among pregnancies is estimated between 12 and 15% (even more when including early pregnancy losses).

Medicinal product no longer authorised It was agreed that the spontaneous data and O/E analyses will not allow this issue to be resolved. It was considered that the ongoing epidemiological studies can provide valid estimates of the risk of GBS associated with the A/H1N1 vaccines. The main issue will be the power of these studies to detect a small  increase  in  risk  (i.e.  &lt;2)  as  the  number  of  reported  cases  at  this  stage  and  the  vaccination coverage are lower than expected. Given the fact that the main problem of ongoing epidemiological studies will be the lack of statistical power, an objective to be achieved is the pooling of data collected in the different studies. The VAESCO consortium will pool data from eight countries. It was also agreed that there are no additional studies or data that can be reasonably collected or currently requested from vaccine manufacturers to assist in the assessment of this issue. The CHMP considered that, as there remains no clear evidence of an association between any of the vaccines and GBS, an update of the SmPCs would not be appropriate at this stage. It was agreed that the findings of the EU and VAESCO studies should be awaited before considering any such action. Even if an increased risk up to 2 was confirmed, it was agreed that the balance of risks and benefits would remain favourable. Age-specific or risk group-specific events No particular  safety  concerns  have  been  identified  in  the  paediatric  population.  Surveillance  data  in children are in line with safety data coming from ongoing H1N1 clinical trials and from PASS study. Safety in Pregnancy No particular safety concerns have been identified for vaccinated pregnant women. It is estimated that 92,000 pregnant women have been vaccinated. Until the 5th February 2010, 14 cases of intrauterine foetal deaths (after 20 weeks of pregnancy) and 10 cases of miscarriage (or spontaneous abortions, before 20 weeks of pregnancy) have been reported to the MAH. Incidence of intrauterine foetal death has been estimated as 2.6 - 9.1 per 1000 live birth (from  2004  European  Perinatal  Health  Report  by  Euro-Peristat  project  in  collaboration  with  SCPE, EUROCAT &amp; EURONEOSTAT). Considering those rates, the number of vaccinated pregnant women who would coincidently experience an intrauterine foetal death would be between 192 and 764.

Therefore,  whatever  the  considered  rate,  the  14  cases  of  intrauterine  death  and  the  10  cases  of miscarriage reported are very small numbers. In conclusion, it is reasonable to affirm that there is not a sign of intrauterine death or miscarriage associated with the use of Focetria.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The overall B/R of Focetria in pregnant women is, at present, considered positive.

However the MAH is committed to continuously monitor the AEs in pregnant women.

Overall, the data available did not reveal any specific concern regarding the safety profile of Focetria (H1N1)v which was found similar to that of seasonal vaccines. Furthermore, the current content of the safety database for this product has been largely substantiated with data from routine use and clinical studies.

In the context of the RMP and as for any other vaccine the safety profile will continue to be monitored.

<!-- image -->

The initial approval for Focetria limited its use to WHO Phase 6 in accordance with CHMP guidance and taking  into  account  the  paucity  of  data  available  on  safety  and  immunogenicity  at  the  time.  Since September 2009 FOCETRIA has been administered to 7 million of people across a wide age range, providing a substantial safety database. In addition, data have been provided from clinical studies in persons aged from 6 months to &gt; 60 years and the SmPC has been amended on several occasions to reflect these data.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Risk Management Plan Update The latest evaluated RMP version (1.6) can be considered adequate. An updated version (1.7) of the RMP is currently under evaluation. This version includes an update of the RMP linked to FUM 29, FUM 30 and FUM 31. This latest version submitted will require an update in the PSUR cycle. III.3  Product Information III.3.1. Summary of Product Characteristics, Labelling and Package Leaflet The current SPC and PL are appended in the Appendix to this report. These versions reflect completion of all the clinical variations listed in III.1 and in the Appendix. Further changes are anticipated during the completion of variations II/0019. Change in indication and additional statement in section 4.4 4.1 Prophylaxis of influenza caused by A(H1N1) 2009 virus (see section 4.4). Focetria should be used in accordance with Official Guidance. 4.4 The  vaccine  can  only  be  expected  to  protect  against  influenza  caused  by A/California/7/2009

While no further pandemic waves are predicted within the EU the usual feature of pandemics is that the influenza A strain and its drift variants persist as the most common cause of seasonal influenza up to  the  time  of  the  next  pandemic.  For  this  reason  it  has  already  been  recommended  that  suitable strains should be used in the manufacture of the trivalent seasonal influenza vaccines for the winter 2010-2011.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Uptake of pandemic influenza vaccine has been variable across EU countries thus far. A substantial proportion of the population, including those in groups at risk of complications from influenza, may still be unprotected by means of naturally-acquired or vaccine-induced immunity.

Since  all  relevant  non  clinical  and  clinical  data  within  the  context  of  Article  21  of  Commission Regulation (EC) 1234/2007, have been submitted as part of either FUMs/SOBs or variation(s), such provision is therefore considered adequately fulfilled and the exceptional and temporary nature of the variations  to  the  terms  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation  for  Focetria  as  initially  granted  in  September 2009, not anymore required. Consequently the indication can now be read as stated above.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Thus  the  proposed  change  in  indication  allows  further  use  of  vaccine  within  the  EU  regardless  of whether or not the current WHO pandemic phase is maintained or altered during the coming year. The addition to section 4.4 is intended to underline the difference between Focetria and the forthcoming trivalent seasonal vaccines. Updates to other sections It  is  proposed  that  several  other  sections  of  the  FOCETRIA  SmPC  should  be  updated  during  this procedure so that the emphasis is now placed on the substantial data obtained with Focetria, allowing the H5N1 data to be removed and replaced. In addition, the changes involve removal of the cautionary statements regarding the limits of data from clinical studies in various age groups and replacement with references to section  5.1  where  the  limited  numbers  formally  assessed  for  safety  and immunogenicity during clinical studies are clearly displayed. III.3.2. General Conditions for the Marketing Authorisation B. B. CONDITIONS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION · CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE IMPOSED ON THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. · CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT · The  MAH  shall  agree  with  Member  States  to  measures  facilitating  the  identification  and traceability of the A/H1N1 vaccine administered to each patient, in order to minimise medication errors  and  aid  patients  and  health  care  professionals  to  report  adverse  reactions.  This  may include the provision by the MAH of stickers with invented name and batch number with each pack of the vaccine.

- The  MAH  shall  agree  with  Member  States  on  mechanisms  allowing  patients  and  health  care professionals to have continuous access to updated information regarding Focetria.
- The  MAH  shall  agree  with  Member  States  on  the  provision  of  a  targeted  communication  to healthcare professionals which should address the following:
- The correct way to prepare the vaccine prior to administration.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Adverse  events  to  be  prioritised  for  reporting,  i.e.  fatal  and  life-threatening  adverse reactions, unexpected severe adverse reactions, adverse events of special interest (AESI).
- The minimal data elements to be transmitted in individual case safety reports in order to facilitate the evaluation and the identification of the vaccine administered to each subject, including the invented name, the vaccine manufacturer and the batch number.
- If a specific notification system has been put in place, how to report adverse reactions.

## · OTHER CONDITIONS

Medicinal product no longer authorised Official batch release: In accordance with Article 114 Directive 2001/83/EC as amended, the official batch release will be undertaken by a state laboratory or a laboratory designated for that purpose. Pharmacovigilance system The MAH must ensure that the system of pharmacovigilance, as described in version 11.1 (dated 05 January 2010) presented in Module 1.8.1 of the marketing authorisation application, is in place and functioning before the product is placed on the market and for as long as the marketed product remains in use. PSUR submission The marketing Authorisation holder will submit periodic safety update reports on a 6-month cycle, unless the CHMP decides otherwise. Risk Management plan The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in version RMP 1.6 (dated 29 January 2010) of the Risk Management Plan (RMP) presented in Module 1.8.2. of the Marketing Authorisation Application and any subsequent updates of the RMP agreed by the CHMP. Follow-up Measures (FUMs) The Marketing Authorisation Holder shall complete the following programme of studies within the specified time frame, the results of which shall form the basis of the continuous reassessment of the benefit/risk profile.

| Area            | Description                                                                | Due Date                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Clinical FUM 28 | Study V111_03: The MAH commits to provide the final report                 | End August 2011                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Clinical FUM 29 | The MAH commits to provide the results of the clinical effectiveness study | Results of study to be provided within two weeks of availability. Interim report on effectiveness by August 2010 Final report on effectiveness: nine months after the end of the pandemic declared by WHO. |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Pharmacovigilance FUM 30   | The MAH will submit the results of a prospective cohort safety study in at least 9,000 patients in different age groups, including immunocompromised subjects, in accordance with the protocol submitted with the Risk Management Plan. Observed- to-Expected analyses will be performed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Final study report by end August 2010:                                                                                                                                                                                |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pharmacovigilance FUM 31   | The MAH commits to report the results of a study in a pregnancy registry.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Upon issuance of Commission Decision                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Pharmacovigilance FUM 37   | The next updated RMP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | By 21 November 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Clinical FUM 36.1          | Clinical trials timelines - The MAH commits to report the results                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | longer authorised V111_02 and V111_03: Interim and final results will be submitted in accordance with the protocol. Final study report for V111_02 by end July 2011 and final study report for V111_03 by August 2011 |
| Clinical FUM 40.1          | product no The MAH commits to provide additional data as listed in the AR for FUM 40 at the time of the submission of the clinical data for the annual update variation of seasonal influenza vaccines 2010-11.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | By September 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Quality FUM 43             | The applicant should provide all stability data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | By end July 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Pharmacovigilance          | Medicinal The MAH commit to submit on a monthly basis safety report including: - a frequency table of all spontaneous cases per country, stratified according to type of report (medically confirmed or non- medically confirmed) and seriousness, for the period covered by the report and cumulatively - a frequency table of all spontaneous adverse reactions by SOC, High Level Term (HLT) and Preferred Term (PT), stratified according to type of report (medically confirmed or non-medically confirmed) and including the number of fatal reports, for the period covered by the report and cumulatively. - a line listing of Adverse events of special interest (as defined in the CHMP Recommendations [EMEA/359381/2009]) | Submission to continue on a monthly basis until otherwise informed by the CHMP.                                                                                                                                       |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| reported from countries of the European Economic Area. Furthermore, the MAH commits to submit 6 monthly PSURs for the medicinal product authorised by this decision until further review by CHMP.   | Next PSUR submission date: 21 November 2010   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|

Medicinal product no longer authorised A number of FUMS have been submitted since the revision of the opinion of the switch of MA status. Annexe II is updated to reflect the FUMs that are still pending. FUMS submitted since the revision of the opinion include: First monthly pharmacovigilance report on 21 May 2010; RMP update on 7 May 2010; Clinical FUM 35 (final study report) on 30 April 2010; pharmacovigilance FUM 31 3rd interim report on 30/04/2010, fourth interim report on 29/05/2010; Pharmacovigilance FUM 30, Interim and final results submitted in accordance with the protocol by end May 2010. IV OVERALL CONCLUSIONS AND BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE NEW INDICATION AND CHANGE TO FULL MARKETING AUTHORISATION The overall benefit/risk of Focetria in the Prophylaxis of influenza caused by A(H1N1) 2009 virus (see section 4.4) is considered favourable. The  CHMP  considered  that  from  a  quality  perspective  there  are  no  outstanding  concerns  regarding conversion to a full MA. The  non-clinical  data  package  provided  by  the  applicant  at  the  time  of  the  initial  application  for  a marketing authorization for the mock-up vaccine and data provided afterwards are considered to be satisfactory  to  support  the  conversion  to  a  full  MA  for  Focetria  (H1N1)v.  There  are  no  outstanding concerns from a non-clinical point of view. Since  the  approval  of  the  strain  change  variation,  the  clinical  data  package  for  Focetria  has  been substantiated with data coming from post-approval studies and marketing experience. Benefit profile Data  coming  from  post-approval  studies  support  the  use  of  a  single  dose  of  the  adjuvanted  H1N1 vaccine in subjects from 9 to 60 years regardless of their serostatus at baseline and seasonal influenza vaccination history. The analyses restricted to the immune  response  developed  by subjects seronegative at the baseline showed that the CHMP criteria were not met in the elderly and therefore the  use  of  a  second  dose  was  recommended.  These  data  are  currently  reflected  in  the  relevant posology section of the SmPC

In children aged 3-8 years all CHMP criteria were met after a single dose of the adjuvanted vaccine. It is  the  CHMP  opinion  that  overall  data  on  immunogenicity  support  the  use  of  a  single  dose  of  the adjuvanted vaccine in the age-stratum 3-8 years, in line with the current posology recommended for influenza seasonal vaccines. The relevant SmPC sections has been updated to reflect the CHMP opinion (please refer to the above section on variation II/19)

In the 12 to 35 months age stratum immunogenicity results for the adjuvanted vaccine met all three CHMP criteria as early as 3 weeks after the first vaccination, achieving the HI seroprotection threshold of 1:40. Final data related to the effect of the second dose in the age group 12 to 35 months have been  recently  assessed  as  well  as  overall  immunogenicity  data  in  children  aged  6-11  months. Immunogenicity provided by one full dose of Focetria has been shown to induce a satisfactory immune response,  achieving  the  HI  seroprotection  threshold  of 1:40.  A  further  dose  has  been  shown  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

augment the immune response. This information will be mentioned in the relative sections of the SmPC (please refer to the above section on variation II/19).

## Risk profile

All  the  available  data  on  safety  from  clinical  studies  and  routine  use  suggested  that  there  was  no undue risk associated with use of Focetria. Following more than four months of marketing experience with Focetria (H1N1), reflected in the latest reviewed sPSUR, the overall safety data indicated that the safety profile was acceptable. The majority of ADRs reported related to the signs and symptoms of the listed and expected side effects. Focetria safety profile could be considered similar to the adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine. Via the comprehensive RMP the CHMP will continue to closely review safety of  Focetria  including  Guillain-Barre  syndrome  (GBS),  safety  in  pregnant  women,  and  response  in immunocompromised subjects.

The  CHMP  in  making  this recommendation  has  taken  into  consideration  that  comprehensive information  on  clinical  safety  and  efficacy  have  now  been  provided  and  that  specific  procedures  in particular concerning safety are no longer required such that the grounds to maintain the licence under exceptional circumstances are no longer considered to apply.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Re-assessment of B/R profile in the context of the revised indication and switch to a full MA The Specific Obligations concerning the evaluation of safety and effectiveness as introduced during the initial  authorisation  and  the  variation  in  order  to  introduce  the  pandemic  (H1N1)v  strain  have  been sufficiently addressed to conclude on the maintenance of a positive risk/benefit for the use of Focetria in the current Community epidemiological situation. The CHMP consider that the MAH has now provided sufficient comprehensive safety and efficacy data such that grounds to maintain the MA under exceptional circumstances are no longer applicable. In addition  specific  procedures  concerning  safety  are  no  longer  required  in  context  Article  14  (8)  of regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004  as  these  can  be  achieved  in  context  of  the  conventional  Risk Management Plan. In addition the safety data presented in additional studies, submitted since the initial approval and in the  sPSURs  have  been  satisfactory.  Overall  a  favourable  benefit-risk  assessment  continues  to  be applicable to use in the population for which FOCETRIA is indicated. Conclusion Based on the review of the data submitted by the MAH as evidence of compliance with the specific obligations  and  having  re-assessed  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  the  medicinal  product  further  to  the provision of comprehensive data on efficacy and safety such that the grounds set out in Part II.6 of Annex I of Directive 2001/83/EC are no longer applying to maintain the MA under Article 14(8), the CHMP recommends to change the status of the marketing authorisation outside the scope of Art. 14(8) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 for Focetria (Influenza vaccine (H1N1)v (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted).

In  addition  the  CHMP,  having  reviewed  all  relevant  clinical  data  within  the  context  of  Article  21  of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1234/2008, considers that adequate information has been supplied to recommend a change of the indication outside of the restricted clinical setting of a pandemic and that

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the temporary and exceptional nature concerning the approval of the variation introducing the strain change no longer applies.

As a result of the above the recommended indication should read as follows: Prophylaxis of influenza caused by A(H1N1) 2009 virus (see section 4.4 of SmPC). Focetria should be used in accordance with Official Guidance, thus allowing for further use of vaccine within the EU regardless of whether or not the current WHO pandemic phase is maintained or altered during the coming year. (see section III.3 for more details).

<!-- image -->