---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:10:45
document_pages: 11
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/focetria-h-c-710-ii-0010-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: focetria-h-c-710-ii-0010-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 19.8066626
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 12:15:33.458891
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

Doc. Ref: EMEA/CHMP/704698/2009 London, 22 October 2009

Medicinal product no longer authorised ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR FOCETRIA Common name: pandemic influenza vaccine (surface antigen, inactivated, adjuvanted) a/california/7/2009 (H1N1)v like strain (X-181A) Procedure No.  EMEA/H/C/000710/II/0010 Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Introduction

Focetria  is  a  pandemic  H1N1v  vaccine.  The  strain  change  of  the  mock-up  vaccine  from  H5N1  to H1N1v was approved on 29/09/09 (EMEA/H/C/710/PU/05).

The current posology of Focetria was based on data from the mock-up vaccines, largely represented by vaccines containing the avian derived H5N1 antigen, scarcely immunogenic in humans. The marketing authorisation  holder  (MAH)  submitted  a  type  II  variation  based  on  study  V87P13  with  the  aim  of updating  Focetria's  product  information  to  take  into  account  the  extended  H5N1  safety  data information available. Study V87P13 is a phase 3, randomised, controlled, observer-blind, multicentre study to evaluate the safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of two doses of a monovalent A/H5N1 influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF59 1 , in adult and elderly subjects. The MAH submits an interim safety  data  analysis  taking  into  account  only  adverse  events  (AEs)  collected  during  the  64  days following the enrolment. The MAH had already committed to provide the final study report which will include a 6-months follow up of the enrolled subjects.

| product   |
|-----------|

Elderly subjects were enrolled first.  At  day  1,  subjects  were  randomised  at  a  4:1  ratio  to  receive  a single 0.5 ml IM injection of the trivalent inactivated subunit vaccine NonAdjSeasonal (Groups 1 and 3), or placebo (Groups 2 and 4), followed by two 0.5 ml IM injections, administered three weeks apart (day 22 and day 43), of the MF59-adjuvanted monovalent A/H5N1 influenza vaccine (AdjPanH5N1) or  the  MF59-adjuvanted trivalent inactivated subunit vaccine (AdjSeasonal), according to the study group. NonAdjSeasonal was used to provide also elderly and adult subjects enrolled in the Groups 1 and  3,  respectively,  with  a  seasonal  influenza  vaccine.  Placebo  was  used  to  maintain  the  blind approach (3 consecutive injections in each vaccination group).

Medicinal product no longer authorised Clinical safety Study design Study V87P13 was designed to evaluate the safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of 2 doses of a monovalent A/H5N1 influenza vaccine adjuvanted with MF59 (AdjPanH5N1), each containing 7.5 µg of A/Vietnam/1194/2004 (H5N1 Clade 1) antigen administered 3 weeks apart. The  study  was  performed  at  multiple  study  sites,  in  a  population  of  healthy  subjects  aged  18  to 60 years and over 60 years of age. Overall, subjects were enrolled and randomised at a 4:1 ratio within each age group to receive the study vaccinations listed in the table below. Subjects  were  enrolled  into  two  age  stratifications:  3372  adults  (18  to  60  years)  and  275  elderly (&gt;60 years).  A  total  of  3371  subjects  were  vaccinated  according  to  the  randomisation  list  (2692 received AdjPanH5N1 and 679 received AdjSeasonal).

1 Due  to  the  different  names  given  to  the  products  during  clinical  development,  in  the  present  report  the following names  refer  to  the  same  formulation  (antigen  quantity  and  adjuvant  amount):  Fluad-H5N1, AdjPanH5N1, H5N1 mock-up vaccine and Focetria (H5N1). The non adjuvanted vaccine is referred to as the seasonal subunit vaccine Agrippal or NonAdjSeasonal.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Most  of  the  enrolled  subjects  completed  the  study  and  the  premature  withdrawals  were  &lt;5%  and balanced  across  both  the  vaccine  groups  within  each  age  stratification.  The  common  reasons  for premature  withdrawals  were  withdrawal  of  consent,  subjects  being  lost  to  follow-up  and  protocol deviation.  All  details  from  AEs  occuring  in  subjects  which  prematurely  withdrew  will  be  provided with the final study report.

It  was noted that the exclusion criteria included also several condition that are characteristics of the elderly  population  e.g.  diabetes,  arteriosclerosis,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  (COPD), hepatic disease, renal disease, congestive heart failure, obesity.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  order  to  provide  a  comprehensive  picture  of  safety  observed  with  mock-up  vaccines,  a  pooled analysis of safety data for the H5N1 mock up vaccine from several studies conducted from 2006 to present in adults 18 years and above will be provided. The complete analysis is expected with the final report. It is expected that study V87P13, which had a secondary objective to compare the safety and tolerability  profiles  of  7.5 µ g  Focetria  (H5N1)  and  of  the  MF59-  adjuvanted  seasonal  vaccine,  will contributed  for  most  of  the  data  off  the  pooled  analysis.  Further  information  on  the  statistical significance of the comparison will also be available with the final report. Objectives The primary safety objectives were: · To assess the safety and tolerability profile of two doses of MF59-adjuvanted A/Vietnam/1194/2004 (H5N1 Clade 1) influenza vaccine (AdjPanH5N1), each containing 7.5 µg of H5N1 antigen. ·  To  contribute  to  an  integrated  safety  database  of  approximately  3400  subjects  exposed  to AdjPanH5N1,  capable  of  detecting  rare  adverse  events  in  adult  subjects,  i.e.  those  occurring  at  a frequency of ≤ 0.1%, and uncommon adverse events in elderly, i.e. those occurring at a frequency of ≤ 1% according to the EMEA guideline CHMP/VWP/263499/2006. There was also a secondary safety objective: ·  To evaluate the safety and tolerability profile of AdjPanH5N1 compared with a MF59-adjuvanted interpandemic trivalent influenza vaccine (AdjSeasonal). The study had two immunogenicity objectives, which are out of the scope of the present variation and so  they  will  be  assessed  after  the  submission  of  the  report  at  the  end  of  the  study.  The  MAH  is committed to provide this report. Results: A total of 3372 adults were enrolled and randomised in this age cohort, 3371 of them were vaccinated according  to  the  randomisation  list  (2692  received  AdjPanH5N1  and  679  received  AdjSeasonal). Subjects who provided AdjPanH5N1 or AdjSeasonal post-vaccination safety data were included in at least one safety analysis of these two vaccines. Within the  three  weeks  after  each  vaccination  there  were  22  serious  adverse  events  (SAEs)  (&lt;1%) reported for 19 adults (11 adults following either AdjPanH5N1 vaccination, 2 adults following either AdjSeasonal vaccination, 4 adults after the NonAdjSeasonal vaccination and 2 adults after the placebo vaccination).  Two  adult  subjects  (AdjPanH5N1  and  NonAdjSeasonal)  experienced  possibly  or probably  related  serious  adverse  events  (anaphylactic  reaction  and  muscle  weakness).  The  event  of muscle weakness will be followed up in light of the prolongued persistence of the reaction.

One female adult subject (AdjPanH5N1) experienced imminent abortion, which in the opinion of the investigator was not related to the study vaccine. However, since this event occurred about 3 weeks after  the  vaccination  this  cannot  be  confirmed  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  provided.  Further information is expected with the final report.

In total, 10 adult subjects withdrew prematurely from the study due to an AE following either of the two AdjPanH5N1 or AdjSeasonal vaccinations (5 subjects [&lt;1%] from the AdjPanH5N1 group and 5 subjects  [1%]  from  the  AdjSeasonal  group).  This  compares  with  6  (&lt;1%)  subjects  who  withdrew prematurely  due  to  an  AE  after  the  initial  NonAdjSeasonal  vaccination  and  5  (1%)  subjects  who withdrew after the placebo.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

No death was reported up to day 64.

A  total  of  275  elderly  subjects  were  enrolled  and  randomised  to  receive  either  AdjPanH5N1 (219 subjects) or AdjSeasonal vaccination (56 subjects) and were included in the safety set. There  were  five  reports  of  SAEs  (&lt;1%)  for  four  elderly  subjects  (1  elderly  following  either AdjPanH5N1  vaccination,  2  elderly  following  either  AdjSeasonal  vaccination,  1  elderly  after  the NonAdjSeasonal vaccination). Two elderly subjects experienced possibly or probably related serious adverse events (bronchial hyperreactivity and pneumonia in one subject [AdjSeasonal] and leukocytoclastic  vasculitis  in  another  subject  [NonAdjSeasonal]).  Only  one  subject  prematurely withdrew from the study following an AE after either AdjPanH5N1 vaccination. One subject withdrew due  to  an  AE  following  the  initial  NonAdjSeasonal  vaccine  and  one  subject  prematurely  withdrew after the initial placebo vaccination. No deaths were reported up to day 64.

In  the  elderly  group,  the  percentage  of  subjects  reporting  any  solicited  reactions  was  higher  in  the NonAdjSeasonal vaccine group than in the placebo group after the first vaccination (54% vs 45%). After first and second vaccination with either AdjPanH5N1 or seasonal AdjSeasonal vaccines, there was  a  general  tendency  towards  a  decrease  in  percentage  of  subjects  reporting  local,  systemic  and other  reactions.  The  two  vaccine  groups  showed  similar  percentages  of  subjects  with  solicited reactions reported.

Medicinal product no longer authorised As the administration of NonAdjSeasonal could confound both the safety evaluation of AdjPanH5N1 alone and the comparison between AdjPanH5N1 and AdjSeasonal additional analyses were provided. The reactogenicity profile of AdjPanH5N1 was generally lower than the AdjSeasonal vaccine. This finding  is  in  line  with  previous  observations  in  clinical  trials  and  is  probably  related  to  the  lower antigen content of the H5N1 vaccine (7.5 µ g) compared with the seasonal one (45 µ g) given that the adjuvant content was identical. Looking at the reactogenicity profile within each vaccine group, the AdjPanH5N1 vaccine when given for the first time (2 nd vaccination) had a slightly higher reactogenicity profile when compared to the second  administration  (3 rd vaccination)  in  both  age  groups.  A  similar  phenomenon  of  lower reactogenicity  after  the  subsequent  dose  was  observed  for  the  control  group  (AdjSeasonal),  also reporting slightly decreased reactogenicity rates after the third vaccination. Only  a  slight  underreporting  (differences  between  second  and  third  vaccinations  of  1-17%  of  any solicited reaction across all vaccine and age groups) seemed to have occurred. If these differences are due to the introduction of a first vaccination or simply reflect the phenomenon of lower reporting after each subsequent dosing cannot be answered without a third control arm. According to MAH, due to ethical and logistical reasons at the time of the study design and set-up it was not possible to include an additional control arm (two doses of AdjPanH5N1 without the first vaccination with NonAdjSeasonal),  which  would  have  been  the  only  measure  to  control  the  potential  confounding effect of the first vaccination with NonAdjSeasonal . However, as this potential underreporting affects both  vaccine  groups  in  an  equal  way,  the  comparative  assessment  of  the  AdjPanH5N1  and AdjSeasonal  and  therefore  the  overall  interpretability  of  the  results  is  not  affected.  Regarding unsolicited  AEs  no  significant  differences  were  observed  in  the  reporting  rates  after  subsequent dosing. Solicited reactions Adults After first injection a higher percentage of subjects reported solicited local and systemic reactions in the NonAdjSeasonal group when compared to the group of subjects receiving placebo (69% vs. 50% respectively).  Solicited  reactions  were  more  frequent  in  the  AdjSeasonal  than  in  the  AdjPanH5N1 vaccine group. There was a consistent trend towards a reduction of the percentage of subjects with solicited reactions reported after a second consecutive dose of AdjPanH5N1 andAdjSeasonal vaccines. Elderly:

The percentage of subjects with solicited reactions after receiving the AdjPanH5N1 vaccination was similar or lower than that for those receiving the AdjSeasonal vaccination. In the elderly 44% of those in  the  AdjPanH5N1  group  and  55%  in  the  AdjSeasonal  group  had  solicited  reactions  after  third vaccination.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The table below provides a summary of the solicited reactions reported by injection and study group.

## Overview of subjects with solicited reactions, by injections

|                                     | Number (%) of Subjects With Solicited Reactions   | Number (%) of Subjects With Solicited Reactions   | Number (%) of Subjects With Solicited Reactions   | Number (%) of Subjects With Solicited Reactions   | Number (%) of Subjects With Solicited Reactions   |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Age Group                           | Adults                                            | Adults                                            | Elderly                                           | Elderly                                           | Elderly                                           |
| Vaccine Group                       | Group 1                                           | Group 2                                           | Group 3                                           | Group 4                                           | Group 4                                           |
| After 1 st vaccination (Days 1-7)   | NonAdjSeasonal N=2688                             | Placebo N=678                                     | NonAdjSeasonal N=219                              | Placebo N=56                                      | Placebo N=56                                      |
| Any                                 | 1858 (69%)                                        | 339 (50%)                                         | 118 (54%)                                         | 25 (45%)                                          |                                                   |
| Local                               | 1456 (54%)                                        | 202 (30%)                                         | 84 (38%)                                          | 15 (27%)                                          |                                                   |
| Systemic                            | 1207 (45%)                                        | 229 (34%)                                         | 66 (30%)                                          | 18 (32%)                                          | 18 (32%)                                          |
| Other                               | 338 (13%)                                         | 65 (10%)                                          | 18 (8%)                                           | 4 (7%)                                            | 4 (7%)                                            |
| After 2 nd vaccination (Days 22-28) | AdjPanH5N1 N=2607                                 | AdjSeasonal N=657                                 | AdjPanH5N1 N=214                                  | authorised AdjSeasonal N=54                       | authorised AdjSeasonal N=54                       |
| Any                                 | 1770 (68%)                                        | 507 (77%)                                         | 113 (53%)                                         | 30 (56%)                                          | 30 (56%)                                          |
| Local                               | 1532 (59%)                                        | 452 (69%)                                         | 89 (42%)                                          | 22 (41%)                                          | 22 (41%)                                          |
| Systemic                            | 1134 (43%)                                        | 343 (52%)                                         | 71 (33%)                                          | 17 (31%)                                          | 17 (31%)                                          |
| Other                               | 246 (9%)                                          | 106 (16%)                                         | 16 (7%)                                           | 4 (7%)                                            | 4 (7%)                                            |
| After 3 rd vaccination (Day 43-49)  | AdjPanH5N1 N=2559                                 | AdjSeasonal N=639                                 | longer AdjPanH5N1 N=212                           | AdjSeasonal N=53                                  | AdjSeasonal N=53                                  |
| Any                                 | 1413 (55%)                                        | 385 (60%)                                         | 94 (44%)                                          | 29 (55%)                                          | 29 (55%)                                          |
| Local                               | 1200 (47%)                                        | 342 (54%)                                         | 66 (31%)                                          | 21 (40%)                                          | 21 (40%)                                          |
| Systemic                            | 844 (33%)                                         | no 206 (32%)                                      | 55 (26%)                                          | 16 (30%) 3 (6%)                                   | 16 (30%) 3 (6%)                                   |
| Other                               | 185 (7%)                                          | 45 (7%)                                           | 16 (8%)                                           |                                                   |                                                   |

| Medicinal   |
|-------------|

Medicinal product no longer authorised The table below shows the percentage of subjects with each (and severe) local reactions

a One subject's data was missing; b Two subjects' data were missing.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The table below shows the percentage of subjects with each (and severe) systemic reactions

|         |    |        | authorised   |
|---------|----|--------|--------------|
|         |    | longer |              |
|         | no |        |              |
| product |    |        |              |

The  most  commonly  affected  system  organ  classes  (SOCs)  after  first  and  second  injections  of AdjPanH5N1 and AdjSeasonal vaccines was infections and infestations, followed by musculoskeletal, connective tissue and bone disorders, respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders, general disorders and administration site conditions, gastrointestinal disorders, and nervous system disorders.

Medicinal product no longer authorised a One subject's data was missing; b Two subjects' data were missing. ( ≥ 40) a indicates severe reaction. Unsolicited reactions Adults

The  most common  adverse  event  reported in adults within 21 days of any injection  was nasopharyngitis (7% in AdjPanH5N1 and 8% in AdjSeasonal vaccine group). Upper respiratory tract infections  were  reported  by  6%  of  adult  subjects  in  the  AdjPanH5N1  vaccine  group  and  5%  in AdjSeasonal vaccine group. Other adverse events were reported in ≤ 5% of subjects, were generally balanced between the vaccine groups, and were caused by expected adverse events in this population or known side effects to influenza vaccination.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Elderly:

The most commonly affected SOCs after first and second injections of AdjPanH5N1 and AdjSeasonal vaccines  was  infections  and  infestations,  followed  by  musculoskeletal,  connective  tissue  and  bone disorders,  respiratory,  thoracic  and  mediastinal  disorders,  general  disorders  and  administration  site conditions, gastrointestinal disorders, and nervous system disorders. The most common adverse event reported by elderly subjects within 21 days of each injection were upper respiratory tract infection (4% in  AdjPanH5N1 and 9% in AdjSeasonal vaccine group), headache (3% in AdjPanH5N1 and 6% in AdjSeasonal vaccine group) and rhinitis (2% in AdjPanH5N1 and 6% in AdjSeasonal vaccine group). Other adverse events were reported in &lt; 5% of subjects, were generally balanced between the vaccine groups,  and  were  caused  by  expected  adverse  events  in  this  population  or  known  side  effects  to influenza vaccination.

| Type of Reaction              | Number (%) of Subjects With Adverse Event   | Number (%) of Subjects With Adverse Event   | Number (%) of Subjects With Adverse Event   | Number (%) of Subjects With Adverse Event   |
|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Age Group                     | Adults                                      | Adults                                      | Elderly                                     | Elderly                                     |
| Vaccine Group                 | Group 1                                     | Group 2                                     | Group 3                                     | Group 4                                     |
| After 1st vaccination         | NonAdjSeasonal N=2688                       | Placebo N=678                               | longer NonAdjSeasonal N=219                 | Placebo N=56                                |
| Any AEs                       | 851 (32)                                    | 198 (29)                                    | 54 (25)                                     | 13 (23)                                     |
| At least possibly related AEs | 318 (12)                                    | 67 (10)                                     | 17 (8)                                      | 6 (11)                                      |
| After 2 nd vaccination        | AdjPanH5N1 N=2607                           | no AdjSeasonal N=657                        | AdjPanH5N1 N=214                            | AdjSeasonal N=54                            |
| Any AEs                       | 690 (26)                                    | 174 (26)                                    | 51 (24)                                     | 18 (33)                                     |
| At least possibly related AEs | 231 (9)                                     | 76 (12)                                     | 17 (8)                                      | 9 (17)                                      |
| After 3 rd vaccination        | product AdjPanH5N1 N=2559                   | AdjSeasonal N=639                           | AdjPanH5N1 N=212                            | AdjSeasonal N=53                            |
| Any AEs                       | 548 (21)                                    | 146 (23)                                    | 38 (18)                                     | 7 (13)                                      |
| At least possibly related AEs | 155 (6)                                     | 42 (7)                                      | 12 (6)                                      | 4 (8)                                       |

Medicinal product no longer authorised The table below provides a summary of the unsolicited AEs by injection and study group. Overview of unsolicited AEs by injection Summary of Adverse Events One  case  of  anaphylaxis  was  reported.  Two  cases  each  were  reported  for  convulsions  and  eye swelling, corresponding to a frequency of rare. A total of 19 cases of urticaria were reported in the two different  cohorts  (adults  and  elderly),  corresponding  to  an  uncommon  frequency.  The  frequency  of headache, myalgia, injection site swelling, injection site pain, injection site induration, injection site redness, malaise, fatigue and shivering (chills) was reviewed as there was an increase in the reporting of these adverse events. Influenza like illnesses occurred uncommonly. Several cases of nausea were reported commonly. The product information was updated to reflect this.

The tables below provide a summary of AEs that occurred in 1% or more of the population after either AdjPanH5N1 or AdjSeasonal vaccination in adults and a summary of all treatment emergent adverse events  that  occurred  in  1%  or  more  of  the  population  after  either  AdjPanH5N1  or  AdjSeasonal vaccination in elderly.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Summary of Adverse Events After Any AdjPanH5N1 or AdjSeasonal Vaccination by ≥ 1% of subjects in adults

| Preferred Term                    | Number (%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs At Least Possibly Related AEs   | Number (%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs At Least Possibly Related AEs   | Number (%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs At Least Possibly Related AEs   | Number (%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs At Least Possibly Related AEs   |
|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                   | AdjPanH5N1                                                                         | AdjSeasonal                                                                        | AdjPanH5N1                                                                         | AdjSeasonal                                                                        |
|                                   | N=2611                                                                             | N=658                                                                              | N=2611                                                                             | N=658                                                                              |
| Nasopharyngitis                   | 172 (7%)                                                                           | 50 (8%)                                                                            | 45 (2%)                                                                            | 18 (3%)                                                                            |
| Upper Respiratory Tract Infection | 157 (6%)                                                                           | 35 (5%)                                                                            | 38 (1%)                                                                            | 5 (1%)                                                                             |
| Headache                          | 121 (5%)                                                                           | 23 (3%)                                                                            | 33 (1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Rhinitis                          | 81 (3%)                                                                            | 27 (4%)                                                                            | 21 (1%)                                                                            | 7 (1%)                                                                             |
| Oropharyngeal Pain                | 85 (3%)                                                                            | 24 (4%)                                                                            | 47 (2%)                                                                            | authorised 8 (1%)                                                                  |
| Gastroenteritis                   | 50 (2%)                                                                            | 13 (2%)                                                                            | 6 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Sinusitis                         | 41 (2%)                                                                            | 13 (2%)                                                                            | 9 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Injection Site Haemorrhage        | 31 (1%)                                                                            | 12 (2%)                                                                            | 30 (1%)                                                                            | 12 (2%)                                                                            |
| Cough                             | 45 (2%)                                                                            | 9 (1%)                                                                             | 14 (1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Diarrhoea                         | 45 (2%)                                                                            | 11 (2%)                                                                            | 15 (1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             |
| Back Pain                         | 41 (2%)                                                                            | 11 (2%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Fatigue                           | 43 (2%)                                                                            | 10 (2%)                                                                            | longer 30 (1%)                                                                     | 7 (1%)                                                                             |
| Bronchitis                        | 31 (1%)                                                                            | 8 (1%)                                                                             | 4 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Pyrexia                           | 22 (1%)                                                                            | 8 (1%)                                                                             | 4 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Arthralgia                        | 27 (1%)                                                                            | 7 (1%)                                                                             | 11 (<1%)                                                                           | 4 (1%)                                                                             |
| Influenza                         | 11 (<1%)                                                                           | 7 (1%)                                                                             | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Myalgia                           | 24 (1%)                                                                            | no 5 (1%)                                                                          | 9 (<1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Abdominal Pain Upper              | product 18 (1%)                                                                    | 6 (1%)                                                                             | 5 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Ecchymosis                        | 15 (1%)                                                                            | 6 (1%)                                                                             | 14 (1%)                                                                            | 6 (1%)                                                                             |
| Migraine                          | 20 (1%)                                                                            | 6 (1%)                                                                             | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 1 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Musculoskeletal Pain              | 20 (1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 7 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Injection Site Pruritus           | 12 (<1%)                                                                           | 5 (1%)                                                                             | 12 (<1%)                                                                           | 5 (1%)                                                                             |
| Lymphadenopathy                   | 4 (<1%)                                                                            | 5 (1%)                                                                             | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 5 (1%)                                                                             |
| Medicinal Pain In Extremity       | 15 (1%)                                                                            | 5 (1%)                                                                             | 5 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Dysmenorrhoea                     | 18 (1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 1 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Vertigo                           | 16 (1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 6 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             |
| Abdominal Pain                    | 7 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Dizziness                         | 5 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 1 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Ear Infection                     | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 0                                                                                  | 0                                                                                  |
| Hyperhidrosis                     | 8 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 7 (<1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Hypertension                      | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 0                                                                                  | 1 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Pharyngitis                       | 9 (<1%)                                                                            | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 1 (<1%)                                                                            | 1 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Toothache                         | 10 (<1%)                                                                           | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 1 (<1%)                                                                            | 0                                                                                  |
| Vertebral Injury                  | 12 (<1%)                                                                           | 4 (1%)                                                                             | 0                                                                                  | 0                                                                                  |
| Nausea                            | 15 (1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 2 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Malaise                           | 14 (1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            | 7 (<1%)                                                                            | 3 (<1%)                                                                            |
| Neck Pain                         | 14 (1%)                                                                            | 1 (<1%)                                                                            | 7 (<1%)                                                                            | 1 (<1%)                                                                            |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Summary of All Treatment Emergent Adverse Events After Any AdjPanH5N1 or AdjSeasonal Vaccination by ≥ 1% of Subjects in Elderly

| Preferred Term                      | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events All AEs   |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                     |                                                       |                                                       | At Least Possibly Related AEs                         | At Least Possibly Related AEs                         |
|                                     | AdjPanH5N1                                            | AdjSeasonal                                           | AdjPanH5N1                                            | AdjSeasonal                                           |
|                                     | N=214                                                 | N=54                                                  | N=214                                                 | N=54                                                  |
| Infection Headache                  | 7 (3%)                                                | 3 (6%)                                                | 0                                                     | 2 (4%)                                                |
| Rhinitis                            | 4 (2%)                                                | 3 (6%)                                                | 1 (<1%)                                               | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Cough                               | 2 (1%)                                                | 2 (4%)                                                | 1 (<1%)                                               | authorised 2 (4%)                                     |
| Diarrhoea                           | 0                                                     | 2 (4%)                                                | 0                                                     | 2 (4%)                                                |
| Dyspepsia                           | 1 (<1%)                                               | 2 (4%)                                                | 1 (<1%)                                               | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Nasopharyngitis                     | 7 (3%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Oropharyngeal Pain                  | 6 (3%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                | 4 (2%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Injection Site Haemorrhage          | 5 (2%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                | 5 (2%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Gastroenteritis                     | 4 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Abdominal Pain Upper                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Bronchial Hyperreactivity           | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | longer 0                                              | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Chest Pain                          | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Dry Mouth                           | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Ecchymosis                          | 3 (1%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                | 3 (1%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Enteritis                           | 0                                                     | no 1 (2%)                                             | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Erectile Dysfunction                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Fatigue                             | 2 (1%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                | 1 (<1%)                                               | 0                                                     |
| Humerus Fracture                    | product 0                                             | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Hyperhidrosis                       | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Injection Site Erythema             | 2 (1%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                | 2 (1%)                                                | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Insomnia                            | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Otitis Externa                      | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Pneumonia                           | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Rhinorrhoea                         | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Medicinal Sensation Of Foreign Body | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Thermal Burn                        | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Toothache                           | 1 (<1%)                                               | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Tremor                              | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Urticaria                           | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (2%)                                                |
| Back Pain                           | 3 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Migraine                            | 3 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Vertigo                             | 3 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 1 (<1%)                                               | 0                                                     |
| Arthralgia                          | 2 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 2 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     |
| Conjunctivitis                      | 2 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |
| Herpes Simplex                      | 2 (1%)                                                | 0                                                     | 0                                                     | 0                                                     |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Preferred Term    | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events   | Number (%%) of Subjects with Adverse Events   |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
|                   | All AEs                                       | All AEs                                       | At Least Possibly Related AEs                 | At Least Possibly Related AEs                 |
|                   | AdjPanH5N1                                    | AdjSeasonal                                   | AdjPanH5N1                                    | AdjSeasonal                                   |
|                   | N=214                                         | N=54                                          | N=214                                         | N=54                                          |
| Influenza         | 2 (1%)                                        | 0                                             | 0                                             | 0                                             |
| Nasal Congestion  | 2 (1%)                                        | 0                                             | 0                                             | 0                                             |
| Pain In Extremity | 2 (1%)                                        | 0                                             | 0                                             | 0                                             |
| Sinusitis         | 2 (1%)                                        | 0                                             | 0                                             | 0                                             |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Among the 'at least possible related AEs' there is in AdjPanH5N1 a percentage of adults subjects with some adverse events higher than in AdjSeasonal. However, the number of subjects involved was very small and further details on these differences will be available with the final report, which the MAH is committed to provide. Serious adverse events In the following tables the listing of serious adverse events in adults 18-60 years and elderly subjects is presented. Listing of Serious Adverse Events Occurring up to Day 64 in 18 to 60 year old subjects

| Preferred Term              |   Onset (Day) | Duration (days)   | Outcome      | Hospitalisation   | Relatedness      |
|-----------------------------|---------------|-------------------|--------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Pleurisy                    |             5 | 17                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Pyelonephritis              |            28 | 4                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Pyelonephritis Acute        |            68 | 34                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Stress Cardiomyopathy       |            12 | 7                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Cerebral Infarction         |            74 | 16                | no Recovered | Yes               | None             |
| Subarachnoid Haemorrhage    |            70 | 15                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Cholecystitis Acute         |            30 | product 14        | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Pneumonia                   |            35 | 9                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Anaphylactic Reaction       |            48 | <1                | Recovered    | No                | Probably Related |
| Anxiety Disorder            |            40 | 28                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Medicinal Muscular Weakness |            31 |                   | Ae Persist   | No                | Possibly Related |
| Biliary Colic               |            22 | <1                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Cholelithiasis              |            23 | 3                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Hyperventilation            |            28 | <1                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Inguinal Hernia             |            32 | 29                | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Depression                  |             5 |                   | Unk/Lostfu   | Yes               | None             |
| Imminent Abortion           |            47 | 2                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Vertigo                     |            56 | 2                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Abdominal Pain Lower        |            59 | 1                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Gastroenteritis             |            70 | 5                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Uterine Leiomyoma           |            60 | 3                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |
| Rectal Haemorrhage          |            10 | 7                 | Recovered    | Yes               | None             |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Listing of Serious Adverse Events Occurring up to Day 64 in Over 60 Year Old subjects

| Preferred Term              |   Onset (Day) | Duration (days)   | Outcome    | Hospitalisation   | Relatedness      |
|-----------------------------|---------------|-------------------|------------|-------------------|------------------|
| Humerus Fracture            |            35 | 143               | Recovered  | Yes               | None             |
| Haemorrhoid Operation       |            59 | 1                 | Unk/Lostfu | Yes               | None             |
| Bronchial Hyperreactivity   |            50 | 2                 | Recovered  | No                | Possibly Related |
| Pneumonia                   |            50 | 7                 | Recovered  | No                | Possibly Related |
| Leukocytoclastic Vasculitis |            18 |                   | Ae Persist | No                | Possibly Related |

Medicinal product no longer authorised A  compiled  listing  of  SAE  will  be  provided  with  the  final  report,  as  presently  these  data  are  not available. Changes to the Product Information The proposed changes to section 4.8 of the summary of product characteristics (SPC) were reviewed and initially not agreed with. A revision of the wording was submitted taking into account the results of  the  assessment  and  this  was  agreed  with  by  the  CHMP.  The  package  leaflet  (PL)  was  updated accordingly. Several minor corrections and clarifications were introduced in the product information and these were agreed with by the CHMP. Overall discussion and benefit risk assessment The  present  study  was  aimed  to  evaluate  the  safety  and  tolerability  of  2  doses  of  the  monovalent AdjPanH5N1, each dose containing 7.5 µg of A/Vietnam/1194/2004 antigen antigen in approximately 2600 adults and 210 elderly. The study was to contribute to an integrated AdjPanH5N1 safety database from clinical trials of approximately 3400 exposed subjects, the sample size that would be sufficient to detect rare adverse events in adults (at ≤ 0.1% frequency) and elderly (at ≤ 1% frequency). After two injections, both AdjPanH5N1 and AdjSeasonal vaccines were well tolerated. Solicited local and systemic reactions were mostly mild or moderate in severity. The percentage of solicited reactions was  higher  in  the  NonAdjSeasonal  group  than  in  the  placebo  group  after  first  vaccination.  The percentage  was  higher  after  the  second  dose  than  the  third.  Overall,  the  safety  profile  of  the AdjPanH5N1  did  not  seem  to  be  significantly  affected  by  the  prior  vaccination  with  the  seasonal subunit vaccine. The most frequent local  solicited reactions after  AdjPanH5N1  was  pain in  both  adults and  elderly, whilst  the  most  frequent  systemic  reaction  was  myalgia.  A  high  number  of  AEs  concerning  the infections and infestations SOC was observed. These should be monitored and reported in the final report.  Anaphylaxis  was  considered  as  a  SAE  probably  related  to  the  study  vaccine.  Two  cases  of convulsions  were  reported  (one  in  first  vaccination,  which  cannot  be  thus  attributed  to  Focetria (H5N1). Two cases of eye swelling were also reported. Since in both cohorts malaise and shivering occurred  with  an  incidence ≥ 10%  these  AE  should  be  considered  as  very  common.  Several  local reactions  (injection  site  redness,  swelling,  pain  and  induration)  and  headache  were  also  very commonly reported. Urticaria was uncommonly reported (19 cases, 18 in the adult cohort and 1 in the elderly), and none considered as serious. Influenza like illnesses should be reported as an uncommon AE  since  it  occurred  with  a  frequency  of  0.6%.  Nausea  was  commonly  reported.  The  product information was updated to reflect the available safety information.