---
document_datetime: 2023-10-31 11:11:19
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/invirase-h-c-113-x-43-epar-assessment-report-extension_en.pdf
document_name: invirase-h-c-113-x-43-epar-assessment-report-extension_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.1208735
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 11:54:59.789007
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

1. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION 1.1 Introduction A  Community  Marketing  Authorisation  for  the  HIV  protease  inhibitor,  saquinavir  (Invirase),  hard capsule  (HC)  formulation  was  granted  by  the  European  commission  on  04  October  1996  for  the treatment of HIV-1 infected adults. This was followed by the Marketing Authorisation of Fortovase, a soft gel capsule formulation (1998). Saquinavir, when given alone, has a very low systemic bioavailability. This is a function of incomplete absorption and high first pass metabolism mediated via cytochrome p450 3A4 (CYP3A4) in the gut and liver. Absorption is enhanced by dose administration with food. The proportion of the dose extracted by first pass metabolism can be reduced by CYP3A4 inhibition. Grapefruit juice, which inhibits the activity of  CYP3A4  in  the  gut  wall,  increases  systemic  bioavailability  by  ~1.5-2  fold;  however  concomitant administration of other, more potent, inhibitors of hepatic CYP3A4 increases saquinavir bioavailability more substantively in a manner which is dependent on the relative potency of CYP3A4 inhibition. This feature of the pharmacology of saquinavir has been exploited by giving it concomitantly with ritonavir, a potent time dependent inhibitor of CYP3A4, to 'boost' saquinavir exposures - in this case by ~ 10 fold, relative  to  monotherapy . The  approved  'boosted'  combination  regimen  is  1000  mg  Invirase  given  in combination with 100 mg ritonavir twice daily. This regimen is now an established part of therapy for HIV infection. With the present 200 mg capsule strength, this dose regimen requires a total of 5 saquinavir capsules and one ritonavir capsule per dose (a total of 12 daily). The Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) has now developed  a  500mg  saquinavir  film  coated  tablet  (FCT)  and  seeks  to  introduce  this  to  the  market. Pursuant to Article 2(a) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1085/2003 and Annex II, point 2, indent (iii), Roche applied with the present application to add this new strength, i.e. 500 mg film coated tablets in order to further improve dosing convenience. This reduction in pill count is highly likely to result in improved compliance and thereby represents an improvement over the present Invirase HC dose form. 1.2 Quality aspects Introduction Invirase  is  presented  as  film-coated  tablets  containing  571.5  mg  of  saquinavir  mesylate  equivalent  to 500 mg of saquinavir. The other ingredients include: -tablet  core:  povidone,  lactose  monohydrate,  croscarmellose  sodium,  microcrystalline  cellulose and magnesium stearate, -tablet  film-coating:  hypromellose,  titanium  dioxide  (E171),  talc,  iron  oxide  yellow  and  red (E172) and glycerol triacetate. The tablets are packed in a HPDE bottle with a tamper evident screw closure. Drug Substance Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

Saquinavir is the  active  substance  of  the  centrally  authorised  medicinal  product  Invirase  200  mg  hard capsules (EU/1/96/02/001) to which no change has been made. It is characterised by a low solubility, a low  bioavailability  (approximately  4  %)  and  a  bitter  taste.  Batch  analysis  data  provided  for  5  recent production batches comply with the authorised specifications.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Drug Product

· Pharmaceutical Development This new pharmaceutical form has been developed in order to support patient adherence to treatment by reducing daily pill burden (from 5x200 mg hard capsules 2 times a day to 2x500 mg tablets 2 times a day). A film-coated tablet is a well-accepted pharmaceutical form for oral administration. As previously, the formulation is optimised by the use of the mesylate salt and by micronisation of the active  substance.  The  function  of  each  excipient  and  the  rationale  for  its  use  has  been  satisfactorily described.  The  film  coat  provides  taste  masking  and  assists  patient  swallowing.  All  the  excipients selected are of PhEur quality and the colorants iron oxide yellow and red comply with EU requirements. Regarding  the  TSE  risk,  the  lactose  monohydrate  prepared  from  milk  of  bovine  origin  has  been considered in compliance with the current TSE requirements. The magnesium stearate and the glycerol triacetate are from vegetable origin. The primary packaging selected is of PhEur quality. Two formulations differing only in the composition of the film coat were used in clinical studies. The initial formulation manufactured at a development site was used in study BP17058, whereas the proposed commercial formulation manufactured at the commercial manufacturing site was used in study BP17359 and  study  BP17653.  Dissolution  profiles  for  these  batches  show  rapid  dissolution,  demonstrating  that tablet dissolution is independent of film coat composition and manufacturing site. · Manufacture of the Product The  manufacturing  process  involves  the  following  conventional  operations  using  standard  equipment: mixing,  high  shear  wet  granulation,  delumping,  drying,  sieving,  blending,  compression,  coating  and packaging.    A  manufacturing  overage  is  used  for  all  coating  ingredients  to  guarantee  an  optimal  film coat. Appropriate in-process controls are established in order to ensure that the specified chemical and physical properties of the tablets are achieved consistently. Satisfactory validation data have been provided for 3 batches manufactured at the proposed commercial site and show that the manufacturing process is robust and well controlled. · Product Specification The  product  specification  includes  tests  controlled  by  validated  methods  for  appearance,  colour, markings, uniformity of mass (PhEur), identity (HPLC and IR), assay, degradation products, dissolution (PhEur) and microbial purity (PhEur). Batch  analysis  data  provided  for  2  partial  full  scales  and  1  full-scale  batch  manufactured  at  the commercial manufacturing site meet the specification at the time of release and indicate consistent and reproducible manufacture. · Stability of the Product Stability  data  have  been  provided  for  2  partial  full  scales  and  1  full-scale  batch  manufactured  at  the commercial  manufacturing  site.  1-year  and  6-month  data  are  available  for  these  batches  under respectively  long  term  (25ºC/60%  RH  -  packaging  intended  for  commercialisation)  and  accelerated conditions (40°C/75% RH - intended packaging).  A photostability study has been performed. It showed that the product is not light sensitive. The data provided support the proposed shelf life and storage conditions as defined in the SPC. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects

<!-- image -->

This was an single-centre, open-label, randomised, two-sequence, four-period, two-treatment, replicated, crossover study comparing the bioavailability of the 500 mg saquinavir tablet (Invirase FCT) relative to the 200 mg saquinavir capsule (Invirase HC). Both saquinavir formulations were administered at a single dose of 1000 mg combined with ritonavir 100 mg under fed conditions (which is the presently approved single  dose).  Twenty  healthy  male  volunteers  aged  19  to  56  years  were  enrolled  and  were  to  receive ritonavir for 24 days (100 mg p.o., b.i.d.) and a single dose of saquinavir on days 14, 17, 20, and 23 as either Invirase HC (5 x 200 mg capsules) or Invirase FCT (2 x 500 mg tablets). The reference treatment (A) was Invirase HC + ritonavir and the test treatment (B) was Invirase FCT + ritonavir. Subjects were randomly assigned to the two treatment sequences ABAB  and BABA.  Blood samples for pharmacokinetic  analysis  were  collected  over  24  hours.  Plasma  concentrations  of  saquinavir  were determined  by  high  performance  liquid  chromatography-tandem  mass  spectrometry  (HPLC-MS/MS) with a quantification limit of 0.2 ng/mL. Primary pharmacokinetic parameters were AUC0-∞ and Cmax. Of

Invirase 500 mg film-coated tablet has been developed in order to support patient adherence to treatment by reducing daily pill burden. No change has been made to saquinavir mesylate active substance. The excipients  are  commonly  used  in  this  kind  of  formulation  and  the  packaging  material  is  well documented. The manufacturing process was developed and optimised to obtain reproducible finished product  batches.  Stability  tests  under  ICH  conditions  indicate  that  the  products  are  stable  for  the proposed shelf life. 1.3 Non-clinical aspects This application does not concern any change in dosage or indication for Invirase. No  Module  4  has  been  provided  with  the  present  application  since  no  nonclinical  data  have  been generated in the context of the development of Invirase FCT. However, the MAH has submitted a short nonclinical overview, showing that most of the nonclinical data were already submitted with the original application  while  additional  studies  in  monkeys  (12  -  month  toxicity),  rats  and  mice  (carcinogenicity studies)  were  submitted  between  1996  and  1998.  The  safe  use  of  Invirase  is  based  not  only  on  the available nonclinical studies, but also on the broad clinical experience. 1.4 Clinical aspects Introduction The  clinical  development  program  for  the  Invirase  FCT  was  based  on  the  premise  that,  provided bioequivalence  is  demonstrated,  a  new  preparation  of  solid  dose  forms  can  be  expected  to  provide essentially  similar  efficacy  and  safety  to  the  reference  medication.  Therefore,  the  development  of  the 500 mg Invirase FCT was based on three clinical pharmacology studies, i.e. one pivotal bioequivalence study as well as two supporting bioavailability studies: · to investigate the relative bioavailability of the 500 mg Invirase FCT formulation compared to the existing 200 mg Invirase HC market formulation in combination with ritonavir 100 mg b.i.d. (Study BP17058) · to  demonstrate  bioequivalence  between  these  two  formulations  in  combination  with  ritonavir 100 mg b.i.d. (Study BP17059) to investigate saquinavir exposures following use of Invirase FCT and Invirase HC in the absence of ritonavir, to collect some information on pure product performance (Study BP17653 conducted at the request of the FDA ). Pharmacokinetics 1. Relative Bioavailability Pilot Study BP17058 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  20  subjects  enrolled,  4  subjects  withdrew  from  the  study  prematurely  of  whom  two  provided  no saquinavir pharmacokinetic data.

<!-- image -->

| Exposure Parameter   | Treatment              |   Estimated Mean Exposure a | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio (90% CI) INV FCT/ritonavir vs INV HC/ritonavir   |
|----------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AUC 0- ∞             | Invirase HC/ritonavir  |                       21442 | 1.05 (0.94, 1.18)                                                              |
| (h*ng/mL)            | Invirase FCT/ritonavir |                       22485 |                                                                                |
| C max                | Invirase HC/ritonavir  |                        2930 | 1.13 (1.00, 1.26)                                                              |
| (ng/mL)              | Invirase FCT/ritonavir |                        3298 |                                                                                |

<!-- image -->

| Parameter              |                       | A: Invirase HC/ritonavir   | B: Invirase FCT/ritonavir   |
|------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Number of observations |                       | 188                        | 188                         |
| AUC 0- ∞ (h*ng/mL)     | Arithmetic Mean (CV%) | 27805 (51%)                | 29734 (45%)                 |
|                        | Geometric Mean (CV%)  | 24430 (56%)                | 26826 (49%)                 |
| C max (ng/mL)          | Arithmetic Mean (CV%) | 3322 (39%)                 | 3911 (36%)                  |

Table 1 Study BP17058: Estimated Mean Exposures and Mean Exposure Ratios (90% CI) for Saquinavir Exposure Parameter AUC0-∞ (h*ng/mL) Cmax (ng/mL) a: exponentiated least squares means of ln-transformed exposure parameters N=16 subjects Mean  saquinavir  exposure  in  terms  of  both  AUC0-∞ and  Cmax  following  administration  of  Invirase FCT/ritonavir was similar to that following administration of Invirase HC/ritonavir. In the case of Cmax Invirase FCT/ritonavir showed a tendency for higher values than Invirase HC/ritonavir. This was a pilot study, which followed the generally accepted criteria for bioavailability studies. The fact that  for  C max the  standard  upper  confidence  interval  of  1.25  has  been  slightly  exceeded  should  not  be overestimated since in the pivotal study BP17359 in a much greater number of subjects (see below) the bioequivalence criteria (90 % C.I. 0.80; 1.25) were fulfilled even for Cmax. 2. Bioequivalence Study BP17359 This  study  was  designed  to  establish  bioequivalence  of  the  Invirase  FCT  500 mg  to  the  Invirase  HC 200 mg  at  a  single  dose  of  1000 mg  of  saquinavir.  Both  formulations  were  administered  under  fed conditions  and  were  combined  with  ritonavir  100 mg  capsules.  This  was  a  two-center,  open-label, randomised,  two-treatment,  two-sequence,  four-period,  replicated  crossover  study  conducted  in  two centers. A total of 100 healthy (93 males and 7 females) volunteers aged 19 to 65 years were enrolled and were to receive ritonavir for 24 days (100 mg p.o., b.i.d.) and a single dose of saquinavir on days 14, 17, 20,  and  23  as  either  Invirase HC  (5  x  200 mg  capsules)  or  Invirase FCT  (2  x  500 mg  tablets).  The reference  treatment  (A)  was  Invirase  HC  +  ritonavir  and  the  test  treatment  (B)  was  Invirase FCT  + ritonavir. Subjects were randomly assigned to the two treatment sequences ABAB and BABA, balancing the allocation with respect to site and gender. Blood samples for pharmacokinetic analysis were collected over  24  hours.  Plasma  concentrations  of  saquinavir  were  determined  by  high  performance  liquid chromatography-tandem  mass  spectrometry  (HPLC-MS/MS)  with  a  quantification  limit  of  1 ng/mL. Primary pharmacokinetic parameters were AUC0-∞ and Cmax. Of the 100 subjects enrolled, 6 subjects (all males) withdrew from the study prematurely and did not provide any saquinavir pharmacokinetic data. Table 2 Study BP17359: Primary Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Saquinavir Parameter Number of observations AUC0-∞ Cmax (ng/mL) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3 Study BP17359: Primary Pharmacokinetic Parameters of Saquinavir by Gender

| Parameter              | A: Invirase HC/ritonavir   | A: Invirase HC/ritonavir   | B: Invirase FCT/ritonavir   | B: Invirase FCT/ritonavir   |
|------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                        | Male                       | Female                     | Male                        | Female                      |
| Number of observations | 174                        | 14                         | 174                         | 14                          |
| AUC 0- ∞ (h*ng/mL)     | 26384 (49%)                | 45459 (35%)                | 28407 (43%)                 | 46224 (35%)                 |
|                        | 23343 (54%)                | 43014 (36%)                | 25786 (48%)                 | 43852 (34%)                 |
| C max (ng/mL)          | 3267 (40%)                 | 4005 (28%)                 | 3808 (36%)                  | 5201 (22%)                  |
|                        | 3008 (44%)                 | 3858 (30%)                 | 3548 (40%)                  | 5074 (24%)                  |

∞

and Cmax,

| Exposure Parameter      | Treatment               | Estimated Mean Exposure a   | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio Invirase FCT/r vs Invirase HC/r   | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio Invirase FCT/r vs Invirase HC/r   | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio Invirase FCT/r vs Invirase HC/r   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                         |                         |                             | Estimated Mean Exposure (%)                                     | 90% CI (%)                                                      | Conclusion                                                      |
| AUC 0- ∞                | Invirase HC/ ritonavir  | 28420                       | 100.00                                                          | Reference                                                       |                                                                 |
| (h*ng/mL)               | Invirase FCT/ ritonavir | 31223                       | 109.86 longer                                                   | [104.41,115.59]                                                 | Equivalence                                                     |
| C max                   | Invirase HC/ ritonavir  | 3295                        | 100.00 no                                                       | Reference                                                       |                                                                 |
| (ng/mL)                 | Invirase FCT/ ritonavir | 3924                        | 119.07                                                          | [113.67,124.72]                                                 | Equivalence                                                     |
| Equivalence Region (%): | Equivalence Region (%): |                             | [ 80.00,                                                        | 125.00]                                                         |                                                                 |

<!-- image -->

Arithmetic means (arithmetic CV%) followed by geometric means (geometric CV%) are reported for AUC0Bioequivalence of Invirase FCT and Invirase HC in combination with ritonavir was assessed based on the 90% confidence intervals for the mean exposure ratio derived from an ANOVA applied to the lntransformed primary pharmacokinetic parameters AUC0-∞ and Cmax using the standard acceptance criteria for bioequivalence (Table 4). Table 4 Study BP17359: Estimated Mean Exposures and Mean Exposure Ratios (90% CI) for Saquinavir a: exponentiated least squares means of ln-transformed exposure parameters N = (7 Females + 87 Males) * 4 = 376 PK profiles Bioequivalence  of  Invirase FCT/ritonavir  and  Invirase HC/ritonavir  with  respect  to  saquinavir  was demonstrated. Administration  of  Invirase FCT/ritonavir  resulted  in  increased  exposure  to  saquinavir  compared  to Invirase HC/ritonavir, both in terms of AUC0-∞ and Cmax. An investigation  of  the  gender  effect  revealed  that  saquinavir  exposures  (AUC  and  Cmax)  after  use  of either Invirase FCT/r or Invirase HC/r were higher for female subjects (+56% for AUC0-∞ and +26% for Cmax) than for male subjects (Table 5). Table 5 Study  BP17359:  Estimated  Mean  Exposures  and  Mean  Exposure  Ratios  for  Saquinavir  in  Females  versus Males Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Exposure Parameter   | Gender   |   Estimated Mean Exposure a | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio (95 %CI) Females vs Males   |
|----------------------|----------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| AUC 0- ∞ (h*ng/mL)   | Females  |                       37203 | 1.56 (1.16, 2.10)                                         |
|                      | Males    |                       23852 |                                                           |
| C max (ng/mL)        | Females  |                        4044 | 1.26 (0.99, 1.62)                                         |
|                      | Males    |                        3198 |                                                           |

This pivotal study has demonstrated the bioequivalence between Invirase 200 mg HC and Invirase 500 mg FCT both on AUC (infinity) and on Cmax, although the saquinavir exposure after the FCT was a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

little higher than after the HC, but still within the accepted range for bioequivalence (0.80 - 1.25). The study was adequately performed. The four-period crossover design obviously has been chosen in order to fulfil FDA requirements. It is appreciated that the MAH has not tried to widen the acceptance criteria for Cmax, but has chosen a number of almost 100 evaluable study subjects. In this respect the MAH has followed  the  advice,  which  has  been  given  both  by  FDA  and  by  the  rapporteur  in  a  pre-submission meeting. Under the conditions of the present experiment the Invirase FCT fulfils the accepted criteria of bioequivalence  to  the  approved  Invirase  HC.  This  is  especially  remarkable  when  the  known  high variability in saquinavir exposure is taken into consideration.

<!-- image -->

| Exposure Parameter   | Gender Treatment   | Gender Treatment                                              | Estimated Mean Exposure a   | Estimated Mean Exposure Ratio (90% CI) INV FCT vs INVHC   |
|----------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| AUC 0- ∞ (h*ng/mL) b |                    | Invirase HC Invirase FCT Invirase HC Invirase FCT             | 1086 1485 1039 1028         | 1.37 (1.17, 1.59) 0.99 (0.85, 1.15)                       |
| C max (ng/mL)        |                    | Invirase HC Invirase FCT Invirase HC Invirase FCT Invirase HC | 306 395 265 278 285         | 1.29 (1.03, 1.62) 1.05 (0.84, 1.31)                       |

<!-- image -->

The  observed  gender  difference  (higher  saquinavir  exposure  in  females  than  in  males)  is  adequately reflected in the SmPC. 3. Relative Bioavailability Study BP17653 Study  BP17653  was  an  open-label,  randomised,  two-sequence,  four-period,  two-treatment,  replicated, crossover study assessing bioavailability of the Invirase FCT 500 mg relative to the Invirase HC 200 mg. Both  saquinavir  formulations  were  administered  at  a  single  dose  of  1000 mg  under  fed  conditions. Twenty  healthy  volunteers  (10  male  and  10  female  subjects)  aged  20  to  64  years  were  enrolled  and received a single dose of 1000 mg saquinavir as either Invirase HC (5 x 200 mg capsules), treatment A, or  Invirase  FCT  (2  x  500 mg  tablets),  treatment  B,  on  four  occasions  two  days  apart.  Subjects  were randomly  assigned  to  the  two  treatment  sequences  ABAB  and  BABA,  balancing  the  allocation  with respect  to  gender.  Blood  samples  for  pharmacokinetic  analysis  were  collected  over  24  hours.  Plasma concentrations of saquinavir were determined by high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry  (HPLC-MS/MS)  with  a  quantification  limit  of  0.2 ng/mL.  Primary  pharmacokinetic parameters were AUC0-∞ and Cmax. The bioavailability of Invirase FCT relative to Invirase HC was investigated by use of ANOVA methods applied to the ln-transformed primary pharmacokinetic parameters and therefrom derived estimates and 90% confidence intervals for the mean exposure ratio (Table 6). Table 6 Study BP17653: Estimated Mean Exposures and Mean Exposure Ratios (90% CI) for Saquinavir Exposure Parameter AUC0-∞ (h*ng/mL) Cmax (ng/mL) a: exponentiated least squares means of ln-transformed exposure parameters b: overall estimation (i.e. for females and males together) of mean exposures and exposure ratios for the two treatments not provided for AUC due to the finding of a gender-by-treatment interaction N = (10 Females + 10 Males) *4 = 80 PK profiles Medicinal product no longer authorised

There is evidence for a difference in the relative performance of the two formulations between male and female healthy volunteers (gender-by-treatment interaction for AUC0-∞ ). With respect to AUC0-∞ , higher exposures  were  observed  in  females  compared  to  males  following  Invirase  FCT  but  virtually  no difference was found between the sexes following Invirase HC. Given the presence of this gender-bytreatment interaction  for  AUC0-∞ ,  a  common,  gender  independent  estimate  (i.e.  for  males  and  females together) of the treatment ratio for AUC0-∞ was not calculated.

With respect  to  Cmax  a  higher  increase  was  observed  in  females  than  in  males  when  administered  the tablet formulation compared to the capsule. There was, however, no indication of a gender-by-treatment

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

interaction and the results did not provide clear evidence for a difference between treatments or gender with respect to Cmax.

In summary, comparable pharmacokinetic properties were observed for Invirase FCT and Invirase HC with the possible exception of a higher AUC0-∞ following  Invirase  FCT  compared with HC in female subjects. Formally this study has not fulfilled the accepted criteria for bioequivalence since the upper 90 % C.I. is above 1.25. Nevertheless this study is the least relevant of the three submitted bioavailability/bioequivalence  studies  with  respect  to  the  clinical  use  of  this  drug.    The  very  low saquinavir exposure in subjects that did not receive ritonavir is demonstrating once again that in clinical practice saquinavir no longer should be given without ritonavir. Comments 1. The  quantification  limit  for  saquinavir  in  the  pivotal  study  BP17359  was  1 ng/ml  while  in  the smaller studies BP17058 and BP17653 it was five times lower (i.e. 0.2 ng/ml). However, the change of the  LOQ from  0.200 ng/ml to  1.00 ng/ml  had  no  impact  on  the  PK  parameters  Cmax  and  AUC0-∞ and therefore on the results of the pivotal bioequivalence results. Because the pilot study (BP17058) and the pivotal study (BP17359) were performed in sequential order, the adjustment of the LOQ for saquinavir in study BP17359 was based on the results from study BP17058. In  the  pilot  study  (BP17058),  where saquinavir/ritonavir was administered, the quantification limit for saquinavir  was  chosen  to  be  0.200 ng/ml  (calibration  range  0.200-100 ng/ml)  to  ensure  that  low saquinavir plasma concentrations could be measured. Based on the saquinavir-concentration-time profile obtained in the pilot study it became clear that saquinavir plasma concentrations were very high, and a LOQ of 1.00 ng/ml would be sufficient to adequately characterize the plasma concentration profile. In addition, the  calibration range was increased up to 7500 ng/ml in order to minimize the dilution steps required during sample preparation. In study BP17653, saquinavir was administered without ritonavir, and therefore much lower saquinavir plasma concentrations were anticipated based on prior experience with saquinavir monotherapy. In order to obtain measurable concentrations over the entire concentration time profile, the LOQ for saquinavir was retained at 0.200 ng/ml for this monotherapy study. 2. There was no indication as to the terms included in the ANOVA model, in particular whether these included sequence and period, as recommended in the Note for guidance . This was however clarified. 3. It  was requested that definite evidence be provided to support the use of intervals of three days between saquinavir doses . Based on the half-life considerations and the negligible residual concentrations at pre-dose, it can be concluded that the use of intervals of three days between saquinavir doses was appropriate for the purpose of the study. 4. The  MAH  was  requested  to  justify  why  no  bioequivalence  trial  comparing  Invirase  FCT  and Fortovase (each boosted) has been performed. This request for a clarification is based on the view that in clinical practice also Invirase FCT and Fortovase may be considered \"interchangeable\", and will be, foreseeable,  interchanged  in  the  future.  In  addition,  the  MAH  was  requested  to  clarify  whether  it  is planning to investigate bioequivalence of saquinavir of both products. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The rationale for including Invirase Hard Capsule (HC) as the comparator is that the active ingredient in the  Invirase  Film-coated  Tablet  (FCT)  is  the  same  as  in  Invirase  HC,  i.e.  saquinavir  mesylate. Furthermore, Invirase HC leads to comparable saquinavir exposure as Fortovase Soft Capsule (SC) when boosted with ritonavir (saquinavir/ritonavir 1000/100 mg  bid). This allows switching between Fortovase/ritonavir and Invirase/ritonavir. Additionally, Invirase Film-coated Tablets and Hard Capsules have advantages over the Fortovase formulation as they are easier to swallow due to their smaller size, they can also be stored at room temperature (Fortovase needs refrigeration). Invirase HC has become the preferred saquinavir formulation in combination with ritonavir.  Based on the interchangeability between

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Fortovase/ritonavir and Invirase/ritonavir, the MAH does not intend to perform another bioequivalence study using as comparator Fortovase Soft Capsules.  Furthermore, the choice of the comparator for the bioequivalence study has been discussed and Invirase 200 mg HC has been approved as comparator at a pre-submission  meeting  between  the  Rapporteur  and  Roche  on  the  saquinavir  500 mg  Film-coated Tablet.

The vast  majority  of  healthy  volunteers  in  these  three  trials  received  all  doses  of  study  treatment  and completed the study according to the protocol. There were no withdrawals from study BP17653. Four subjects were withdrawn prematurely from study BP17058, one due to an adverse event prior to the first scheduled dose of saquinavir, a second withdrew consent due to personal reasons and the remaining two due  to  protocol  violations.  Six  subjects  were  withdrawn  from  study  BP17359.  Four  subjects  were withdrawn  due  to  adverse  events  prior  to  the  first  scheduled  day  of  saquinavir  dosing,  one  was withdrawn  due  to  an  adverse  event  after  receiving  the  first  dose  of  saquinavir  and  the  sixth  subject withdrew consent due to personal commitments on Day 2 of dosing with ritonavir.

5. Boosted saquinavir is recommended with food intake, but there is no information in the SPC to justify this recommendation. Hence, the MAH was requested to provide information on the effect of food on ritonavir-boosted saquinavir. If this information is not available this should be investigated, and in the meantime a sentence should be added to section 5.2 of the SPC that currently there is no information available on the effect of food on ritonavir-boosted saquinavir . The  justification  for  this  recommendation  is  as  follows.  The  pivotal  studies  for  the  ritonavir  boosted saquinavir regimen as well as the PK bridging study (from Fortovase/ritonavir to Invirase/ritonavir) were performed  with  food.  Therefore,  all  the  data  (efficacy,  safety,  and  pharmacokinetics)  collected  with saquinavir/ritonavir 1000/100 mg  bid  are  based  on  administration  with  food.  This  leads  to  the recommendation to give boosted saquinavir with food which is reflected in section 4.2 of the currently approved  SPCs  of  Fortovase  Soft  Capsules  (SC)  and  Invirase  Hard  Capsules  (HC)  as  well  as  in  the proposal  for  the  SPC  of  Invirase  Film-coated  Tablets  (FCT).  The  recommendation  to  give  ritonavir boosted  saquinavir  with  food  dates  back  to  the  Type II  Variation  for  the  new  dosing  regimen Invirase/ritonavir or Fortovase/ritonavir 1000 /100 mg bid. The MAH proposes to address this question by adding in section 5.2 of the SPC a sentence saying that no food effect data are available for Invirase in combination with ritonavir. The current approved labels of Fortovase SC and Invirase HC as well as the proposed label for Invirase FCT are recommending clearly that the drug combination needs to be taken with food. The MAH has no intent to alter this recommendation. However,  on  request  from  CHMP,  the  MAH  commits  to  investigate  the  effect  of  food  on  boosted saquinavir to clarify if there is a scientific rationale for the current recommendation that the combination should be taken within 2 hours following a meal.   The reason for this is that if the food effect on boosted saquinavir is small and if, in the individual patient, intake in the fasting state is tolerable, this could be a useful option. Pharmacodynamics Not applicable Clinical efficacy Not applicable Clinical safety The safety  profile  of  the  Invirase  FCT  formulation  has  been  determined  in  the  three  pharmacokinetic studies conducted in healthy volunteers. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  the  healthy  volunteer  studies  no  concomitant  medication  was  permitted,  with  the  exception  of medications to treat adverse events.

Adverse Events As  the  bioavailability/bioequivalence  studies  BP17058  and  BP17359  were  of  a  similar  design  and involved similar subject populations, the safety data from these trials have been pooled in order to better reflect  the  frequency  of  adverse  events  reported  during  treatment  with  the  Invirase  FCT  formulation. These data are presented separately from the data derived from the unboosted saquinavir bioavailability study BP17653. Overall,  the  Invirase  FCT  and  Invirase  HC  formulations  were  equally  well  tolerated  by  healthy volunteers  and  the  types  of  adverse  event  seen  were  similar  to  those  following  the  Fortovase  SC formulation  in  the  patient  studies.  There  were  no  unexpected  adverse  events  in  any  of  the  healthy volunteers or patient studies. Overall, the most common adverse events were gastrointestinal disorders, a finding that is consistent with the current product label. 1. Ritonavir Boosted Studies BP17058/BP17359 (Pooled Dataset) A total  of  72  subjects  (60.0%)  reported  144  adverse  events  during  the  ritonavir  100  mg  b.i.d.  run-in period compared with 25 subjects (22.1%) reporting 35 adverse events during the Invirase HC/ritonavir treatment periods and 33 subjects (29.7%) reporting 40 adverse events during the Invirase FCT/ritonavir periods.  Headache  was  the  most  frequently  reported  adverse  event  throughout  the  study  [11  subjects (9.7%)  versus  15  subjects  (13.5%)  in  the  HC/ritonavir  and  FCT/ritonavir  periods,  respectively].  This compares with 30 subjects (25.0%) reporting headache during the ritonavir alone run-in period. 'Gastrointestinal disorders' was the most frequently reported body system throughout the study. A total of 31 subjects (25.8%) reported at least one incidence of a gastrointestinal disorder during the ritonavir run-in  period  compared  with  13  subjects  (11.5%)  during  the  Invirase  HC/ritonavir  periods  and  18 subjects (16.2%) during the Invirase FCT/ritonavir periods. Diarrhoea was the gastrointestinal disorder reported with the highest frequency. This event was recorded by 15 subjects (12.5%) during the ritonavir run-in period, 6 subjects (5.3%) during the Invirase HC/ritonavir periods and 7 subjects (6.3%) during the Invirase FCT/ritonavir treatment periods. Nausea, reported by 3 subjects (2.7%), loose stools reported by  3  subjects  (2.7%),  watery  stools  reported  by  3  subjects  (2.7%)  and  abdominal  pain  reported  by  4 subjects (3.6%) were the only other gastrointestinal disorders reported during the Invirase FCT/ritonavir treatment periods. The temporal association between the occurrence of adverse events recorded during the study and the administration of saquinavir was further investigated by summarizing all adverse events, which occurred within  48  hours  of  administration  of  the  scheduled  dose  (phase)  of  Invirase  HC/ritonavir  or  Invirase FCT/ritonavir according to the subjects' randomisation schedule.  Headache was the only adverse event, which appeared to show any temporal relationship to Invirase administration. Of the subjects randomised to receive Invirase FCT in combination with ritonavir as the first phase of saquinavir dosing, 10 (18.0%) reported a headache within the 48 hours immediately following dosing. During the remaining 3 phases (Invirase  HC/ritonavir, Invirase  FCT/ritonavir,  Invirase  HC/ritonavir)  for  this  randomised  group, headache was reported only three times, always by patients who had previously reported the event. In the group of subjects randomised to receive Invirase HC in combination with ritonavir as the first phase of saquinavir dosing, no differences were identified in the occurrence of headache between this phase and the following three dose phases. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No  deaths  or  serious  adverse  events  were  recorded  in  any  of  the  healthy  volunteer.    Despite  the significant gender effect with regard to exposure in the healthy volunteer studies, and the slightly higher occurrence of adverse events in female subjects than in male subjects in the unboosted study BP17653, the adverse event profiles of the 500 mg Invirase FCT or 200 mg Invirase HC did not differ markedly between male and female subjects.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2. Unboosted Bioavailability Study BP17653

In general, both the Invirase FCT and Invirase HC treatments were well tolerated. A total of 17 subjects (85.0%)  reported  38  adverse  events  following  Invirase  FCT  treatment  compared  with  14  subjects (70.0%)  reporting  25  adverse  events  following  Invirase  HC.  (Venipuncture  site  bruise  was  the  most frequently reported adverse event in each period [10 subjects (50.0%) versus 7 subjects (35.0%) in the FCT and HC periods, respectively]. A marginally higher incidence of gastrointestinal disorders was seen following Invirase FCT treatment compared with Invirase  HC treatment.  Abdominal pain (3  subjects  versus  0  subjects),  loose  stools  (2 subjects versus 1 subject) and nausea (2 subjects versus 1 subject) were all reported by a slightly greater number of subjects during the Invirase FCT treatment periods. In contrast, infrequent bowel movement was reported by 1 subject following Invirase HC treatment but was absent in the Invirase FCT treatment periods. Comments 1. Regardless  of  meeting  the  bioequivalence  criteria,  the  MAH  was  asked  to  discuss  the  potential effects of higher saquinavir exposures on taking the new 500 mg film-coated tablet formulation.' 2. The submitted bioequivalence studies clearly indicate that there is a sex difference in saquinavir exposure for boosted saquinavir, with females showing higher exposure than men. The MAH has added a paragraph in section 5.2 Effect of gender, stating that 'A clinically significant difference in safety profile and efficacy between men and women has not been reported with the approved dosage regimen'. This statement should be supported by relevant efficacy and safety data, or the sentence should be changed to read:  'It  has  not  been  investigated  if  the  sex  difference  in  exposure  results  in  a  clinically  significant difference in safety profile or efficacy between men and women has not been investigated 3. The  MAH  was  invited  to  further  substantiate  the  observed  gender  differences  in  the  light  of current knowledge (at least by a critical overview of the published literature), especially regarding the relationship between plasma levels and safety, and the applicant should give clear recommendation in terms of therapeutic management of male and female patients. 4. The MAH was requested to submit a meta-analysis on gender effect concerning all data available as regards to efficacy and safety of boosted saquinavir, preferentially data derived from larger (not less than 200 patients) randomised controlled clinical trials. Questions 1,2, 3 and 4 are considered by the MAH to all relate to the same general issue. As a consequence, responses to these questions have been combined to provide a single consolidated response as the issues raised in each are linked to the same observation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Data from two large studies of the Fortovase-ritonavir combination regimen were explored to investigate whether there is any evidence for a concentration driven deterioration in safety profile. The consistency of  the  observations  across  the  studies  evaluated  is  reassuring.  The  results  suggest  that  there  is  no significant  relationship  between  saquinavir  drug  levels  and  the  nature  or  severity  of  the  majority  of adverse  events  experienced  by  patients  treated  with  saquinavir/ritonavir.  There  is  a  possible  slight association with increasing severity of gastrointestinal events reported and the time of onset of an event in an affected individual. However, gastrointestinal symptoms are usually considered to be 'nuisance' effects and were not medically significant in most cases. Importantly there appeared to be no relationship between  saquinavir  concentrations  and  serious  adverse  events  in  any  study.    The  data  support  the excellent safety profile of saquinavir and provide a measure of reassurance that the potential for a modest increase in overall exposures following introduction of the film coated tablet is unlikely to result in a worsening safety profile of the product in everyday use in clinical practice.

A gender effect, noted in the bioequivalence study, prompted an evaluation of gender specific effects. A small  increase  in  adverse  event  reporting  rates  was  noted  in  women  enrolled  in  these  studies.  Higher adverse event frequencies among women have been reported in other trials in HIV infected patients.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

In a study of ritonavir use, women reported more frequent and severe side effects than men, particularly gastrointestinal  and  neurological  side  effects.  The  frequency  of  these  events  corresponded  to  higher plasma concentrations of ritonavir in women than men given the same dose. Other investigators have reported that women have a higher incidence of neuropathy and safety driven regimen changes higher rates  of  gastrointestinal  disturbance  and  higher  rates  of  allergic  reactions,  neurologic  side  effects, gastrointestinal problems, and symptoms of nephrolithiasis than men. Women also suffer from a greater number of adverse events, such as neuropathy, while taking nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), than men possibly owing to increased levels of the active anabolites because of gender related differences  in  phosphorylation  rate.    It  is  therefore  unsurprising  that  a  higher  proportion  of  women enrolled  in  MaxCmin  1  and  MaxCmin  2  reported  adverse  events,  particularly  gastrointestinal  events, than  men.  However,  neither  the  frequency  nor  the  severity  of  events  reported  appeared  to  correlate significantly with observed saquinavir plasma concentrations, so these effects may be a result of gender bias in reporting tendency rather than a result of concentration related toxicity. Fletcher et al . recently reported the efficacy and safety data from ACTG 359. Saquinavir was common in all study arms, and the study investigated relationships among characteristics of patients, saquinavir area under the curve (AUC), trough concentrations (Cmin) and virologic response. Females had higher AUC and Cmin values than did males. Higher saquinavir AUC and Cmin values were associated with a greater likelihood of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) RNA levels ≤ 500 copies/mL (p=0.008). Males had a  lower  probability  of  having  HIV  RNA  levels ≤ 500  copies/mL  at  week  16  than  did  females  (28% versus. 42%; adjusted odds ratio, 0.43). Gender specific safety data have not been reported from ACTG 359  at  present;  however  the  safety  profile  observed  in  this  study  is  good.  These  data  support  the conclusion that saquinavir is well tolerated by both women and men. A breakdown of the efficacy data from MaxCmin 1 and MaxCmin 2 support the conclusion that the combination is efficacious in both men and women. In  summary,  the  MAH  believes  that  the  introduction  of  the  Invirase  500  mg  film  coated  tablet  into clinical  practice  has  a  positive  benefit  risk  profile  as  it  significantly  decreases  the  pill  burden  while retaining the  efficacy and  safety profile of the currently approved dose form. There are no significant differences  between  men  and  women  that  justify  differential  treatment  based  on  gender.  Efficacy  is assured in both men and women. Although women may report adverse experience more frequently than men,  the  differences  observed  are  medically  unimportant  and  there  is  no  clear  relationship  between adverse event experience and blood plasma saquinavir concentrations in either men or in women. It  is  concluded  that  the  proposed  text  in  Section  5.2  of  the  SPC,  which  describes  the  gender  specific differences  in  concentrations  and  concludes ' Limited  data  from  controlled  clinical  studies  with  the approved dosage regimen do not indicate a major difference in the efficacy and safety profile between men and women.' is supported by the available evidence. The MAH also gives a commitment to amend the SPCs of Invirase 200 mg hard capsules and Fortovase 200 mg soft capsules with respect to gender effect as Type II variations. 1.5 Product literature The SPC  and PL have been adapted according to the outcome of the variation procedure EMEA/H/C/113/II/44. 1.5.1 Except for some minor modification, the SPC changes (taking into account QRD comments) as proposed by the MAH are acceptable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- The MAH has revised the SPC section on the \"Effect of Gender\" as follows: 'Effect of gender following treatment with Invirase/ritonavir: No effect of gender was observed

on the pharmacokinetics of Invirase 200 mg hard capsule administered as a 600 mg single dose in 71 healthy volunteers. A gender difference was observed with females showing higher saquinavir exposure than males (AUC 56%, Cmax 26%) in the bioequivalence study comparing

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Invirase 500 mg film coated tablets with Invirase 200 mg hard capsules both in combination with ritonavir. There was no evidence that age and body-weight explained the gender difference in this study. A clinically significant difference in safety profile and efficacy between men and women has not been reported with the approved dosage regimen. Treatment with saquinavir/ritonavir 1000/100 mg bid in male and female patients is found to be safe and effective.'

The justification for this proposed new wording is provided under the response to comments 1, 2, 3 and 4 in section \" Clinical safety\" of this assessment report. The revised SPC proposal is generally endorsed but data from controlled clinical studies are limited with respect to a possible difference in the safety/efficacy profile between men and women. However, 'experience' with the approved dosage regimen of boosted saquinavir may be quite extensive meanwhile. Therefore, the respective paragraph should read as follows: 'Effect of gender following treatment with Invirase/ritonavir: A gender difference was observed with females showing higher saquinavir exposure than males (AUC on average 56% higher and Cmax on average 26% higher) in the bioequivalence study comparing Invirase 500 mg film coated tablets with Invirase 200 mg hard capsules both in combination with ritonavir. There was no evidence that age and body-weight explained the gender difference in this study. A clinically significant Based on limited experience, no major difference in safety profile and efficacy between men and women has not been reported with the approved dosage regimen. Limited data from controlled clinical studies with the approved dosage regimen do not  indicate a major difference in the efficacy and safety profile between men and women.' · On the one hand it is stated that the medicinal product should be taken with food, on the other hand it says that there is no data available on the effect of food on boosted saquinavir. Without the  respective  background  information,  this  might  appear  misleading  to  the  reader.  Therefore CHMP proposes to reword the text in section 5.2 of SPC as follows: 'In HIV-infected patients, Invirase or Fortovase in combination with ritonavir at doses of 1000/100 mg bid provides saquinavir systemic exposures over a 24-hour period similar to or greater than those achieved with Fortovase 1200 mg tid (see Table 3). The pharmacokinetics of saquinavir are stable during long-term treatment. No food effect data are available for Invirase in combination with ritonavir. Studies with saquinavir in combination with ritonavir have been performed with food only. No data are available for the intake of ritonavir boosted saquinavir in the fasting state. ' · The CHMP also requests that information included in the SPC, e.g . in section 4.4, 4.5, 4.8, 5.1 and 5.2, be revised to better comply with recommendations in the 'Note for Guidance on the clinical development of medicinal products for the treatment of HIV infection'. At present the text mirrors the cumulative growth of experience of saquinavir when it should rather be focusing on the currently approved regimen of boosted saquinavir. 1.5.2 All PL changes as proposed by the MAH are acceptable. Medicinal product no longer authorised

- 1.5.3 All labelling changes as proposed by the MAH are acceptable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.5.4 Important safety data received on 03 February 2005

In a clinical pharmacology study in healthy volunteers, 11/28 (39.3%) subjects exposed to rifampicin 600 mg  daily  taken  together  with  ritonavir  100  mg  and  saquinavir  1000  mg  given  twice  daily  (ritonavir boosted saquinavir) developed significant hepatocellular toxicity.  One subject was admitted to hospital with  mild  liver  failure.  Dosing  was  immediately  interrupted  and  the  study  discontinued  immediately. Liver function tests in all affected subjects are returning to normal following drugs discontinuation. As a result of these findings, Roche advises that Rifampicin SHOULD NOT be used in patients also receiving saquinavir/ritonavir as part of combination antiretroviral therapy (ART).  Roche has distributed a Dear Health Care Provider Letter in which information on these findings is given.  The MAH has to submit Type II variations for all saquinavir containing products with respect to the following SPC changes as soon as possible: -In  section  4.3  rifampicine  has  to  be  included  to  the  list  of  substances  contraindicated  for  use  in patients receiving saquinavir/ritonavir as part of combination antiretroviral therapy -The sections 4.4, 4.5 and 4.8 have to be adapted in order to provide the relevant new information on hepatotoxicty when rifampicin and saquinavir/ritonavir age given concomitantly. 1.6 Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality The quality of this product is considered to be acceptable when used in accordance with the conditions defined in the SPC. Physicochemical and biological aspects relevant to the uniform clinical performance of the product have been investigated and are controlled in a satisfactory way. Non-clinical pharmacology and toxicology Not applicable Clinical Pharmacology The  MAH  has  submitted  three  bioavailability  /  bioequivalence  studies  with  Invirase  FCT  versus  the authorised  reference  product  Invirase  HC.  Bioequivalence  has  adequately  been  demonstrated  in  the pivotal study BP17539. Similar bioavailability (although not formal bioequivalence) has been demonstrated in the pilot study BP17538. No bioequivalence has been demonstrated in study BP17653 in which saquinavir was given without ritonavir; this posology is no longer recommended. In the opinion of the CHMP no further pharmacokinetic studies are necessary with respect to the authorisation of Invirase 500 mg FCT. Medicinal product no longer authorised

No  clinical  safety  studies  using  the  500  mg  Invirase  FCT  formulation  in  a  patient  population  were performed  during  the  development  program  and  the  safety  data  derived  from  the  phase  I  studies  in healthy volunteers is of limited value due to the single dose nature of these studies. Based on the results and  the  gender  effect  noted  in  the  healthy  volunteer  studies  whereby  females  had  higher  saquinavir exposures  than  males  following  administration  of  either  Invirase  FCT  or  Invirase  HC  in  combination with ritonavir, additional supplemental safety analyses have been provided to assess the possibility that tolerability  may  be  affected  given  a  modest  increase  in  saquinavir  exposures.  Steady  state  plasma concentrations  of  saquinavir  following  treatment  with  1000/100 mg  b.i.d.  Invirase  FCT/ritonavir  were predicted  from  the  observed  saquinavir  exposure  in  a  pharmacokinetic  study  in  patients  administered Invirase HC/ritonavir and Fortovase SC/ritonavir. The predicted saquinavir exposure following administration  of  1000/100 mg  b.i.d.  Invirase  FCT/ritonavir  was  shown  to  lie  in  the  range  of  the observed exposure data in patients receiving Invirase HC/ritonavir and Fortovase SC/ritonavir.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Overall, the data suggest that the modest increase in exposures seen following administration of the film coated tablet to healthy volunteers is unlikely to result in a worsening safety profile of the product in patients.

<!-- image -->

The new 500 mg Invirase FCT formulation is not yet licensed in any region. Therefore there is currently no post-marketing data for this product. The safety data, which were gathered in the three pharmacokinetic studies, should not be overestimated since one cannot compare the administration of single doses of Invirase in healthy volunteers with the administration of therapeutic doses of Invirase in HIV infected patients. One can just conclude that the safety  data  in  healthy  volunteers  have  not  shown  any  new  signal,  which  would  change  the  known benefit/risk ratio of saquinavir. Benefit/risk assessment The benefit/risk ratio of Invirase 500 mg FCT is not different from that of the authorised Invirase 200 mg HC. Since the new 500 mg film-coated tablet enables the reduction of the 'pill burden' to the patient from  10  to  4  saquinavir  containing  units  per  day,  compliance  might  be  improved,  and  this  is  an advantage to the therapy.   Hence, it is deemed that the benefit / risk ratio of Invirase 500 mg film-coated tablets is positive. Recommendation Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  data  on  quality,  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the benefit/risk ratio of Invirase 500 mg film-coated tablets in the following indication 'Invirase is indicated for  the  treatment  of  HIV-1  infected  adult  patients.  Invirase  should  only  be  given  in  combination  with ritonavir  and  other  antiretroviral  medicinal  products'  was  favourable  and  therefore  recommended  the granting of the marketing authorisation for this new strength. Medicinal product no longer authorised