---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:35:41
document_pages: 43
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/silgard-h-c-732-ii-18-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: silgard-h-c-732-ii-18-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 34.7106316
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 11:52:37.315796
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 23 July 2009 Doc. Ref: EMEA/CHMP/492404/2009

CHMP VARIATION ASSESSMENT REPORT Invented name/Name : Silgard International non-proprietary name/Common name: human papillomavirus vaccine [types 6, 11, 16, 18] (recombinant, adsorbed) TYPE II VARIATION: EMEA/H/C/000732/II/0018 Variation Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted Medicinal product no longer authorised

7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK

Tel. (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Table of contents

| I.      | SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION                          | 3             |
|---------|------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| 1.1.    | Introduction                                   | 3             |
| 1.2     | Clinical efficacy                              | 3             |
| 1.2.1   | Protocol 019                                   | 4             |
| 1.2.1.1 | Methods                                        | 4             |
| 1.2.1.2 | Results                                        | 7             |
| 1.2.1.3 | Discussion                                     | 20            |
| 1.3     | Immunogenicity                                 | 26            |
| 1.3.1   | Methods                                        | 26 authorised |
| 1.3.2   | Results                                        | 27            |
| 1.3.2.1 | Protocol 19                                    | 27            |
| 1.3.2.2 | Integrated review                              | 30            |
| 1.3.3   | Discussion                                     | 30            |
| 1.4     | Clinical safety                                | 32            |
| 1.4.1   | Protocol 019                                   | 32            |
| 1.4.2   | Protocols 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 combined  | 34            |
| 1.4.3   | Discussion                                     | 35            |
| 1.5     | Pharmacovigilance system                       | 36            |
| 1.5.1   | Risk Management Plan                           | 36            |
| 1.6     | Overall discussion and benefit-risk assessment | 37            |
| 1.6     | Changes to the product information             | 41            |
| IV.     | CONCLUSION                                     | 42            |
| VI.     | GLOSSARY                                       | 43            |

## 1.2.1.2 Results 1.2.1.3 Discussion 1.3 Immunogenicity 1.3.1 Methods 1.3.2 Results 1.3.2.1 Protocol 19 1.3.2.2 Integrated review 1.3.3 Discussion 1.4 Clinical safety 1.4.1 Protocol 019 1.4.2 Protocols 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 combined 1.4.3 Discussion 1.5 Pharmacovigilance system 1.5.1 Risk Management Plan 1.6 Overall discussion and benefit-risk assessment 1.6 Changes to the product information IV. CONCLUSION VI. GLOSSARY Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 1.1. Introduction

Silgard is a quadrivalent (HPV Types 6, 11, 16 and 18) recombinant HPV (qHPV) vaccine licensed on 24 September 2006.

Silgard is indicated in the prevention of premalignant genital lesions (cervical, vulvar and vaginal), cervical  cancer  and  external  genital  warts  (condyloma  acuminata)  causally  related  to  Human Papillomavirus (HPV) types 6, 11, 16 and 18.

The main goal of the study was to provide data to support that efficacy was comparable to that shown in young adult women (YAW) and thereby allowing the inclusion of a statement in the indication that efficacy against premalignant genital lesions, cervical cancer and genital warts has been demonstrated in women up to the age of 45 years. The study was designed to demonstrate the efficacy in MAW with respect to the composite co-primary endpoints of HPV 6/11/16/18- and HPV 16/18-related persistent infection  and  clinical  disease  (CIN,  AIS  and  EGLs).  The  scientific  basis  for  these  endpoints constituted the natural history of HPV and the results of the clinical program in YAW. The original licensure  of  the  qHPV  vaccine  was  based  on  histologically-confirmed  efficacy  endpoints,  i.e.  HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3 and AIS, as surrogates for cervical cancer. Subsequent to the demonstration of robust efficacy in this endpoint in YAW, a virological endpoint was applied in the study of MAW.

The current indication is based on the demonstration of efficacy of qHPV vaccine in adult females 16 to 26 years of age and on the demonstration of immunogenicity of qHPV vaccine in 9- to 15-year old children and adolescents. The present type II variation application aimed to extend the therapeutic indication to women up to 45 years old, based on submission of data on efficacy, immunogenicity, and safety of the qHPV vaccine in female subjects 24 to 45 years of age from an on-going phase III study (Protocol 019). The MAH proposed amendments of the age range in section 4.1 of the SPC is as follows: Gardasil /Silgard is a vaccine for the prevention of premalignant genital lesions (cervical, vulvar and vaginal), cervical  cancer  and  external  genital  warts  (condyloma  acuminata)  causally  related  to Human Papillomavirus (HPV) types 6, 11, 16 and 18 (see section 5.1). The indication is based on the demonstration of efficacy of Gardasil/Silgard in adult females 16 to 26 45 years of age and on the demonstration of immunogenicity of Gardasil/Silgard in 9- to 15-year old children and adolescents. Protective efficacy has not been evaluated in males (see section 5.1). The use of Gardasil/Silgard should be in accordance with official recommendations. This variation also aimed to update all relevant sections of the SPC (sections 4.5, 4.6. 4.8 and 5.1) and PL (sections 1, 3 and 4) to reflect the study results obtained in mid-adult women. Following CHMP major objections to extend the age range of woman up to age of 45, which could not be overcome by the MAH, the MAH agreed not to pursue with the extension of indication and limited this application to the update of sections 4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.8 and 5.1. 1.2 Clinical efficacy The HPV attack rate is high in sexually active adults and women remain at risk for acquisition of new infections  throughout  their  sexual  lives.  The  incidence  of  HPV  disease  peaks  within  10  years  after sexual debut. However, social changes (e.g. later marriage, increasing divorce rate) have increased the risk in women in their late 20s, 30s and 40s. The literature review provided by the MAH showed that HPV incidence rates in MAW varied by country, in general decreased with increasing age, but were still  noticeable  at  older  ages.  The  published  data  suggest  that  at  least  60%  of  MAW  will  remain susceptible  to  vaccine  HPV  type  infection  and  can  potentially  benefit  from  the  qHPV  vaccine. Therefore, the MAH has conducted this efficacy study in mid-adult women (MAW). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Persistent  HPV infection is  recognized  as  a  necessary  pre-requisite  for  the  development  of  cervical cancer.  Comparable  efficacy  against  HPV  16/18-related  persistent  infection  and  CIN  2/3  was demonstrated in the YAW studies.

## 1.2.1 Protocol 019

## 1.2.1.1  Methods

| Study Protocol            | No. of study centres / locations/dates                                                                    | Study vaccine No/study arm           | No subjects and age group                                                                                | Primary Endpoint                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Duration Post-7 mo FU                               |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| P019 Phase III FUTURE III | US, Europe (France, Germany, Spain), Colombia, Thailand (n=38 sites) 18 Jun 2004 - 13 Jul 2007 (on-going) | qHPV vaccine n=1910 Placebo (n=1907) | N=3819 24-45 year-old women Mean 34.3 years Age stratification (1:1): 24-34 years: 35 to 45 years of age | Co-primary endpoint: - the incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18- related persistent infection, CIN, AIS, cervical cancer or EGLs (genital warts, VIN, VaIN or vulvar/vaginal cancer) - the incidence of HPV 16/18-related persistent infection, CIN, AIS, cervical cancer or EGLs | Mean: 19 months (Ongoing planned follow-up 4 years) |

The claim of efficacy in mid-adult women (MAW) is based on one randomized controlled efficacy trial Protocol 019 (summarized in table 1) including 3819 healthy sexually active 24- to 45-year old women. Randomization was stratified by age in approximately 1:1 ratio into 2 groups, those 24 to 34 years  and  those  35  to  45  years.  Within  each  age  stratum  subjects  were  randomized  in  1:1  ratio  to qHPV vaccine or placebo. Table 1: Summary of study P019 Study participants The study subjects were healthy 24 to 45-year-old women. The studies did not include pre-screening visit  for  HPV. Thus, both naïve individuals and individuals who had been exposed to HPV prior to enrolment were included. All subjects had at inclusion:  Serum anti-HPV testing  Pap test  Cervicovaginal sampling for HPV typing  Colposcopy if Pap test showed some abnormalities To enrich the population with HPV naïve subjects, intact cervix (i.e. those without hysterectomy) was used  as  screening  criterion.  Subjects  who  had  surgical  treatment  (such  as  conisation,  LEEP,  laser cervical cryotherapy) or subjects who had a cervical biopsy taken within 5 years were not eligible for further evaluation. Populations The following populations were considered for the HPV-specific efficacy analysis: Per-protocol efficacy:  Received all 3 doses of study vaccine  Were seronegative to relevant vaccine HPV type(s) at Day 1  Were PCR negative to relevant vaccine HPV type(s) Day 1 to Month 7  Did not have general protocol violations  Cases counted starting 30 days postdose 3 (Month 7). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The Per-Protocol Efficacy (PPE) population was used as the primary efficacy population.

HPV-Naïve to the Relevant-HPV-Type (HNRT) population*

-  Received at least 1 vaccination
-  Were seronegative to relevant vaccine HPV type(s) Day 1
-  Were PCR negative to relevant vaccine HPV type(s) Day 1

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  Cases counted starting after Day 1

(*This  population  was  similar  to  the  Modified  Intention  to  Treat-2  (MITT-2)  population  for  YAW  (used  in  P005,  P007, P013, P015) but for MITT-2, cases counted starting after Day 30)

The HNRT population was used as a supportive population.

## Full Analysis Set (FAS)*

-  Received at least 1dose of study vaccine
-  Regardless of PCR status at Day 1

 Had at least one follow-up visit after Day 1  Cases counted starting after Day 1 (*This  FAS  population  is  similar  to  the  MITT-3  population  in  studies  in  YAW.  However,  in  the  MITT-3 population, cases were counted started after Day 30) The FAS population represents the general (female) population (ITT) in this age group. For the analyses that were not HPV-vaccine-type specific (population benefit analyses) the following populations were defined: Generally HPV-naïve (GHN) population*  Received at least 1 vaccination  Were seronegative and PCR negative to all 4 vaccine HPV types at Day 1;  Were PCR negative to non-vaccine HPV type for which testing were available (HPV 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, and 59) at Day 1,  Had a negative-for-SIL Pap test result at Day 1;  Had at least one follow-up visit following Day 1.  Cases were counted starting after Day 1. (*For studies conducted in YAW, the generally HPV-naïve (GHN) population was referred to as the RMITT-2 population. In the RMITT-2 population, cases were counted starting after Day 30 instead of after Day 1) The GHN population represents the primary analysis population HPV-naïve to the relevant type (HNRT)  Received at least 1 vaccination  Were sero- and PCR-negative at Day 1 to the appropriate vaccine HPV type (HPV 6, 11, 16, 18);  were  PCR-negative at Day 1 to the appropriate non-vaccine HPV type for which PCR assays were available (31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, or 59), or had a negative Day 1 Pap test result;  Cases were counted starting after Day 1. The HNRT population is a supportive population. Full Analysis Set (FAS) General population (ITT) as defined above. Treatments Subjects  were  randomised  1:1  to  receive  either  quadrivalent  HPV  VPL  vaccine  (20/40/40/20mcg  + 225mcg  amorphous  aluminium  hydroxyphosphate  sulphate  (AAHS)  adjuvant)  or  placebo  (225mcg Aluminium adjuvant in normal saline) at Day 1, Month 2 and Month 6. Objectives Medicinal product no longer authorised

The primary efficacy  study  objectives  were  to  demonstrate  that  administration  of  the  HPV  vaccine would reduce the combined incidence of:

-  HPV 6/11/16/18-related persistent infection, genital warts, VIN, VaIN, vulvar cancer, vaginal cancer, CIN, AIS, and cervical cancer, compared with placebo in 24- to 45-year-old women who are naïve to the relevant HPV type at baseline.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  HPV16/18-related  persistent  infection,  genital  warts,  VIN,  VaIN,  vulvar  cancer,  vaginal cancer, CIN, AIS, and cervical cancer, compared with placebo in 24- to 45-year-old women who are naïve to the relevant HPV type at baseline.

The secondary efficacy study objectives were to demonstrate that administration of the HPV vaccine would reduce the combined incidence of:



-  The number of subjects in the PPE population who developed a HPV 31/33/35/52/58-related persistent  infection,  external  genital  warts,  VIN,  VaIN,  vulvar  cancer,  vaginal  cancer,  CIN (any grade), AIS, and cervical cancer.

 HPV6/11-related persistent infection, genital warts, VIN, VaIN, vulvar cancer, vaginal cancer, CIN, AIS, and cervical cancer, compared with placebo in 24- to 45-year-old women who are naïve to the relevant HPV type at baseline.  HPV  31/33/35/52/58-related  persistent  infection,  genital  warts,  VIN,  VaIN,  vulvar  cancer, vaginal cancer, CIN, AIS, and cervical cancer, compared with placebo in 24- to 45-year-old women who are naïve to the relevant HPV type at baseline. Outcomes/endpoints Primary efficacy endpoint First co-primary endpoint:  The  combined  incidence  of  HPV  6,  11,  16,  and  18-related  persistent  infection  CIN  (any grade), AIS, or EGLs. The definition of the persistent infection endpoint for the first primary endpoint encompassed:  Persistent  vaccine-type  infection  without  confirmed  CIN  -  defined  as  detection  of  HPV positivity for the same HPV type by the HPV 6/11/16/18 PCR assay in 2 or more consecutive cervicovaginal specimens obtained at least 6 months apart (within ± 4-week windows).  Vaccine-type HPV infection with confirmed CIN - defined as a consensus Pathology Panel diagnosis of CIN 1, CIN 2, CIN 3, AIS or cervical cancer plus detection of the corresponding HPV vaccine type in specimens obtained from the same lesion, plus detection of HPV vaccine type on the routine visit immediately prior to colposcopy visit in which the biopsy showing CIN, AIS or cervical cancer was obtained. Second co-primary endpoint:  The combined incidence of persistent HPV 16 and HPV 18 infection and HPV 16- and 18related CIN (any grade), AIS or EGLs. Secondary efficacy endpoint The number of subjects in the PPE population who developed a HPV 6- and HPV 11-related persistent  infection,  external  genital  warts,  VIN,  VaIN,  vulvar  cancer,  vaginal  cancer,  CIN (any grade), AIS, and cervical cancer. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Statistical methods

Study  019  employed  a  fixed  event  design.  Hypothesis  testing  was  planned  on  3  endpoints, HPV6/11/16/18-  (co-primary), HPV  16/18-  (co-primary)  and  HPV  6/11-  (secondary)  -related persistent infection and disease. The testing of the endpoints was to be performed in a priority order, where testing of the successive endpoints would only proceed if success was achieved in the previous

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

endpoint.  The  testing  was  to  take  place  when  at  least  25  subjects  had  developed  a  case  of HPV6/11/16/18-related endpoint and at least 14 subjects had developed a case of HPV 16/18-related endpoint in the PPE population. For the secondary HPV 6/11-related endpoint, 19 subjects were the target number. The study was powered for the two co-primary endpoints, but not to detect statistically significant  efficacy  with  respect  to  the  individual  components  of  the  composites.  The  stipulated number of primary and secondary endpoints was reached as of 13 Jul-2007, after 2.2 years of followup post-enrollment. The statistical methods are considered acceptable.

1.2.1.2 Results A total  of  3819  subjects  were  enrolled  in  the  study.  Protocol  019  is  ongoing  and  therefore,  a  large number of subjects are continuing in the efficacy follow-up period. The mean duration of follow-up post-enrollment  was  2.2  years.  Final  analyses  are  planned  for  End-of-Study  (through  4.0  years  of follow-up post-enrollment). Thirty-eight study centers located in 7 countries in France, Germany, Spain, Columbia, Philippines, Thailand  and  the  US  conducted  the  study.  The  3  countries  with  the  highest  number  of  recruitment were Colombia (43% of study population), Thailand (20%) and the US (14%). Europe enrolled 12.6% of the study population. Overall,  96.8%  of  all  subjects  completed  the  vaccination  phase.  The  proportions  of  subjects  who completed  the  vaccination  phase  were  comparable  between  the  vaccine  and  the  placebo  group. Altogether, 2.5% of the subjects discontinued participation in the study during the vaccination period and 1.0% discontinued participation in the study in the follow-up period. Baseline data The 2 vaccination groups were well balanced with respect to baseline demographics. The mean age was 34.3 years.  The  majority  of  subjects  were  Hispanic  American  (43%).  Europe  contributed  only 12.6% of study subjects. Sexual  demographics  were  comparable  between  vaccination  groups.  Overall  99.9%  of  subjects  had experienced sexual debut. The median first intercourse was 18 years (range: 4 to 39) and the median number of lifetime sex partners was 2 in both groups and in both age strata. In both vaccination groups approximately 30% of subjects were positive to a HPV vaccine type by serology  and  approximately  8%  were  positive  by  PCR.  Altogether  67%  of  the  population  was seronegative and PCR negative to all vaccine HPV types 6, 11, 16 and 18. The vaccination groups were comparable with respect to the overall proportions of subjects with detectable vaccine HPV type DNA at baseline. By age, the proportion of subjects who were PCR positive was lower in the 35 to 45 year-old stratum than in the 24 to 34 year-olds (5.6% vs. 10.2%) whereas with respect to serology the proportions were similar (28.8% vs. 30.7%). Pap test results showed that SIL was present in 7.5% of subjects. The proportions of subjects reporting a  SIL-related  diagnosis  were  comparable  between  the  2  vaccination  groups.  When  analysed  by  age stratum,  higher  occurrence  of  an  abnormal  Pap  test  was  reported  in  the  24  to  34  year  age  group compared with the 35 to 45 year old women (6.8% vs. 2.6% in the respective vaccine group  and 5.9% vs. 4.0% in the placebo groups). Efficacy against HPV 6/11/16/18-related persistent infection, CIN and EGL The results presented in the tables were analysed using 6-month persistent infection. PPE-population Medicinal product no longer authorised

Results  with  respect  to  the  primary  and  secondary  efficacy  endpoints  in  the  primary  efficacy population  (PPE)  are  displayed  in  Table  2.  The  results  were  statistically  significant  in  all  three analyses (p&lt;0.001) and were comparable within each of the two protocol-defined age strata.

Efficacy against HPV 18- and HPV 11-related endpoints could not be confirmed, due to the fact that too few and no cases, respectively, were observed.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table  2:  Analysis  of  efficacy  against  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  persistent  infection  (PI),  CIN  or EGL (PPE population )

Of the 45 HPV 6/11/16/18-related endpoint cases, 4 cases occurred in the vaccine group. There were 3 cases  of  HPV  16  persistent  infection  (6-month  definition)  and  1  case  of  HPV  16-related  CIN  2 (positive for HPV types 16 and 51 at a month 18 biopsy). All of the 4 cases occurred early in the follow-up, 5 and 11 months after completion of the 3-dose series. All of these cases had satisfactory anti-HPV 16 responses at Month 7 including  two of them having evidence of an anamnestic response with very high antibody levels at Month 7. Vaccine efficacy against HPV 6/11/1/18-related related persistent infection, CIN and EGL was also calculated  excluding  the  endpoint  HPV  6  and  11-  related  persistent  infection  in  PPE  population. Vaccine efficacy was 86.0% (95% CI: 60.0, 96.4). The MAH further calculated this primary combined endpoint using 12-month persistent infection. For HPV 16/18-related  persistent  infection,  CIN  and  EGL  vaccine  efficacy  was  84.5%  (95%  CI:  47.4, 97.1) using 12-month persistent infection. Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                               | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   | Observed efficacy   |            |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|------------|
| Endpoint                      | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | %                   | 95% CI     |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI, CIN or EGL | 1615                  | 4                     | 1607             | 41               | 90.5                | 73.7, 97.5 |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |            |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 792                   | 2                     | 792              | 24               | 91.8                | 67.1, 99.1 |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 823                   | 2                     | 815              | 17               | 88.6                | 51.9, 98.7 |
| HPV 16/18 PI, CIN or EGL      | 1601                  | 4                     | 1579             | 23               | 83.1                | 50.6, 95.8 |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |            |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 784                   | 2                     | 774              | 13               | 85.0                | 33.8, 98.4 |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 817                   | 2                     | 805              | 10               | 80.6                | 9.1, 97.9  |
| HPV 6/11 PI, CIN or EGL       | 1329                  | 0                     | 1323             | 19               | 100                 | 79.0, 100  |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |            |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 636                   | 0                     | 653              | 12               | 100                 | 63.7, 100  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 693                   | 0                     | 670              | 7                | 100                 | 33.6, 100  |
| By HPV type (all ages)        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |            |
| HPV 6                         | 1329                  | 0                     | 1323             | 19               | 100 NA              | 79.0, 100  |
| HPV 11                        | 1329                  | 0                     | 1323             | 0                | 100 NA              | NA         |
| HPV 16                        | 1347                  | 4                     | 1325             | 18               | 78.3                | 34.1, 94.7 |
| HPV 18                        | 1522                  | 0                     | 1512             | 5                | 100                 | -7.1, 100  |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## HNRT population

Results for this population are presented in table 3. Vaccine efficacy was 74.6% (95% CI 58.1, 85.3). Twenty  (20)  cases  were  observed  in  the  vaccinated  arm  (16  new  cases  compared  with  the  PPE population). Ten (10) of these new cases were HPV 16/18-related.

VE was lower in the older age stratum versus the younger stratum (VE: 62.3% vs. 79.8%).

Table 3: Analysis of efficacy against HPV 6/11/16/18-related PI, CIN or EGL (HNRT)

|                               | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   | Observed efficacy   |             |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|-------------|
| Endpoint                      | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | %                   | 95% CI      |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI, CIN or EGL | 1841                  | 20                    | 1833             | 77               | 74.6                | 58.1, 85.3  |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 914                   | 11                    | 920              | 54               | 79.8                | 61.0, 90.5  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 927                   | 9                     | 913              | 23               | 62.3                | 15.4, 84.6  |
| HPV 16/18 PI, CIN or EGL      | 1823                  | 14                    | 1803             | 48               | 71.6                | 47.6, 85.5  |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 904                   | 9                     | 901              | 33               | 73.0                | 42.3, 88.6  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 919                   | 5                     | 902              | 15               | 68.0                | 7.3, 90.9   |
| HPV 6/11 PI, CIN or EGL       | 1514                  | 6                     | 1514             | 30               | 80.2                | 51.7, 93.3  |
| By age                        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds            | 735                   | 2                     | 770              | 22               | 90.6                | 61.7, 98.9  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds            | 779                   | 4                     | 744              | 8                | 52.8                | -76.1, 89.6 |
| By HPV type (all ages)        |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer              |             |
| HPV 6                         | 1514                  | 6                     | 1514             | 30               | 80.2                | 51.7, 93.3  |
| HPV 11                        | 1514                  | 0                     | 1514             | 0                | NA                  | NA          |
| HPV 16                        | 1554                  | 13                    | 1524             | 37               | 65.8                | 34.2, 83.3  |
| HPV 18                        | 1741                  | 1                     | 1726             | 12               | 91.8                | 44.5, 99.8  |

|                                         | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                     |                |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|----------------|
| Endpoint                                | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % | 95% CI         |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI, CIN or EGL Medicinal | 1886                  | 108                   | 1883             | 154              | 30.9                | 11.1, 46.5     |
| By age                                  |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |                |
| 24 to 34 year-olds                      | 937                   | 71                    | 944              | 94               | 23.7                | -4.9, 44.7     |
| 35 to 45 year-olds                      | 949                   | 37                    | 939              | 60               | 40.7                | 9.2, 61.7      |
| HPV 16/18 PI, CIN or EGL                | 1886                  | 90                    | 1883             | 115              | 22.6                | -2.9, 41.9     |
| By age                                  |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |                |
| 24 to 34 year-olds                      | 937                   | 57                    | 944              | 70               | 17.7                | -18.4, 43.0    |
| 35 to 45 year-olds                      | 949                   | 33                    | 939              | 45               | 28.9                | -13.9, 56.1    |
| HPV 6/11 PI, CIN or EGL                 | 1886                  | 24                    | 1883             | 45               | 47.1                | 11.4, 69.2     |
| By age                                  |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |                |
| 24 to 34 year-olds                      | 937                   | 17                    | 944              | 28               | 38.4                | -16.5, 68.4    |
| 35 to 45 year-olds                      | 949                   | 7                     | 939              | 17               | 60.1                | -1.3, 86.0     |
| By HPV type (all ages)                  |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |                |
| HPV 6                                   | 1886                  | 22                    | 1883             | 44               | 50.5                | 15.6, 71.7     |
| HPV 11                                  | 1886                  | 2                     | 1883             | 1                | -99.0               | -11641.1, 89.6 |
| HPV 16                                  | 1886                  | 72                    | 1883             | 89               | 19.8                | -10.6, 42.1    |
| HPV 18                                  | 1886                  | 19                    | 1883             | 30               | 37.2                | -15.3, 66.6    |

FAS population Vaccine efficacy against the HPV 6/11/16/18-related endpoint was much lower in the FAS population (VE: 30.9%) (Table 4). As regards the HPV 16/18-related endpoint only a numerical reduction was seen (lower bound of the 95% CI &lt;0%). Table 4: Analysis of efficacy against HPV 6/11/16/18-related PI, CIN or EGL (FAS population) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Vaccine  efficacy  against  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  related  persistent  infection,  CIN  and  EGL  was calculated excluding the endpoint HPV 6 and 11- related persistent infection in FAS population. No statistical significant efficacy was demonstrated [23.7% (95% CI: -0.1, 42.0)].

## Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related persistent infection

The results presented in the tables were analysed using 6-month persistent infection.

## PPE population

|                                | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                            |             |
|--------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|----------------------------|-------------|
| Endpoint                       | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % longer | 95% CI      |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI              | 1593                  | 3                     | 1592             | 40               | 92.6                       | 76.9, 98.5  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 780                   | 2                     | 788              | 24               | 91.7                       | 66.4, 99.0  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 813                   | 1                     | 804              | 16               | 94.0                       | 61.1, 99.9  |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1593                  | 3                     | 1592             | 38               | 92.2                       | 75.5, 98.5  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1593                  | 0                     | 1592             | 3                | 100                        | -140.3, 100 |
| HPV 16/18 PI                   | 1580                  | 3                     | 1565 no          | 22               | 86.7                       | 55.6, 97.4  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 773                   | 2                     | 770              | 13               | 84.7                       | 32.5, 98.3  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 807                   | 1                     | 795              | 9                | 89.3                       | 33.8, 99.8  |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1580                  | 3                     | 1565             | 22               | 86.7                       | 55.6, 96.8  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1501                  | 0                     | 1565             | 0                | NA                         | NA          |
|                                | product               | product               |                  |                  |                            |             |
| HPV 6/11 PI                    | 1310                  | 0                     | 1311             | 19               | 100.0                      | 78.7, 100   |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 627                   | 0                     | 650              | 12               | 100                        | 62.9, 100   |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 683                   | 0                     | 661              | 7                | 100                        | 33.6, 100   |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1310                  | 0                     | 1311             | 16               | 100                        | 74.2, 100   |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1310                  | 0                     | 1311             | 3                | 100                        | -141.5, 100 |
| By HPV type (all ages)         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                            |             |
| HPV 6                          | 1310                  | 0                     | 1311             | 19               | 100                        | 78.7, 100   |
| HPV 11                         | 1310                  | 0                     | 1310             | 0                | NA                         | NA          |
| HPV 16                         | 1333                  | 3                     | 1319             | 17               | 82.7                       | 40.2, 96.8  |
| HPV 18                         | 1501                  | 0                     | 1498             | 5                | 100                        | -7.8, 100   |

<!-- image -->

The analysis  of  efficacy  against  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  persistent  infection  gave  similar  results  as that  of  the  composite  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  endpoint,  since  persistent  infection  comprised  the majority of the composite persistent infection and disease endpoint (Table 5). Efficacy estimates against the HPV 16/18-related persistent infection were similar in both age strata. All the persistent infection endpoints in the vaccine group, and majority of those in the placebo group, were HPV 16-related. With regard to HPV 6/11-related persistent infection there were no cases in the vaccine group (VE: 100%). Table 5: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type-related persistent infection (PI) (PPE-population) The MAH further presented the results using 12-month persistent infection. For HPV 16/18-related persistent infection, VE was 80.4% (8.0, 97.9). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## HNRT population

The efficacy estimates were lower in the HNRT population compared to the PPE population (see table 6). The findings with respect to persistent infection were similar to the results of analyses of efficacy against the composite HPV 6/11/16/18-related endpoint.

A  single  case  of  persistent  HPV  18  infection  was  observed  in  the  vaccine  group,  which  started between Day 1 and Month 7.

Table 6: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related persistent infection (HNRT-population)

Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                                | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                     |             |
|--------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|-------------|
| Endpoint                       | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % | 95% CI      |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI              | 1811                  | 19                    | 1807             | 76               | 75.5                | 59.0, 86.0  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 893                   | 11                    | 906              | 54               | 79.6                | 60.5, 90.4  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 918                   | 8                     | 901              | 22               | 65.1                | 18.6, 86.6  |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1811                  | 18                    | 1807             | 71               | 75.1                | 57.8, 86.0  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1811                  | 1                     | 1807             | 6                | 83.4                | -36.7, 99.6 |
| HPV 16/18 PI                   | 1793                  | 13                    | 1777             | 47               | 73.0                | 49.2, 86.6  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer              |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 883                   | 9                     | 887              | 33               | 72.7                | 41.7, 88.5  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 910                   | 4                     | 890              | 14               | 72.7                | 13.0,93.5   |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1793                  | 12                    | 1777             | 47               | 75.0                | 52.2, 87.9  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1793                  | 1                     | 1777             | 0                | NA                  | NA          |
| HPV 6/11 PI                    | 1497                  | 6                     | 1496             | 30               | 80.1                | 51.4, 93.2  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 723                   | 2                     | 758 no           | 22               | 90.5                | 61.2, 98.9  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 774                   | 4                     | 738              | 8                | 52.8                | -76.4, 89.6 |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1497                  | 6                     | 1496             | 24               | 75.1                | 37.5, 91.7  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1497                  | 0                     | 1496             | 6                | 100                 | 15.1, 100   |
| By HPV type (all ages)         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| HPV 6                          | 1497                  | 6                     | 1496             | 30               | 80.1                | 51.4, 93.2  |
| HPV 11                         | 1497                  | 0                     | 1496             | 0                | NA                  | NA          |
| HPV 16                         | 1528                  | 12                    | 1501             | 36               | 67.5                | 36.1, 84.6  |
| HPV 18                         | 1711                  | 1                     | 1702             | 12               | 91.8                | 44.3, 99.8  |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## FAS population

Overall vaccine efficacy estimates were substantially lower in this population compared with the PPE population,  as  could  be  explained  by  the  inclusion  of  subjects  with  infections  that  were  present  at vaccination onset (Table 7). Only trends were observed for the majority of endpoints. With respect to HPV 6/11-related infections less impact was seen than that of HPV 16/18-related endpoint, due the lower baseline prevalence of HPV 6/11 and the shorter duration of this infection.

Table 7: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related persistent infection (FAS-population)

|                                | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                     |             |
|--------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|-------------|
| Endpoint                       | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % | 95% CI      |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 PI              | 1856                  | 102                   | 1856             | 151              | 33.2                | 13.6, 48.6  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 916                   | 67                    | 929              | 93               | 26.7                | -1.5, 47.3  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 940                   | 35                    | 927              | 58               | 42.0                | 10.2, 63.0  |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1856                  | 91                    | 1856             | 130              | 30.8                | 8.8, 47.6   |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1856                  | 12                    | 1856             | 22               | 45.6                | -14.7, 75.5 |
| HPV 16/18 PI                   | 1856                  | 86                    | 1856             | 112              | 23.9                | -1.7, 43.2  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 916                   | 55                    | 929              | 69               | 18.8                | -17.4, 44.1 |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 940                   | 31                    | 927              | 43               | 30.3                | -13.2, 57.6 |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1856                  | 75                    | 1856             | 96               | 22.5                | -5.9, 43.5  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1856                  | 11                    | 1856             | 16               | 31.6                | -57.0, 71.3 |
| HPV 6/11 PI                    | 1856                  | 21                    | 1856             | 45               | 53.6                | 20.5, 73.8  |
| By age                         |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer              |             |
| 24 to 34 year-olds             | 916                   | 14                    | 929              | 28               | 48.9                | -0.4, 75.1  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds             | 940                   | 7                     | 927 no           | 17               | 60.2                | -1.1, 86.0  |
| By severity                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| PI without HPV-related disease | 1856                  | 20                    | 1856             | 39               | 49.0                | 10.4, 71.8  |
| PI with HPV-related disease    | 1856                  | 1                     | 1856             | 6                | 83.4                | -37.1, 99.6 |
| By HPV type (all ages)         |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |             |
| HPV 6                          | 1856                  | 20                    | 1856             | 44               | 54.8                | 21.8, 74.8  |
| HPV 11                         | 1856                  | 1                     | 1856             | 1                | 0.0                 | -7727, 98.7 |
| HPV 16                         | 1856                  | 68                    | 1856             | 87               | 22.3                | -8.0, 44.3  |
| HPV 18                         | 1855                  | 19                    | 1855             | 29               | 34.8                | -20.2, 65.5 |

<!-- image -->

The MAH further presented the results using 12-month persistent infection. For HPV 16/18-related persistent infection, no statistical significant efficacy was shown [14.6% (-24.3, 41.6)]. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Efficacy against vaccine HPV type-related CIN

## PPE population

The results of the PPE analysis of efficacy against HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN showed VE of 90.1%, with 1 case in the vaccine group versus 10 cases in the placebo group (Table 8). Efficacy against HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3 or AIS was not statistically significant with one case in the vaccine group and 4 cases in the placebo group (VE: 75.2% (95% CI: -150.6, 99.5)). The one case in the vaccine group was a case of HPV 16-related CIN 2 (positive for HPV types 16 and 51 at Month 18 biopsy).

|                    | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   | Observed efficacy %   |              |
|--------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------------|--------------|
| Endpoint           | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  |                       | 95% CI       |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 CIN | 1595                  | 1                     | 1592             | 10               | 90.1                  | 30.3, 99.8   |
| By age             |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds | 779                   | 0                     | 787              | 5                | 100                   | -10.3, 100   |
| 35 to 45 year-olds | 816                   | 1                     | 805              | 5                | 80.5                  | -73.9, 99.6  |
| By severity        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| CIN 1              | 1595                  | 0                     | 1592             | 7                | 100                   | 31.2, 100    |
| CIN 2/3 or AIS     | 1595                  | 1                     | 1592             | 4                | 75.2                  | -150.6, 99.5 |
| CIN 2              | 1595                  | 1                     | 1592             | 3                | 66.9                  | -311.8, 99.4 |
| CIN 3              | 1595                  | 0                     | 1592             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
| AIS                | 1595                  | 0                     | 1592             | 1                | 100                   | -3768.0, 100 |
| Cervical cancer    | 1595                  | 0                     | 1592             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
| HPV 16/18 CIN      | 1582                  | 1                     | 1566             | 8                | 87.7                  | 8.3, 99.7    |
| By age             |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer                |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds | 772                   | 0                     | 770              | 4                | 100                   | -51.5, 100   |
| 35 to 45 year-olds | 810                   | 1                     | 796              | 4                | 75.8                  | -144.6, 99.5 |
| By HPV type        |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| (all ages)         |                       |                       | no               |                  |                       |              |
| HPV 6              | 1313                  | 0                     | 1312             | 3                | 100                   | -140.8, 100  |
| HPV 11             | 1313                  | 0                     | 1312             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
| HPV 16             | 1335                  | 1                     | 1320             | 6                | 83.6                  | -35.2, 99.6  |
| HPV 18             | 1504                  | 0                     | 1499             | 2                | 100                   | -427.1, 100  |

Table 8: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related CIN (PPE-population) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## HNRT population

In the HNRT analysis, VE was 81.4% (table 9).

The number of CIN 2/3 cases in the vaccine group was almost the same as that in the placebo group (3 vs. 4 cases), but by severity it was worse with the only case of CIN 3 in the vaccine group. VE against HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3 or AIS was only 25.4% (95% CI: -340.8, 89.1). Two of the CIN 2/3 cases in the vaccine group were detected early in the follow-up, at Month 8 and Month 9, despite that the subjects were HPV-naïve at baseline.

|                        | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   | Observed efficacy %   |              |
|------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------------|--------------|
| Endpoint               | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  |                       | 95% CI       |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 CIN     | 1817                  | 3                     | 1812             | 16               | 81.4                  | 34.9, 96.5   |
| By age                 |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds     | 896                   | 2                     | 908              | 10               | 79.5                  | 4.0, 97.8    |
| 35 to 45 year-olds     | 921                   | 1                     | 904              | 6                | 83.9                  | -32.6, 90.7  |
| By severity            |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| CIN 1                  | 1817                  | 1                     | 1812             | 13               | 92.4                  | 49.1, 99.8   |
| CIN 2/3 or AIS         | 1817                  | 3                     | 1812             | 4                | 25.4                  | -340.8, 89.1 |
| CIN 2                  | 1817                  | 3                     | 1812             | 3                | 0.6                   | -642.3, 86.7 |
| CIN 3                  | 1817                  | 1                     | 1812             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
| AIS                    | 1817                  | 0                     | 1812             | 1                | 100                   | -3777, 100   |
| Cervical cancer        | 1817                  | 0                     | 1812             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
|                        |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer                |              |
| HPV 16/18 CIN          | 1799                  | 3                     | 1782             | 12               | 75.3                  | 8.5, 95.9    |
| By age                 |                       |                       |                  |                  |                       |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds     | 886                   | 2                     | 889              | 7                | 71.0                  | -52.4, 97.1  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds     | 913                   | 1                     | 893              | 5                | 80.8                  | -71.8, 99.6  |
| By HPV type (all ages) |                       |                       |                  | no               |                       |              |
| HPV 6                  | 1502                  | 0                     | 1499             | 5                | 100                   | -8.8, 100    |
| HPV 11                 | 1502                  | 0                     | 1499             | 0                | NA                    | NA           |
| HPV 16                 | 1534                  | 3                     | 1505             | 10               | 70.6                  | -14.4, 94.8  |
| HPV 18                 | 1717                  | 0                     | 1707             | 2                | 100                   | -427.8, 100  |

Table 9: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related CIN (HNRT-population) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## FAS population

As presented in table 10, no efficacy against HPV vaccine type-related CIN could be confirmed in the FAS population (VE: 39% (95% CI: -2.2, 64.6)). A similar number of new cases were added to the vaccine and placebo group (22 vs. 25 cases), in addition to those detected in the HNRT population.

Table 10: Efficacy against HPV vaccine type related CIN (FAS-population)

HPV 6/11/16/18 CIN By age 24 to 34 year-olds 35 to 45 year-olds By severity CIN 1 CIN 2/3 or AIS CIN 2 CIN 3 AIS Cervical cancer HPV 16/18 CIN By age 24 to 34 year-olds 35 to 45 year-olds By HPV type (all ages) HPV 6 HPV 11 HPV 16 HPV 18 With respect to the CIN 2/3 or AIS endpoint not even an efficacy trend was observed (VE: 9.9%). The number of CIN 2 and CIN 3 cases was exactly the same in the vaccine group as in the placebo group. The MAH provided the details on these cases and clarified that in each of the vaccine and placebo groups, the 10 cases of CIN 2 and the 14 cases of CIN 3 do not represent 24 unique subjects because some subjects were cases of both CIN 2 and CIN 3. These cases correspond to 40 cases (vaccine = 19, placebo = 21). The breakdown of the 40 cases of HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN 2/3 revealed that the majority of cases (n=33) were due to prevalent disease, which would not be expected to be prevented by the vaccine. The remaining 7 cases were incident infections (vaccine=3 and placebo =4). Of the 3 vaccine cases, one was confounded by co-infection with an oncogenic non-vaccine HPV type (HPV 51) and one had a very early HPV 16 infection (CIN 1 at Month 1) suggesting a baseline infection. The third case with a baseline infection with HPV 56 had a very rapid progression to HPV 16-related CIN 3 diagnosed at Month 8. Efficacy against vaccine HPV type-related EGL PPE-population :  In  the  PPE-population,  too  few  cases  of  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  EGL  were observed to detect a statistically significant efficacy (VE: 100%; 95% CI: -49.2 to 100%). All 4 cases were HPV 6-related condyloma and all were observed in the placebo group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Endpoint               | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                     |              |
|------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|--------------|
| Endpoint               | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % | 95% CI       |
| HPV 6/11/16/18 CIN     | 1862                  | 25                    | 1861             | 41               | 39.3                | -2.2, 64.6   |
| By age                 |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds     | 919                   | 19                    | 931              | 26               | 25.2                | -40.5, 60.9  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds     | 943                   | 6                     | 930              | 15               | 61.3                | -5.7, 87.7   |
| By severity            |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| CIN 1                  | 1862                  | 15                    | 1861             | 26               | 42.6                | -12.5, 71.7  |
| CIN 2/3 or AIS         | 1862                  | 19                    | 1861             | 21               | 9.9                 | -76.1, 54.2  |
| CIN 2                  | 1862                  | 10                    | 1861             | 10               | 0.3                 | -166.9, 62.8 |
| CIN 3                  | 1862                  | 14                    | 1861             | 14               | 0.4                 | -125.4, 56.0 |
| AIS                    | 1862                  | 0                     | 1861             | 1                | 100                 | -3786.8, 100 |
| Cervical cancer        | 1862                  | 0                     | 1861             | 2                | 100                 | -4390.4, 100 |
| HPV 16/18 CIN          | 1862                  | 24                    | 1861             | 36               | 33.6                | -14.3, 62.1  |
| By age                 |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer              |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds     | 919                   | 18                    | 931              | 23               | 19.9                | -55.1, 59.3  |
| 35 to 45 year-olds     | 943                   | 6                     | 930              | 13               | 55.3                | -26.2, 86.1  |
| By HPV type (all ages) |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| HPV 6                  | 1862                  | 3                     | 1861             | 6                | 50.2                | -133.3, 91.9 |
| HPV 11                 | 1862                  | 1                     | 1861             | 0                | NA                  | NA           |
| HPV 16                 | 1862                  | 21                    | 1861             | 32               | 34.7                | -16.9, 64.2  |
| HPV 18                 | 1862                  | 3                     | 1861             | 4                | 25.3                | -341.7, 89.1 |

HNRT-population : The breakdown of cases of HPV 6/11/16/18-related EGL in the HNRT population showed 8 cases in the placebo group and all were HPV 6-related condylomas. One (1) case of HPV 16-related VaIN 1 was observed in the qHPV vaccine group at 7 months Postdose 3 (or 13 months after Day 1). The subject was PCR-positive to HPV 56 at Day 1 and to HPV 16 at Month 7.

FAS population : The following cases were observed among subjects in the group that received qHPV vaccine in the FAS efficacy analysis in addition to the 1 case of HPV 16-related VaIN 1 already noted among subjects eligible for the HNRT analysis of efficacy:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

-  6 cases of HPV 6-related condyloma (5 of 6 were Day 1 HPV 6 PCR-positive; 1 of 6 was Day 1 HPV 18 seropositive with unknown Day 1 HPV 6 status);
-  1 case of HPV 6-related VIN 1 (Day 1 HPV 6 and 16 PCR-positive)
-  1 case of HPV 18-related VaIN 2 (Day 1 HPV 18 PCR-positive).

## Efficacy against vaccine-HPV-type related CIN (any grade) or EGL

The  efficacy  against  disease  endpoints  (CIN+EGL)  is  shown  in  the  Table  11.  Efficacy  against  the different components of the vaccine was similar and in the same direction as the efficacy observed against  the  combined  endpoint.  However,  the  number  of  endpoints  was  too  limited  in  many  of  the analyses to detect statistically significant efficacy.

|                           | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                     |              |
|---------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------------|--------------|
| HPV 6/11/16/18 CIN or EGL | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Observed efficacy % | 95% CI       |
| PPE-population            | 1615                  | 1                     | 1607             | 13               | 92.4                | 49.6, 99.8   |
| By age                    |                       |                       |                  |                  | longer              |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds        | 792                   | 0                     | 792              | 8                | 100                 | 42.0, 100    |
| 35 to 45 year-olds        | 823                   | 1                     | 815              | 5                | 80.4                | -77.9, 99.6  |
| By HPV type (all ages)    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| HPV 6                     | 1329                  | 0                     | 1323             | 6                | 100                 | 16.2, 100    |
| HPV 11                    | 1329                  | 0                     | 1323             | 0                | NA                  | NA           |
| HPV 16                    | 1346                  | 1                     | 1325             | 6                | 83.6                | -34.8, 99.6  |
| HPV 18                    | 1522                  | 0                     | 1512             | 2                | 100                 | -423.9, 100  |
|                           |                       |                       |                  | no               |                     |              |
| HNRT population           | 1841                  | 4                     | 1833             | 22               | 82.0                | 47.0, 95.5   |
| By age                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds        | 914                   | 3                     | 920              | 16               | 81.1                | 33.8, 96.5   |
| 35 to 45 year-olds        | 927                   | 1                     | 913 product      | 6                | 83.8                | -33.3, 99.6  |
| By HPV type (all ages)    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| HPV 6                     | 1514                  | 0                     | 1514             | 11               | 100                 | 60.5, 100    |
| HPV 11                    | 1514                  | 0                     | 1514             | 0                | NA                  | NA           |
| HPV 16                    | 1514                  | 4                     | 1514             | 10               | 60.8                | -36.0, 91.0  |
| HPV 18                    | 1514                  | 0                     | 1514             | 2                | 100                 | -426.3, 100  |
| FAS population            | 1886                  | 34                    | 1883             | 48               | 29.7                | -11.4, 56.1  |
| By age                    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| 24 to 34 year-olds        | 937                   | 26                    | 944              | 32               | 17.5                | -42.8, 2.8   |
| 35 to 45 year-olds        | 949                   | 8                     | 939              | 16               | 51.5                | -20.2, 82.0  |
| By HPV type (all ages)    |                       |                       |                  |                  |                     |              |
| HPV 6                     | 1886                  | 10                    | 1883             | 13               | 23.4                | -89.0, 69.9  |
| HPV 11                    | 1886                  | 1                     | 1823             | 0                | NA                  | NA           |
| HPV 16                    | 1886                  | 22                    | 1883             | 32               | 31.8                | -21.1, 62.2  |
| HPV 18                    | 1886                  | 4                     | 1823             | 4                | 100                 | -434.0, 81.5 |

The number of new cases added to the vaccine group in the FAS-analysis compared with the HNRTanalysis  was  higher  in  the  vaccine  group  (n=30)  than  in  the  placebo  group  (n=26),  which  could suggest a negative impact of the vaccine on baseline HPV infections (see 3.2.1.3 Discussion). Table 11: Analysis of efficacy against HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN or EGL Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Therapeutic efficacy

## Clearance of prevalent infection related to vaccine HPV types

The  impact  of  a  3-dose  vaccination  regimen  on  the  clearance  of  vaccine  HPV  type  DNA  among subjects  who  were  PCR-positive  at  Day  1  to  the  relevant  HPV  type  was  analysed.  The  number  of events, and the total person-years of follow-up in each vaccination group were small and therefore, do not  allow  any  firm  conclusions  to  be  drawn.  However,  it  is  of  note  that  among  subjects  who  were PCR-positive and seronegative to HPV 16, the clearance of HPV 16 DNA was higher in the placebo group  compared  to  the  vaccine  group  (table  12).  The  opposite  pattern  was  observed  in  PCR-/seropositive group (see below).

|                                     | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | qHPV vaccine N=1910   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                               |              |
|-------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|-------------------------------|--------------|
|                                     | n                     | Number of cases       | n                | Number of cases  | Percent incidence reduction % | 95% CI       |
| PCR positive and seronegative Day 1 |                       |                       |                  |                  |                               |              |
| Clearance of HPV 6 infection        | 12                    | 10                    | 18               | 12               | -69.4                         | -327.9, 34.4 |
| Clearance of HPV 11 infection       | 3                     | 2                     | 2                | 1                | -83.7                         | -10739, 90.4 |
| Clearance of HPV 16 infection       | 41                    | 14                    | 24               | 10               | 47.3                          | 0.4, 73.0    |
| Clearance of HPV 18 infection       | 26                    | 14                    | 24               | 10               | -43.5                         | -261.0, 40.7 |
| PCR positive and seropositive Day 1 |                       |                       |                  |                  |                               |              |
| Clearance of HPV 6 infection        | 16                    | 8                     | 15               | 9                | 39.2                          | -77.7, 79.6  |
| Clearance of HPV 11 infection       | 1                     | 1                     | 3                | 3                | -432.2                        | -6416, 90.0  |
| Clearance of HPV 16 infection       | 38                    | 14                    | 21               | 6                | -53.4                         | -386.9, 44.6 |
| Clearance of HPV 18 infection       | 9                     | 4                     | 10               | 4                | -12.9                         | -506.0, 79.0 |

Table 12: Clearance of HPV DNA among subjects PCR positive at Day 1 The MAH performed re-analyses that led to a change in percent incidence reduction from 47.3% (95% CI: 0.4, 73.0) i.e. to 46% (95% CI: -2.7, 72.4) a statistically non-significant result. The result of the original analysis was inaccurate due to  a mistake in case counts. An additional analysis (life table analysis of time-to-clearance of HPV 6 and HPV16 infection) was performed,  comparing  the  vaccine  and  placebo  groups  of  MAW  who  were  Day  1  PCR-positive (regardless of sero-status at Day 1) with respect to the instantaneous probability of clearing infection related  to  HPV  6  and  16.  Results  showed  no  relevant  difference  between  the  vaccine  and  placebo groups. Inconsistent results were observed in the PCR positive group depending on its serostatus. In  addition,  the  MAH  was  requested  to  provide  data  on  the  timing  of  detection  of  CIN  2/3  in  the vaccine and placebo group in the FAS population to clarify whether the qHPV vaccine has a negative impact accelerating disease progression (see figures 1 and 2 below). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1: Cumulative Incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18-Related CIN 2/3 or Worse (Full Analysis Set)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Cumulative Incidence of CIN 2/3 or Worse due to Any HPV Type (Full Analysis Set) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Upon CHMP request the MAH has provided further analysis in non vaccine types to respond to the issue of negative impact of the vaccine with respect to acceleration of disease progression and type replacement.

As  regards,  the  observed  higher  proportion  of  non-vaccine  HPV-type  related  CIN2/3  or  worse endpoints  in  the  vaccine  group  compared  to  placebo  (figure  2),  the  provided  new  data  revealed imbalances in baseline HPV DNA positivity related to HPV types 33, 39, 51 and 58. The increased incidence of CIN 2/3 related to these 4 HPV types in the vaccine group (Table 13) was correlated with the increased incidence of baseline HPV DNA positive in that group compared to placebo.

|                                                 | qHPV vaccine n=1910   | qHPV vaccine n=1910   | qHPV vaccine n=1910   | qHPV vaccine n=1910           | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   | Placebo N=1907   |                              |                      | 95% CI           |
|-------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------------------|----------------------|------------------|
| Endpoint                                        | n                     | N cases               | PY at risk            | Incidence rate/100 PY at risk | n                | N cases          | PY at risk       | Incidenc rate/100 PY at risk | Observe d efficacy % | 95% CI           |
| CIN 2/3 due to any HPV type                     | 1,862                 | 52                    | 4,009.2               | 1.3                           | 1,861            | 36               | 4,003.9 longer   | 0.9                          | -44.3                | (-127.1, 7.5)    |
| HPV 6, 11, 16 ,18 - related CIN 2/3             | 1,862                 | 19                    | 4,022.5               | 0.5                           | 1,861            | 21               | 4,007.6          | 0.5                          | 9.9                  | (-76.1, 54.2)    |
| HPV 6                                           | 1,862                 | 1                     | 4,026.0               | 0.0                           | 1,861            | 1                | 4,012.4          | 0.0                          | 0.3                  | (-7723.1, 98.7)  |
| HPV 11                                          | 1,862                 | 0                     | 4,026.1               | 0.0                           | 1,861            | 0                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | NA                   | NA               |
| HPV 16                                          | 1,862                 | 16                    | 4,023.6               | 0.4                           | 1,861            | 21               | 4,007.6          | 0.5                          | 24.1                 | (-52.6, 63.0)    |
| HPV 18                                          | 1,862                 | 3                     | 4,025.0               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 0                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | NA                   | NA               |
| CIN 2/3 due to any of the 10 typeable HPV types | 1,862                 | 34                    | 4,014.5               | 0.8                           | 1,861 no         | 19               | 4,008.0          | 0.5                          | -78.7                | (-231.6, 0.9)    |
| HPV 31                                          | 1,862                 | 6                     | 4,024.7               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 6                | 4,009.8          | 0.1                          | 0.4                  | (-272.7, 73.4)   |
| HPV 33                                          | 1,862                 | 4                     | 4,025.8               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 0                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | NA                   | NA               |
| HPV 35                                          | 1,862                 | 0                     | 4,026.1               | 0.0                           | 1,861            | 1                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | 100                  | (-3786.8, 100)   |
| HPV 39                                          | 1,862                 | 6                     | 4,024.2               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 1                | 4,012.2          | 0.0                          | -498.2               | (-27416.3, 27.4) |
| HPV 45                                          | 1,862                 | 2                     | 4,026.1               | 0.0                           | 1,861            | 0                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | NA                   | NA               |
| HPV 51                                          | 1,862                 | 9                     | 4,021.1 product       | 0.2                           | 1,861            | 3                | 4,012.2          | 0.1                          | -199.3               | (-1619.0, 25.3)  |
| HPV 52                                          | 1,862                 | 6                     | 4,025.4               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 7                | 4,011.4          | 0.2                          | 14.6                 | (-196.8, 76.3)   |
| HPV 56                                          | 1,862                 | 5                     | 4,023.6               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 3                | 4,012.3          | 0.1                          | -66.2                | (-970.3, 67.7)   |
| HPV 58                                          | 1,862                 | 6                     | 4,025.0               | 0.1                           | 1,861            | 1                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | -498.1               | (-27412.8, 27.4) |
| HPV 59                                          | 1,862                 | 2                     | 4,025.9               | 0.0                           | 1,861            | 0                | 4,012.5          | 0.0                          | NA                   | NA               |
| CIN2/3 not related to any of the 14 HPV types   | 1,862                 | 6                     | 3,916.9               | 0.2                           | 1,861            | 5                | 3,897.2          | 0.1                          | -19.4                | (-394.6, 69.6)   |

<!-- image -->

The  breakdown  of  the  53  cases  of  HPV  31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59-related  CIN  2/3  or  worse (vaccine n=34; placebo n=19) revealed that the majority of cases (vaccine n=25; placebo n=17)) were due to prevalent disease. According to the MAH all these cases were diagnosed with a baseline HPV infection that was of the same type as that detected in the CIN 2/3 lesion. The remaining 11 cases were incident infections (vaccine n=9; placebo n=2). Of the 9 vaccine cases, 5 were confounded by baseline co-infection with other oncogenic HPV type(s) and the other two had a very early diagnosis of CIN 2/3  suggesting  a  baseline  infection.  The  two  remaining  cases,  judged  as  incident  infections,  were diagnosed with HPV 58-related CIN 2/3 at Month 13 and HPV 56-related CIN 2 at Month 19. In the

For each of HPV types 45, 56 and 59 the number of excess cases of CIN 2/3 or worse in the qHPV vaccine  group  compared  to  placebo  was  only  2  (table  13).  The  case  histories  revealed  that  in  the majority of CIN 2/3 or worse diagnoses, co-infections with other high-risk HPV types at baseline of unknown duration confounded the causality assessment. Table 13: Analysis of efficacy against CIN 2/3, AIS, or cervical cancer due to vaccine and nonvaccine types (FAS) In the analyses of non-vaccine HPV types, the incidence of CIN 2/3 cases was higher in the vaccine group compared to the incidence in the placebo group. The data were supplemented with analyses of the cumulative incidence of HPV 31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59-related CIN 2/3 or worse and CIN 2/3 related to non-typeable non-vaccine HPV types in the FAS population and also by age groups. The incidence of cases were markedly higher in the vaccine group (34 cases vs. 19 cases in the placebo group).  The  cumulative  incidence  of  HPV  31/33/35/39/45/51/52/56/58/59-related  CIN  2/3  was  also higher in the vaccine group vs. the placebo group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

placebo group one case was confounded by an infection with HPV 39 at Day 1 and the other case was diagnosed with CIN 2 related to HPV 16 and 51 at Month 30. These few cases of incident infection preclude any conclusions to be drawn.

The side-by-side comparison of plots of cumulative incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN 2/3 in the  ITT  population  of  MAW  versus  YAW  was  presented.  At  Month  12  the  separation  in  the cumulative  incidence  distributions  between  the  vaccine  and  placebo  group  were  greater  in  MAW compared to YAW, In contrast, the Month 24 results in MAW showed that there was no difference in the cumulative incidence plots between the vaccine and placebo group (figure 3). This could likely be explained  by  the  smaller  number  of  subjects  resulting  in  low  incidence  of  new  infections  in  the placebo  group  and  short-term  follow-up  time.  Some  500  MAW  subjects  per  group  are  still  to contribute to the Month 24 estimate. The end-of study results at Month 48 of P019 will be critically important to reveal whether the separation between the vaccine and placebo groups will be of the same magnitude as that observed in the younger women.

<!-- image -->

The study was designed to demonstrate the efficacy in MAW with respect to the composite co-primary endpoints of HPV 6/11/16/18- and HPV 16/18-related persistent infection and clinical disease (CIN, AIS and EGLs).

Figure 3: Cumulative incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN 2/3 or worse through 24 Months (MITT-3 for YAW / Full Analysis Set for MAW Recurrence of HPV 6/11/16/18-related persistent infection Analysis  of  efficacy  against  the  recurrence  of  persistent  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  infection  among subjects who were seropositive and PCR-negative to the relevant HPV type at baseline did not reveal any statistically significant results. Of note in the vaccine group, there were 3/233 cases of persistent HPV 16 infection among women who  were  seropositive  and  PCR  negative  to  HPV  16  at  Day  1  compared  with  6/250  cases  in  the placebo group leading to an efficacy of 45.1% (CI 95%:-156.9, 91.1). 1.2.1.3 Discussion Efficacy endpoints Medicinal product no longer authorised

Success was achieved in the primary and secondary efficacy study objectives.

The statistical methods are considered acceptable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Persistent infection

The MAH provided data to support that persistent HPV infection of 6 months duration (+1 month) was as predictive of HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3 as persistent infection of longer duration based on the data in young adult women. The proposed definition of persistent infection can be accepted with respect to HPV 16/18 and cervical endpoints. Upon CHMP request the MAH provided data on the proportion of women with a CIN or EGL who had prior persistent infection in comparison with women without a lesion. Overall the number of disease endpoints in study 019 was too limited to ensure reliability of the data. The predictive values achieved in the HNRT analyses did not vary significantly by age group or by testing interval of persistent infection. However, the lower PPV value obtained in the analysis of persistent infection of 12 months duration is not consistent with the results presented in the paper by Koshiol et al (2008). This is a systematic meta-analysis of 41 studies including 22000 women. Results indicate that persistent infection of 12 months duration appears to be the most valid endpoint to be used  in  clinical  trials  as  a  surrogate  marker  for  cervical  cancer.  Also  the  data  from  a  recent  study (Rodriguez et al. JNCI, 2008) indicate that 12 month persistent infection is a more reliable predictor of CIN 2/3+. Although the large Koshiol meta-analysis has some limitations, data on the natural course of HPV disease suggest that the 12-month persistent infection is a more reliable and robust predictor of progression to CIN 2/3+ than the 6-month persistent infection. Therefore, the CHMP considers that in  future  study  reports,  data  on  12  month  persistent  infection  should  also  be  included.  The  MAH provided results of the analyses of study 019 using a 12 month persistent infection. Results showed that  efficacy  estimates  against  HPV  16/18-related  persistent  infection  and  against  the  combined primary endpoint were in the same order of magnitude, although with wider confidence intervals, as the results of the analyses using the 6-month persistent infection.

The CHMP questioned, the correlation between HPV 16/18-related persistent infection and VIN 2/3 and VaIN 2/3. In response, data on duration of HPV infection were provided for the cases of HPV 16/18-related  VIN/VaIN  2/3.  The  data  submitted  by  the  MAH  showed  that  all  cases  of  VIN  2/3, except one, were preceded by persistent HPV 16/18 infection, whereas none of the cases of VaIN 2/3. Furthermore, there was only one case of HPV 18-related high-grade vulvar disease. The analyses and calculations were therefore based on HPV 16-related persistent infection and VIN 2/3. Overall it must be stated that the number of disease endpoints was too limited (n=7) to ensure reliability of the data. Furthermore, the MAH provided statistical analysis of the value of HPV 16-related persistent infection for predicting HPV 16-related VIN 2/3 or VaIN 2/3 (for P012, on MITT-2 and MITT-3 populations). It can be agreed that the data give some evidence to support the association between HPV 16-related persistent  infection  and  HPV  16-related  high-grade  vulvar  disease.  Since  persistent  infection  with high-risk HPV has been established as a requirement for progression of cervical disease to pre-/cancer it is likely that the same applies for vulvar as well as vaginal disease and also for HPV 18. Biological plausibility  and  the  provided  data  support  the  use  of  HPV  16/18-related  persistent  infection  as  a surrogate marker for high-grade vulvar and vaginal disease (VIN 2/3 and VaIN 2/3) and as a clinical efficacy endpoint in P019. The CHMP questioned the clinical relevance of persistent HPV 6/11 infection, used as a secondary efficacy endpoint in P019, The MAH was requested to justify this endpoint and present data to support its correlation with clinical disease. The data provided from the qHPV vaccine studies in YAW (P012) showed that the majority of genital warts occurred without preceding persistent HPV 6/11 infection questioning the clinical relevance of the persistent infection endpoint for HPV6/11 in study 019. Since there are no valid data to support the use of persistent infection related to HPV 6/11 as an efficacy endpoint, the results obtained in study 019 were re-analysed excluding all data on HPV 6/11-related persistent infection. For the primary combined endpoint vaccine efficacy decreased from 90.5% (73.7, 97.5) to 86.0% (60.0, 96.4) in the PPE population and from 30.9% (11.1, 46.5) to 23.7 (-0.1, 42.0) in the FAS population when this endpoint was excluded. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The inclusion of vaginal and vulvar cancers in the composite endpoints as proposed by the MAH is not accepted by the CHMP, since the surrogacy of VIN 2/3 and VaIN 2/3 for these cancers has not been proven. All text on these cancers in the SPC were removed since it could falsely be perceived as vaccine efficacy has been demonstrated against vulvar cancer and vaginal cancer.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Study populations

The primary efficacy population (PPE) was defined similarly to that in all previous studies in YAW, as  the  per-protocol  population  who  received  all  3  vaccinations  and  was  naïve  to  the  relevant  HPV type(s) at Day 1 prior to vaccination through 1 month postdose 3 (Month 7). Efficacy was measured starting after the Month 7 visit. Two further populations were defined that resembled the MITT-2 and MITT-3 populations used in the YAW studies; the HNRT population included baseline HPV-naïve women,  but  case-counting  started  immediately  after  the  Day  1  visit.  The  third  population  (FAS) included all women enrolled in the trial regardless of Day 1 HPV status, i.e. also those already infected or with clinical disease at baseline, and with case-counting starting after the Day 1 visit.

Overall,  the  HPV  sero-/DNA-  prevalence  data  observed  in  P019  are  consistent  with  literature estimates. However, in the integrated summary report of natural history in P019, it was shown that HPV sero-/DNA- prevalence varied greatly by countries/continents, which has to be considered in the evaluation of efficacy results. Overall  the region-by-region  analyses  did  not  allow  any  firm conclusions to be drawn. However, the incidence of the composite HPV endpoints in the vaccine and placebo  group  in  the  PPE  populations  did  not  differ  substantially  by  region  suggesting  that prophylactic efficacy was similar in all locations. In the FAS populations differences were noted, with the lowest efficacy and the highest incidence of HPV infections seen in Europe, whereas the reverse was observed for the Asia Pacific region. Moreover, with respect to disease endpoints (CIN), it was noted that more cases were seen in the vaccine group than in the placebo group in the EU population, which was not the case in Latin America or Asia-Pacific. Although the EU population was limited in

In the first assessment the CHMP identified two major objections. The first objection concerned the indication of the qHPV vaccine, which covers all women regardless of HPV status and therefore the ITT  (FAS)  population  was  considered  the  most  representative  population  for  MAW.  The  primary efficacy population, the HPV naïve (PPE) population does not reflect the general population of MAW that will be vaccinated in clinical practice. The poor efficacy results observed in the FAS population did not support the MAH´s proposal to include a statement in the indication that efficacy had been demonstrated in 27-45 year old women. In  the  response  the  MAH  reiterated  the  approach  to  bridge  the  MAW  results  to  the  prophylactic efficacy results against clinical disease obtained in the YAW. Study 019 was powered to demonstrate significant  prophylactic  efficacy  (i.e  in  the  HPV  naive  population)  and  in  the  composite  efficacy endpoints (persistent infection and disease), The CHMP agreed that for demonstration of prophylactic efficacy, the PPE population is the optimal population. The results in study 019 showed significant vaccine efficacy in HPV naïve mid-adult women and in similar magnitude as that shown in young adult  women.  However,  this  target  HPV  naïve  population  is  difficult  to  identify  among  sexually experienced  MAW  and  many  non-naïve  women  will  be  vaccinated  deriving  little  if  any  benefit. Therefore, the MAH was asked to evaluate the usefulness of possible pre-screening approaches. The MAH´s response addressed the possible tools that could be used to select a susceptible population and  their  limitations.  The  MAH  discussed  the  use  of  baseline  characteristics  as  well  as  laboratory testing,  such  as  cytological  testing  (Pap  smear).  serological  testing,  HPV  DNA  testing  (Hybride capture 2 test (HC2) and genotyping as a pre-screening tool to target HPV naïve women. According to the MAH its usefulness for pre-screening of HPV DNA status is very limited. The MAH evaluation of HPV status  gave  meagre  positive  incremental  yield  with  respect  to  identifying  women  who  would benefit from vaccination with the qHPV vaccine. The CHMP accepted the MAH's response. In the future, with the increasing use of HPV testing in cervical screening programmes and availability of validated tests, the public health authorities might reconsider the use of various pre-screening strategies of HPV vaccination. Since pre-screening is not feasible the CHMP considered critical to update the SPC and PL to make it very  clear  to  the  prescribers  and  patients  that  vaccine  efficacy  cannot  be  expected  in  non-naïve women. In the indication, the statement that efficacy has been demonstrated in women 16-26 years of age  is  retained.  In  section  4.4  it  is  stated  that  the  vaccine  is  for  prophylactic  use  only  and  that  the vaccine is not effective against already established HPV infection/disease prior to vaccination, and that no vaccine efficacy has been shown in the ITT population of study 019. Moreover, it is mentioned that continued attendance to cervical screening program is critical. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

size, these data raised some concern. These findings suggest that a lower magnitude of efficacy and a reduced benefit of the vaccine would be obtained in the EU ´real world´ female population than in the populations of the other regions. The end-of study results of P019 at Month 48 are awaited to show whether vaccine efficacy increases with time, as observed in YAW.

Based on the above section 4.4 of the SPC was revised to inform prescribers that the use of Silgard in adult  women  should  take  into  consideration  the  variability  of  HPV  type  prevalence  in  different geographical areas and in the general population of 24- to 45-year-old women, and that no significant efficacy  against  HPV  16/18-related  persistent  infection  and  clinical  disease  has  been  demonstrated. The decision to vaccinate an individual woman 24-45 years old should take into account her risk for previous HPV exposure and her potential benefit from vaccination. Furthermore, the SPC was revised to make it clear that vaccine efficacy cannot be expected in women already infected with vaccine HPV types at baseline and results in the ITT population, in particular with respect to HPV 16/18-related persistent infection, were included in section 5.1.

The  MAH  provided  details  on  these  cases.  The  immune  responses  induced  by  the  qHPV  vaccine appeared satisfactory in all cases (except low anti-HPV 18 GMTs response observed in two subjects (&lt;10 and 72 mMU/ml)). The case narrative was provided for the HPV 18-related persistent infection and this subject was shown to have achieved an acceptable antibody response to HPV 18 at Month 7. Most infections were related to HPV 16 (n=9) and HPV 6 (n=6). The majority of women did not have any new sexual partner reported at 6 months prior to Day 1. It is of note that two-thirds of the cases had co-infections with oncogenic non-vaccine HPV types at baseline, which might explain the early infections seen.

PPE population In  this  population  VE  was  90.5%  against  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  persistent  infection  (PI)/disease, 83.1%  against  HPV  16/18-related  PI/disease  and  100%  against  HPV  6/11-related  PI/disease.  With respect  to  the  HPV  16/18  endpoint,  lower  efficacy  was  observed  in  the  35-  to  45-year-olds  (VE: 80.6%) than in the younger age stratum (VE: 85%). There were 4 HPV 16-related endpoint cases in the vaccine group (3 PI and 1 CIN 2) vs. 41 in the placebo group. The 4 cases occurred relatively early in the follow-up, despite that all subjects developed a satisfactory anti-HPV 16 responses. The MAH was requested to address the grounds for 'vaccine failure'. The issue of the 4 'vaccine failure' cases were addressed as  follows.  One  case  with  CIN  2  had  a  baseline  infection  with  a  non-vaccine  type (HPV 56) and a co-infection with another HPV type (HPV 51 + HPV 16) at the time of diagnosis Month 18. Therefore the causal role of HPV 16 in the CIN 2 lesion could be questioned.  According to the  MAH  the  two  early  cases  of  HPV  16  persistent  infection  might  be  due  to  an  active  infection already present at baseline against which the vaccine would not be expected to protect. Overall, the point efficacy estimates in MAW were lower than those among YAW, and in particular, with  respect  to  the  most  important  HPV  16/18  endpoint  (VE  83.1%  vs.  95-99%  in  YAW).  It  was clarified that the disease attack rates differed among the young and older women with lower rates in the placebo group of MAW, but that the incidence of vaccine HPV type-related persistent infection and disease among vaccinated MAW and YAW were similar. P019  was  powered  to  demonstrate  vaccine  efficacy  against  composite  endpoints  of  persistent infection/disease in the HPV naïve population and not against vaccine type-related clinical disease (i.e. HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3). No statistical significant efficacy was shown against HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3, vaccine efficacy was 75.2% (95% CI: -150.6, 99.5). HNRT population In  the  HNRT  population  vaccine  efficacy  was  lower;  74.6%  (58.1,  85.3)  against  HPV  6/11/16/18related persistent infection (PI)/disease, 71.6% (47.6, 85.5) against HPV 16/18-related PI/disease and 80.2% (51.7, 93.3) against HPV 6/11-related PI/disease.  Vaccine efficacy was also lower than that seen in  the  MITT-2 population of YAW. A contributing factor is the different time point for casecounting,  which  started  earlier  in  the  HNRT  vs.  the  MITT-2  population.  Among  the  16  new  cases observed  in  the  HNRT  analysis  (compared  to  PPE),  10  were  HPV  16/18-related.  These  infections occurred during the vaccination course, which suggest that the vaccine did not provide protection prior to the completion of the 3 dose series, which is in contrast to that seen in YAW. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Although  not  powered  for  CIN  2/3  or  AIS,  VE  was  only  25.4%,  with  3  cases  (one  CIN  3)  in  the vaccine group and 4 cases (3 CIN 2 and 1 AIS) in the placebo group. This finding raised concerns on a

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

potential negative impact of the vaccine and the MAH was asked to provide all details and the timing of disease in these cases. In the group that received vaccine all three women had non-vaccine HPV types  at  baseline  and  two  had  very  early  detection  of  HPV  16-related  disease,  at  Month  1  (CIN  1 progressing to CIN 2 at Month 22)) and at Month 8 (CIN 3). It seems likely that both these subjects were  infected  at  baseline  (despite  a  negative  PCR)  and  therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  judge  if  the vaccine had any negative impact on the course of the HPV 16 infections. The third case had CIN 2 diagnosed  at  Month  18,  but  due  to  co-infection  with  HPV  51,  the  role  of  HPV  16  is  difficult  to interpret. All placebo cases were diagnosed with CIN 2/3 at later time points; Months 18, 24, 27 and 30. It is noted that two of the four CIN 2 cases in the placebo group were co-infected with non-vaccine HPV types. In conclusion, based on the data provided there is no clear evidence of a negative impact of vaccination with qHPV vaccine in women with baseline infection. This issue is further discussed under  the  therapeutic  efficacy  header.  Overall,  the  efficacy  results  in  the  HNRT-analysis  versus MITT-2 analysis in YAW suggest that the vaccine is somewhat less efficacious in MAW. However, longer duration of follow-up is needed to get conclusive data.

FAS (ITT) population In the FAS (ITT) population, very low efficacy was noted for the HPV 6/11/16/18-related PI/disease endpoint  (VE:  30.9%)  and  for  the  more  important  HPV  16/18-related  PI/disease  endpoint  only nominal reductions were seen (VE: 22.6% (-2.9, 41.9)). Efficacy for the HPV 6/11-related endpoint was 47% (11.4, 69.2). These point estimates are much lower than those observed among YAW and the results in the two populations  cannot  be  considered  comparable.  With  respect  to  CIN  2/3  no  efficacy  at  all  was observed,  not  even  a  trend  (VE:  9.9%).  However,  the  study  was  not  powered  to  show  statistically significant  efficacy  in  the  FAS  population.  Furthermore,  the  different  efficacy  estimates  observed between MAW and YAW studies could be explained by the differences in sample size, study duration and exposure risk of acquiring infection. The consequence of the lower exposure risk in MAW is that it  will  take  much  longer  time  to  demonstrate  public  health  benefit  in  this  population  in  comparison with the YAW population. The number of cases vaccine type related CIN in the vaccine group, 10 CIN 2 and 14 CIN 3 (table 10), was  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  placebo  group.  The  CHMP  requested  all  details  on  these  cases, including the time course of the disease in order to exclude a negative impact of the qHPV vaccine, in particular  with  respect  to  HPV  16  infection.  The  MAH  provided  the  details  on  these  cases.  The breakdown of the  40  cases  of  HPV  6/11/16/18-related  CIN  2/3  revealed  that  the  majority  of  cases (n=33) were due to prevalent disease, which would not be expected to be prevented by the vaccine. The remaining 7 cases were incident infections (vaccine=3 and placebo=4). Of the 3 vaccine cases, one was confounded by co-infection with an oncogenic non-vaccine HPV type (HPV 51) and one had a very early HPV 16 infection (CIN 1 at Month 1) suggesting a baseline infection. The third case with a baseline infection with HPV 56 had a very rapid progression to HPV 16-related CIN 3 diagnosed at Month 8. However, this single case does not allow any general conclusions to be drawn as regards any impact of the vaccine on the course of disease. The hypothesis that the qHPV vaccine causes acceleration of CIN 2/3 or worse due to any HPV type issue is discussed under therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, the vaccinated MAW population should be the subject of long-term follow-up to monitor duration of vaccine efficacy and to evaluate the need for a booster dose. This is important considering the  lower  immune  responses  obtained  in  older  women,  which  might  suggest  shorter  duration  of immunity compared to young adult women. The consequence of these lower antibody responses in the MAW population  for  the  durability  of  efficacy  is  not  known  since  no  immunological  correlate  of protection  has  been  defined.  The  MAH  has  committed  to  submit  the  study  synopsis  of  a  sentinel cohort of P019. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Overall,  very  low  efficacy  results  were  achieved  in  the  FAS-population.  Since  there  is  no  positive benefit risk in the general population, the indication remained unchanged in section 4.1 of the SPC. The data is reflected in sections 4.4 and 5.1 of the SPC to inform prescribers that the use of Silgard in adult  women  should  take  into  consideration  the  variability  of  HPV  type  prevalence  in  different geographical areas. Moreover, a statement was included in the SPC that in the general population of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

24- to 45-year-old women, no significant efficacy against HPV 16/18-related persistent infection and clinical disease has been demonstrated. The decision to vaccinate an individual woman 24-45 years old  should  take  into  account  her  risk  for  previous  HPV  exposure  and  her  potential  benefit  from vaccination  and  that  Silgard  is  not  effective  in  women  already  infected/diseased  at  the  start  of vaccination.

## Therapeutic efficacy

The observation of a significantly higher clearance of HPV 16 DNA in the placebo group versus the vaccine group (percent incidence reduction 47.3 (95% CI: 0.4, 73.0)) among subjects who were Day 1 PCR  positive  and  seronegative  to  HPV  16,  raised  major  concerns  and  was  identified  in  the  first assessment  as  a  second  major  objection.  The  study  population  was  limited,  but  together  with  the efficacy results in the FAS/HNRT populations with respect to CIN 2/3, the data could indicate that the vaccine  has  a  negative  impact  on  ongoing  HPV  infections.  Moreover,  a  similar  finding  was  seen initially in one of the pivotal YAW studies (P013), where data suggested that the vaccine aggravated disease in baseline HPV positive subjects. In response the MAH performed re-analyses due to the fact that  inaccurate  case/non-case  definitions  were  used  originally.  The  re-analyses  led  to  a  change  in percent  incidence  reduction  to  46%  (95%  CI:  -2.7,  72.4)  a  statistically  non-significant  result. Inconsistent results were observed in the PCR positive group depending on its serostatus. In addition, the  life  table  analysis  of  time-to-clearance  of  HPV  6  and  HPV  16  infection  showed  no  relevant difference between the vaccine and placebo groups. The 'similar' finding in the YAW study 013 was only  seen  in  one  study,  in  one  subset  (not  in  PCR  positive/seronegative)  and  did  not  extend  to  the MAW population. Moreover, the vaccine efficacy results in MAW with respect to HPV16/18-related CIN 2/3 in PCR positive/seronegative subjects did not corroborate the negative therapeutic efficacy trend with respect to clearance of HPV 16 infection. Furthermore, there is no plausible mechanism for a negative effect of the vaccine on on-going HPV infections.  From the above the CHMP concluded that  the  overall  pattern  is  not  consistent  with  a  negative  impact  of  the  vaccine  on  prevalent  HPV infections. The MAH provided data on the cumulative incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN 2/3, which was lower in the vaccine group than in the placebo group suggesting no acceleration of vaccine HPV typerelated disease progression (see figure 1). However, the lack of separation of the cumulative incidence plots  on  HPV  16/18-related  CIN  2/3  in  the  FAS-population  between  vaccine  and  placebo  group  at Month 24 raised concern. However, due to the small sample size (500 subjects in each group still to be included in the 24 month time point) these curves are not fully representative. The lower number of subjects at Month 24 would result in a lower incidence of new infections in the placebo group, a likely explanation  for  the  flattened  incidence  curve.  The  results  at  Month  48  will  be  important  to  reveal whether  the  cumulative  incidence  plots  will  separate  between  the  vaccine  and  placebo  groups  in  a similar way as that observed in the young adult women In contrast, to the findings for vaccine HPV types, figure 2 showed the opposite pattern with higher incidence of CIN 2/3 due to any HPV type and a steeper curve by time in the vaccine group. These findings raised a major concern since it could suggest an accelerated progression of CIN 2/3 due to any HPV type among vaccinated subjects compared with those in the placebo group. In response the MAH  provided  relevant  data  for  FAS  population  to  clarify  this  issue  including  narratives  for  all CIN2/3 cases observed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The breakdown of cases of CIN 2/3 in the FAS population by prevalent and incident cases showed in the MAH´s reasoning that there were only 2 cases of incident infection in the vaccine group (out of 9 putative incident cases) and 1 case in the placebo group (out of 2 putative incident cases). However, the exclusions made by the MAH were not fully supported, resulting in 4 cases of incident infection in the vaccine group versus 1 case in the placebo group. It is important to mention here that the presence of  prevalent  or  pre-existing  HPV  infection  due  to  non-vaccine  HPV  types  in  the  FAS  population complicates the analysis. The baseline imbalances observed between the vaccine and placebo groups were addressed by the MAH. This analysis showed that the higher incidence of CIN 2/3 related to four non-vaccine HPV types (33, 39, 51 and 58) among vaccines is likely to be attributed to the baseline imbalance  in  prevalent  infection  corresponding  to  the  relevant  HPV  type.  For  three  further  nonvaccine HPV types (HPV 45, 56 and 59) with higher incidence of CIN 2/3 in the vaccine group, the case  histories  do  not  suggest  that  qHPV  vaccine  accelerates  progression  of  disease  related  to  the relevant HPV type.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For CIN 2/3 not related to any of the typeable 14 HPV types, the cumulative incidence in the vaccine group was higher than in the placebo group, although not statistically significantly different. However there were too few cases (6 in the vaccine group vs. 5 in the placebo group) to draw conclusions. The end-of-study results at Month 48 are important in order to show whether a larger difference between groups will be discernable.

Moreover, it is difficult to hypothesize a plausible mechanism for a negative effect of the vaccine on on-going HPV infections.

The time to event data on CIN 2/3 are not possible to be evaluated in cases with baseline infections since  the  duration  of  prevalent  HPV  infection  prior  to  vaccination  is  not  known.  The  MAH  has provided  results of analysis of efficacy of the qHPV vaccine against CIN 2/3 related to any of the 10 non-vaccine HPV types in the cohort of women who were PCR positive at Day 1 to the relevant HPV type, i.e., women infected at baseline with the relevant HPV type and the results of comparison of the qHPV vaccine group and placebo group with respect to the cumulative incidence of CIN2/3 related to any  of  the  10  non-vaccine  HPV  types  in  the  same  cohort  of  women.  The  results  do  not  suggest  a clinically significant acceleration of disease progression in the vaccine group compared to the placebo group. Overall, the data provided, do not suggest that the qHPV vaccine accelerates progression of disease related to vaccine HPV types. At the present time there is no indication of the occurrence of HPV type replacement disease in  the  vaccine  group.  However,  these  issues  must  be  closely  monitored  during longer term follow-up and must be addressed again in the end-of-study report of Protocol 019. Analysis  of  efficacy  against  the  recurrence  of  persistent  HPV  6/11/16/18  infection  among  subjects who  were  seropositive  and  PCR  negative  to  the  relevant  HPV  type  at  baseline  did  not  reveal  any statistically significant result. The data at the current stage are too limited to allow any firm conclusion on this matter.  However, there were 3 cases with persistent HPV 16 infection in the vaccine group (vs.  6  cases  in  the  placebo  group),  which  suggest  that  the  vaccine  might  not  be  effective  against recurrences.  Vaccine  efficacy  against  persistent  HPV  16  infection  in  the  seropositive/PCR  negative subset  could  not  be  demonstrated  in  either  the  YAW  or  MAW  population,  (although  efficacy  was observed for HPV 16 CIN in the young adult women). 1.3 Immunogenicity Protocol 019 included the immunogenicity evaluation. The study enrolled a total of 3819 subjects in 2 approximately  equal  age  strata  (24-  to  34-year-olds  and  35-  to  45-year-olds).  All  subjects  were  to undergo serology testing for anti-HPV 6, anti-HPV 11, anti-HPV 16, and anti-HPV 18 levels at Day 1, and Months 7, 12, 24, 36, and 48. The primary immunogenicity evaluations were to be conducted in the  PPI  population.  The  study  is  ongoing.  The  current  application  includes  results  from  all  visits through 13-July-2007 (corresponding primarily to the Day 1, Month 7, and Month 24 visits). In addition to the new immunogenicity data from P019, an integrated immunogenicity analysis of the immune response over the entire range of 9 to 45 years of age was provided. 1.3.1 Methods The below characteristics are specific for the immunogenicity analysis. Study population Per-Protocol immunogenicity (PPI) population Medicinal product no longer authorised

The per-protocol population for immunogenicity (PPI) analysis generally included subjects who were seronegative and PCR negative to the relevant HPV type(s) at Day 1, remained HPV PCR negative through 1 month post dose 3 (Month 7), received all 3 vaccinations within pre-specified time intervals, and no deviation from the study protocol.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Objectives

The immunogenicity objectives were:

-  To  evaluate  the  kinetics  and  age  dependence  of  anti-HPV  6,  11,  16,  and  18  responses following administration of a 3-dose regimen of qHPV vaccine
-  To  compare  anti-HPV  6,  11,  16,  and  18  responses  following  administration  of  a  3-dose regimen of qHPV vaccine among HPV-naïve women 24 to 45 years of age enrolled in P019 and HPV-naïve women 16 to 23 years of age from P011, P012 (substudies of P013) and the Consistency Lot substudy of P015.

<!-- image -->

The  immunogenicity  of  the  HPV  vaccines  was  measured  using  the  method  competitive  Luminexbased immunoassay (cLIA). The method was requalified as cLIA version 2. Outcomes/endpoints The immunogenicity endpoints for the clinical program have focused on 2 parameters:  Anti-HPV levels (geometric mean titers [GMTs]),  The proportion of subjects who became seropositive to each of the 4 antigens 4 weeks after the third dose. The immunogenicity time points of interest were:  Month 7: The primary immunogenicity endpoint was anti-HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18 serum cLIA levels at Month 7 in the defined PPI population, as this time point reflected the time frame during which peak vaccine-induced immune responses were expected.  Persistence time points. Depending on the protocol, subjects underwent serology testing at 6to 24-month intervals following the Month 7 visit. The data collected at these time points were used to evaluate the durability of vaccine-induced anti-HPV responses. 1.3.2 Results 1.3.2.1 Protocol 19 GMTs Table 13 shows the anti-HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18 GMTs for the vaccine group and placebo group in the PPI population at Day 1, Month 7 and Month 24. For each of the vaccine HPV types, and at all the time points evaluated, the GMTs in the placebo group were below the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) of the assay. In the vaccine group measurable immune responses well above the LLOQ were induced at 4 weeks Postdose 3. At Month 24, the anti-HPV 6, 11, 16, and 18 GMTs were lower, in particular with respect to anti-HPV 18. For anti-HPV 18 the GMT at Month 24 was approximately 50%  of  the  baseline  GMT  among  subjects  who  were  anti-HPV  18  seropositive/PCR  negative  at baseline. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 13: Summary of anti-HPV GMTs by vaccination group (PPI Population)

|                              | qHPV Vaccine (N=1,910)   | qHPV Vaccine (N=1,910)   | qHPV Vaccine (N=1,910)   | Placebo (N=1,907)   | Placebo (N=1,907)   | Placebo (N=1,907)   |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Assay (cLIA v2.0) Study time | n                        | GMT (mMU/ml)             | 95% CI                   | n                   | GMT (mMU/ml)        | 95% CI              |
| Anti-HPV 6                   |                          |                          |                          |                     |                     |                     |
| Day 1                        | 1,262                    | < 7                      | (<7, <7)                 | 1,251               | < 7                 | (<7, <7)            |
| Month 07                     | 1,262                    | 417.5                    | (396.9, 439.2)           | 1,251               | < 7                 | (<7, <7)            |
| Month 24                     | 1,218                    | 70.4                     | (66.9, 74.0)             | 1,203               | < 7                 | (<7, <7)            |
| Anti-HPV 11                  |                          |                          |                          |                     |                     |                     |
| Day 1                        | 1,262                    | < 8                      | (<8, <8)                 | 1,251               | < 8                 | (<8, <8)            |
| Month 07                     | 1,262                    | 552.4                    | (526.7, 579.5)           | 1,251               | < 8                 | (<8, <8)            |
| Month 24                     | 1,218                    | 77.5                     | (73.9, 81.3)             | 1,203               | < 8                 | (<8, <8)            |
| Anti-HPV 16                  |                          |                          |                          |                     |                     |                     |
| Day 1                        | 1,279                    | < 11                     | (<11, <11)               | 1,256               | < 11                | (<11, <11)          |
| Month 07                     | 1,279                    | 2,234.7                  | (2,122.4, 2,353.0)       | 1,256               | < 11                | (<11, <11)          |
| Month 24                     | 1,235                    | 279.6                    | (264.9, 295.2)           | 1,213               | < 11                | (<11, <11)          |
| Anti-HPV 18                  |                          |                          |                          |                     |                     |                     |
| Day 1                        | 1,444                    | < 10                     | (<10, <10)               | 1,427               | < 10                | (<10, <10)          |
| Month 07                     | 1,444                    | 358.7                    | (341.9, 376.4)           | 1,427               | < 10                | (<10, <10)          |
| Month 24                     | 1,390                    | 28.4                     | (26.9, 30.0)             | 1,370               | < 10                | (<10, <10)          |

| Anti-HPV response                 | qHPV vaccine (N=1910)   | qHPV vaccine (N=1910)   | qHPV vaccine (N=1910)   | qHPV vaccine (N=1910)   | Placebo (n=1907)   | Placebo (n=1907)   | Placebo (n=1907)   | Placebo (n=1907)   |
|-----------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|                                   |                         |                         | Seroconversion          | Seroconversion          |                    | Seroconversion     | Seroconversion     | Seroconversion     |
| Study time                        | n                       | M*                      | Percent                 | 95% CI                  | n                  | M*                 | Percent            | 95% CI             |
| Anti-HPV 6 >20 mMU/ml             |                         |                         |                         |                         |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Day 1                             | 1262                    | 0                       | 0.0                     | 0.0, 0.3                | 1251               | 0                  | 0.0                | 0.0, 0.3           |
| Month 7                           | 1262                    | 1242                    | 98.4                    | 97.6, 99.0              | 1251               | 38                 | 3.0                | 2.2, 4.1           |
| Month 24                          | 1,218                   | 1,087                   | 89.2                    | 87.4, 90.9              | 1,203              | 42                 | 3.5                | 2.5, 4.7)          |
| Anti- HPV 11 >16 mMU/ml Medicinal |                         |                         |                         |                         |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Day 1                             | 1,262                   | 0                       | 0.0                     | 0.0, 0.3                | 1,251              | 0                  | 0.0                | 0.0, 0.3           |
| Month 7                           | 1,262                   | 1,238                   | 98.1                    | 97.2, 98.8              | 1,251              | 27                 | 2.2                | 1.4, 3.1           |
| Month 24                          | 1,218                   | 1,126                   | 92.4                    | 90.8, 93.9              | 1,203              | 31                 | 2.6                | 1.8, 3.6           |
| Anti- HPV 16 >20 mMU/ml           |                         |                         |                         |                         |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Day 1                             | 1,279                   | 0                       | 0.0                     | 0.0, 0.3                | 1,256              | 0                  | 0.0                | 0.0, 0.3           |
| Month 7                           | 1,279                   | 1,264                   | 98.8                    | 98.1, 99.3              | 1,256              | 45                 | 3.6                | 2.6, 4.8           |
| Month 24                          | 1,235                   | 1,192                   | 96.5                    | 95.3, 97.5              | 1,213              | 48                 | 4.0                | 2.9, 5.2           |
| Anti- HPV 18 >24 mMU/ml           |                         |                         |                         |                         |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Day 1                             | 1,444                   | 0                       | 0.0                     | 0.0, 0.3                | 1,427              | 0                  | 0.0                | 0.0, 0.3           |
| Month 7                           | 1,444                   | 1,406                   | 97.4                    | 96.4, 98.1              | 1,427              | 31                 | 2.2                | 1.5, 3.1           |
| Month 24                          | 1,390                   | 760                     | 54.7                    | 52.0, 57.3              | 1,370              | 22                 | 1.6                | 1.0, 2.4           |

The estimated GMTs and associated CIs are calculated using an ANOVA model with a term for vaccination group. N = Number of subjects randomized to the respective vaccination group who received at least 1 injection. n = Number of subjects contributing to the analysis. ANOVA = Analysis of variance; CI = Confidence interval; cLIA = Competitive Luminex immunoassay; GMT = Geometric mean titer; mMU = Milli Merck units; Seroconversion The percentage of seroconversion in each of the vaccine HPV types at all time points evaluated were less than 5% in the placebo group (Table 14). In the vaccine group, the percentage seroconversion at Month  7  was  at  least  97%  for  each  of  the  vaccine  HPV  types.  At  Month  24  the  percententage seroconversion  had  dropped  by  &lt;10%  for  each  of  HPV  types  6,  11,  and  16.  For  HPV  18,  the percentage seroconversion at 4 weeks postdose 3 dropped by 43 percentage points at Month 24 and the percentage seropositive was 54.7%. Table 14: Summary of anti-HPV percent seroconversion by vaccination group (PPI Population) Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Vaccine-type anti-HPV responses by age group in the HPV naïve population

## Comparison of 24 to 34 year-olds and 35 to 45 year-olds

Anti-HPV  GMTs  at  Months  7  and  24  were  somewhat  lower  among  35-  to  45-year-old  women compared with 24- to 34-year-old women, though the difference was not statistically significant (i.e., the CIs were overlapping).

For each of the vaccine HPV types, the percent seroconversion at Month 7 and Month 24 was similar between the 2 age groups. Comparison of 16 to 23 year-olds and 25 to 45 year-olds The anti-HPV 6, anti-HPV 11 and anti-HPV 18 GMTs at Month 7 and Month 24 were significantly higher  in  the  16  to  23  year-olds  compared  to  those  in  the  24  to  45  year-olds  (95%  CIs  not overlapping).  Anti-HPV  16  GMTs  were  comparable  between  the  age  groups  at  Month  7,  but  were significantly higher in the 16 to 23 year-olds at Month 24. The percent seroconversion for each of the 4 vaccine HPV types at Month 7 was comparable between age groups.  At Month 24, the percent seroconversion for each of the 4 vaccine HPV types was higher in the 16 to 23 year-old age group compared to that in the 24 to 45 year-old age group (95% CIs do not overlap). Comparison of 16 to 23 year-olds, 24 to 34 year-olds and 35 to 45 year-olds Month 7 For anti-HPV 6, 11 and 18 GMT at Month 7 was highest in the 16 to 23-old age group and lowest in the 35 to 45 year old. In general the GMTs in each of the 3 age groups were different (95% CIs of the GMTs did not overlap), and decreased as the age progressed.  Among 24 to 34 year-olds anti-HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18 GMTs were 82%, 79%, 102% and 87%, respectively, of the corresponding anti HPV GMTs among 16 to 23 year-olds.  Among 35 to 45 year-olds anti-HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18 GMTs were 74%, 67%, 93% and 71%, respectively, of the corresponding anti-HPV GMTs among 16 to 23 year-olds.  The percent seroconversion for each of the 4 vaccine HPV types was comparable in all 3 age groups. Month 24 In general the anti-HPV GMTs for each of the 4 vaccine types at Month 24 was lower compared to the GMTs at Month 7 and the Month 24 GMTs decreased as age progressed.  Among 24 to 34 year-olds anti-HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18 GMTs were 64%, 57%, 63% and 60%, respectively, of the corresponding anti-HPV GMTs among 16 to 23 year-olds.  Among 35 to 45 year-olds anti-HPV 6, 11, 16 and 18 GMTs were 62%, 51%, 59% and 50%, respectively, of the corresponding anti-HPV GMTs among 16 to 23 year-olds.  The percent seroconversion for each of the 4 vaccine HPV types was higher in the 16 to 23 year-olds compared to that in the other 2 older age groups. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Vaccine HPV type anti-HPV responses in populations with prior HPV exposure

## Seropositive/PCR negative population

At Day 1 anti-HPV GMTs were comparable in the  vaccine and placebo group. At Month 7 the GMTs in  the  vaccine  group  increased  at  greater  magnitude  in  the  baseline  HPV  seropositive  subjects compared to those in the HPV-naïve population. At Month 24 the GMTs were lower than at Month 7, but  were  higher  in  the  baseline  seropositive  subjects  than  the  GMTs  in  the  PPI  population.  In  the placebo group there was a steady decline in GMTs.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Seropositive/PCR positive population

The number of evaluable patients was small. In the placebo group GMTs were somewhat higher than those observed in the seropositive/PCR negative group. In the vaccine group, the anti-HPV GMTs at Months  7  and  24  were  higher  in  the  seropositive/PCR  positive  subjects  than  those  in  the  PPI population.

## Seronegative/PCR positive population

The number of evaluable patients was small. In the placebo group anti-HPV 6, anti-HPV 11 and antiHPV 16 seroconversion was observed. At Month 7, 41.2%, 100% (one subject), 23.9% and 4.3% of subjects  who  were  HPV  6,  HPV  11,  HPV  16  and  HPV  DNA-18  positive  had  seroconverted  in  the placebo  group.  The  anti-HPV  6,  11  and  18  GMTs  at  Months  7  and  24  in  the  vaccine  group  were somewhat higher in the baseline PCR positive subjects than those in the PPI population, whereas antiHPV 16 levels were slightly lower. 1.3.2.2 Integrated review The  integrated  review  of  the  immunogenicity  of  qHPV  vaccine  includes  data  from  the  following protocols: P007 (Phase II dose ranging study of in YAW) ; P013 (Phase III efficacy study in YAW; substudies P011 and P012); P015 (Phase III efficacy study in YAW); P016 (Phase III adult-adolescent immunogenicity bridging study); P018 (Phase III immunogenicity and safety study in pre-adolescents and  adolescents);  and  P019  (Phase  III  efficacy,  safety,  and  immunogenicity  study  in  mid-adult women). Baseline characteristics seem to exert some influence on the Month 7 immune response with age as the strongest predictor for all vaccine HPV types, The decreases in Month 7 anti-HPV natural log titers associated with one year´s increase in enrolment age were calculated and corresponded to 2.9%, 2.6%, 2.8%  and  3.5%  decrease  in  anti-HPV  6,  11,  16  and  18  GMTs,  respectively.  Some  variability  in response was seen by race/ethnicity and by geographic region, but no significant pattern was evident. The integrated review of immunogenicity showed that age influenced significantly on Month 7 and Month 24 anti-HPV titres for all vaccine HPV types. The type-specific GMTs were highest in 9- to 17year-olds and decreased with an increase in the enrolment age, being the lowest in the 35- to 45-yearolds.  The  age-related  decline  in  GMTs  was  most  pronounced over the 9- to 17-year old age range, whereafter it was more gradual between ages 18 to 45. The Month 7 GMTs were 2 to 3 fold lower in the 35- to 45 year-olds compared with those in 9- to 17-year-olds. At  Month 24, the GMTs of the 4 vaccine HPV types had decreased substantially from the peak at Month  7  in  all  vaccine  recipients  across  age  groups.  The  GMTs  for  HPV  18  were  low  in  all  age groups, but in particular in the MAW population, where the antibody levels had declined below those in  subjects  naturally  infected.  The  proportions  of  subjects  who  were  anti-HPV  6,  11  and  16 seropositive at Month 24 remained above 89% in all age groups; the seropositivity rates being 3 to 6 percentage  points  lower  in  the  35-  to  45  year-olds  than  in  the  18-  to  26-year-olds.  With  respect  to HPV18, only 55% of MAW remained seropositive as opposed to 85% of 9- to 17-year-olds. 1.3.3 Discussion The version 2 of the HPV-4 cLIA assay was appropriately validated. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Protocol  019,  at  month  7,  the  qHPV  vaccine  induced  an  immune  response  to  all  four  HPV  types. Seroconversion rates for all HPV type were comparable (&gt;97%). As regards persistence of immune response, for all HPV types, anti-HPV GMTs declined between Month 7 and Month 24. Anti-HPV 6, anti-HPV 11, anti-HPV 16 remained above the baseline levels, while for anti-HPV 18 the level was below that of baseline and somewhat lower than that observed up to 4 years post enrollment in young women (see variation II/19) [28.4 mMU/ml) (95%CI: 26.9, 30.0) vs. 33.9 mMU/ml (32.0, 35.9)].

The study demonstrated that administration of the qHPV vaccine to baseline HPV vaccine-type naïve 24-  to  45-year-old  women  resulted  in  anti-HPV  6/11/16/18  responses  at  Month  7  that  were

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

significantly  lower  than  those  observed  in  16-  to  23-  year-old  (non-overlapping  95%  CIs).  The exception was anti-HPV 16 GMTs that were comparable between the two age groups. When analyzed by the two age strata of MAW, the lowest responses were observed in the 35- to 45-year-olds. It can be concluded that the magnitude of antibody response to the qHPV vaccine was related to age, with the highest response achieved in the younger women. The most robust responses were demonstrated against HPV 16 and the weakest response to HPV 18. At Month 24, the anti-HPV GMTs for all 4 vaccine types had decreased substantially.

Subjects who were positive to the relevant HPV type at baseline had substantially higher GMTs. These data suggest the qHPV vaccine induces an anamnestic response in individuals seropositive as a result of prior natural infection. From the integrated analyses it can be concluded that the vaccine-induced immune responses in MAW were inferior to those seen in adolescents and young women. The consequence of these lower antibody responses in the MAW population for the durability of efficacy is not known, since no immunological correlate of protection has been defined. The low Month 24 GMTs and seropositivity rate for HPV 18 raised concern. The data demonstrated that cLIA seems not to be the optimal test to measure long-term vaccine  induced  HPV  immunity  (since  protection  in  YAW  was  sustained  despite  seronegativity  to HPV 18). This assay might be too specific measuring only antibodies against a single type-specific neutralizing epitope on L1 VLPs and not all relevant neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, the MAH has committed to perform serological studies using broader neutralization assays, i.e. pseudoneutralization  assays,  as  well  as  to  submit  the  validation  protocol  and  final  results  using  the  newly developed assay measuring the VLP-specific total IgG. The MAH submitted the relevant study reports in April 2009 and they are currently under assessment, as a follow up measure. In  addition,  the  long-term  surveillance  of  disease  outcomes  in  young  adult  women  will  reveal  the significance  of  the  seronegativity  to  HPV  18.  However  considering  the  lower  immune  response observed in vaccinated mid-adult women it is critical to determine whether this translates to shorter duration of immunity and necessitates an earlier booster dose. At the current stage after a relatively short duration of follow-up (2.2 years) in study 019, no obvious breakthrough infections have been documented. However, long-term follow-up of efficacy and immunogenicity in MAW is mandatory. The MAH has committed to submit a study synopsis on a long term follow up of vaccine efficacy, immunogenicity and safety in MAW and a Protocol. Baseline characteristics seemed to exert some influence on the Month 7 immune response with age as the strongest predictor for all vaccine HPV types. In the multifactor models, BMI was found to be a significant predictor for Month 7 anti-HPV 18 titers and for Month 24 anti-HPV 11, 16 and 18 titers in 18-26  year  old  female.  Unfortunately,  BMI  was  not  included  in  the  modeling  for  the  MAW.  This factor is of interest since the qHPV vaccine is similar to the recombinant Hep B vaccine, for which BMI is a well-known factor associated with a reduced immune response. The results of the modeling exercise were difficult to interpret, since the significant predictors of Month 7 and Month 24 anti-HPV responses varied by HPV type and by age group in an inconsistent pattern. The MAH was requested to clarify  whether  there  are  any  baseline  characteristics  that  are  associated  with  a  decreased  immune response to qHPV vaccine that deserve to be mentioned in the SPC. It was shown that multiple factors influenced on the anti-HPV titres. Overall age is the most important predictor of titer response with the strongest  immune  responses  observed  in  youngest  subjects  below  12  years  of  age.  Importantly,  no particular  subgroup  has  been  identified  with  poor  responses  to  the  vaccine.  Moreover,  the  factors evaluated have not so far been identified to impact on short-term efficacy. Whether the lower response associated with some of the factors will affect the durability of immunity is not known at present, but will be shown in the on-going long-term surveillance studies. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The subjects who were seropositive to the relevant HPV type(s) at baseline had much higher GMTs than those who were seronegative to the same HPV type(s) at Day 1, suggesting the induction of an anamnestic response in naturally infected subjects. Among MAW who were seropositive to vaccine HPV types at Day 1, vaccine induced immune response to the types for which they were positive were comparable to those observed among YAW who were seropositive to the same type at Day 1.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Mild  to  moderate  deviations  (+1  month  with  administration  of  Dose  2  and  +2  months  with administration of Dose 3) from the current dosing schedule of a 3-vaccine injection series at Day 1, Month 2 and Month 6 did not have a major impact on the Month 7 or Month 24 anti-HPV immune responses.

In conclusion, section 5.1 of the SPC reflects the study results and was endorsed by the CHMP with minor  changes.  Furthermore,  a  paragraph  concerning  persistent  of  immune  response  was  included upon CHMP request to add the percentages of MAW vaccinated women per subtype that remained seropositive after a follow up of 2.2 years.

-  A total  of  11  subjects  who  received  qHPV  vaccine  (0.6%)  and  a  total  of  15  subjects  who received  placebo  (0.8%)  reported  a  serious  clinical  adverse  experience  (SAE)  at  any  time during the study. None of the SAEs were determined by the investigator to be related to study vaccine/placebo.

The MAH submitted the relevant study reports to measure long-term vaccine induced HPV immunity test in April 2009 that are currently under assessment as a follow up measure. 1.4 Clinical safety The MAH has provided the safety analysis of study 019 conducted in 3819 healthy 24 to 45 year-old women enrolled in 38 sites in 7 countries. The data are obtained from the start of the study through the visit cut-off date of 13-Jul-2007. The cut-off date for SAEs reported to the WAES was 16-May-2008. Furthermore,  the  MAH  has  submitted  an  integrated  overview  of  safety  data  in  the  population  of subjects 9 to 45 years (including studies P007, P013, P015, P016, P018 and P019) across the entire age  range.  In  addition  integrated  safety  data  is  presented  by  age,  in  order  to  provide  a  comparison between the age groups (9 to 17 years, 18 to 26 years, 27 to 34 years and 35 to 45 years). Protocol 019 contributes all subjects in the categories of 27 to 34 years and 35 to 45 years. All safety data in clinical trials of qHPV vaccine in studies of subjects 9 to 26 years of age have been submitted previously in the EU to the CHMP in the context of the MAA and subsequent Type-II variations. Furhermore, the MAH proposes the deletion of 'Injection-site bruising' from section 4.8 of the SPC. 1.4.1 Protocol 019 Patient exposure Overall,  3819  subjects  were  enrolled  in  this  study;  two  (2)  subjects  were  randomised  but  not vaccinated (resulting in 3817 vaccinated subjects). A total of 1910 subjects received at least one dose of qHPV vaccine and 1907 subjects received at least one dose of placebo. The mean age was 34.3 years in both groups. Thirty-one percent (31%) of subjects were Asian, 43% were Hispanic American and 20% were white. Approximately 13% of the subjects originated from Europe, 13% from North- America, 42% from Latin-America and 31% from Asia. Adverse events From Protocol 019 the following observations can be made:  The proportions of subjects who reported at least one clinical AE was somewhat higher in the group that received qHPV vaccine (87.1%) than in the placebo group (81.3%).  The proportion of subjects who reported at least one injection site AE was somewhat higher in the group that received qHPV vaccine (76.8%) than in the placebo group (64.3%).  The proportion of subjects who reported at least one systemic AE was generally comparable between  the  two  vaccination  groups  (59.3%  in  the  qHPV  group  and  60.1%  in  the  placebo group).  Few subjects discontinued the study due to an AE (0.4% in the qHPV group and 0.1% in the placebo group) or a vaccine related AE (0.3% in the qHPV group and 0.1% in the placebo group). Medicinal product no longer authorised

-  There were 5 deaths: one in the placebo group (0.1%) and 4 in the vaccine group (0.2%). The deaths occurred at least 4 months after vaccination and were not determined to be related to study vaccine.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Injection site Adverse Experiences: The most common injection site AEs in both the vaccine and the placebo group, respectively, were pain (75.3% and 62.0%), swelling (18.7% and 11.3%) and erythema (14.5% and 10.5). In general the proportion of subjects who reported specific injection site AEs was higher in the qHPV group than in the placebo group.

Systemic  Clinical  Adverse  Experiences:    In  both  the  vaccine  and  placebo  groups,  respectively,  the most common clinical AEs were headache (27.8% and 27.5%), pyrexia (11.6% and 12.3%), influenza (5.2% and 5.4%), nasopharyngitis (4.2% and 4.7%), and dizziness (4.2% and 4.3%). In general the proportion of subjects who reported a systemic AE was comparable between the vaccination groups. The exception was pain in the extremity where the proportion of subjects was higher in the qHPV vaccine group than in the placebo group (4.7% vs 2.2%).

The  initial  MAA  included  safety  summaries  by  concomitant  medications  including  systemic, immunosuppressive,  anti-inflammatory  or  antipyretic  formulations  or  contraceptives.  The  MAH anticipated  no  differences  in  safety  profiles  in  this  respect  in  subjects  27  to  45  years  of  age  as compared to subjects 9 to 26 years and therefore did not conduct such analysis in study P019.

Elevated  temperatures:  The  percentage  of  subjects  in  the  qHPV  vaccine  group  who  had  maximum temperature &gt;37.8 º C was comparable to that in the placebo. Serious adverse events and deaths Deaths At the time of the closing of the study database for the current analysis 5 subjects (4 in the qHPV vaccine group and 1 in the placebo group) died during the study. The deaths  occurred  at  least  4  months  after  vaccination.  None  of  the  deaths  was  determined  to  be related to study vaccine. Serious adverse events A total of 11 subjects in the qHPV vaccine group (0.6% of the 1908 subjects) and a total of 15 subjects in the placebo group (0.8 % of the 1902 subjects) reported a SAE at any time during the study. None of the SAEs was determined to be related to study vaccine/placebo.The most common SAEs in both vaccination groups were pregnancy related (premature labour, ectopic pregnancy). The most common non-pregnancy  related  SAE  was  pelvic  inflammatory  disease.  The  incidences  were  comparable between the vaccination groups. New medical history in the safety population The MAH presented the new medical conditions with an incidence &gt; 1% in either treatment group during the vaccination period (Day 1 through Month 7). The most common new medical conditions reported  were  headache  (3.3%  vs.  4.1%),  nasopharyngitis  (2.6%  vs.  2.1%),  and  bacterial  vaginitis (2.0%  vs.  1.6%).  The  proportion  of  subjects  reporting  new  medical  conditions  was  generally comparable between the two vaccination groups. Among nervous system disorders headache prevailed. No other unlisted neurological symptoms were specifically described. The  number  and  percentage  of  new  medical  conditions  potentially  indicative  of  an  autoimmune phenomenon among all subjects in the safety population reported post month 7 by vaccination group shows that the most common diagnosis was hypothyroidism (0.4% in the qHPV group and 0.5% in the placebo group).  Overall  the  reporting  of  potential  autoimmune  conditions  was  comparable  between vaccination groups. Safety in special groups Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Pregnancy outcomes

Pregnancy outcomes were generally comparable between the two vaccination groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Congenital anomalies

A total of 5 congenital anomalies were reported for pregnancies (live births, foetal losses). Of these, 2 were  in  an  infant  (with  ventricular  septal  defect  and  adrenal  neoplasm)  and  one  in  a  foetus  (with bilateral  renal  agenesis)  born  to  subjects  in  the  qHPV  vaccine  group  and  2  were  in  infants  (with hypochondroplasia and congenital hydronephrosis) born in the placebo group. No specific anomaly could be possibly related to vaccination.

<!-- image -->

Overall the proportion of subjects 9 to 45 years of age who were randomised to receive qHPV vaccine in the integrated database consisted of 25% of subjects 9 to 17 years of age, 63% of subjects 18 to 26 years of age, 5% of subjects 27 to 34 years of age and 7% 35 to 45 years of age. The proportions for subjects randomised to receive placebo were 15% of subjects 9 to 17 years of age, 71% of subjects 18 to 26 years of age, 6% of subjects 27 to 34 years of age and 8% of subjects 35 to 45 years of age.

Analysis of pregnancy outcomes in subsets of subjects in protocol 019 Analyses were conducted to evaluate the impact of the qHPV vaccine on pregnancy outcomes among subjects  whose  estimated  date  of  conception  (ECDn)  calculated  by  last  menstrual  period  occurred within 30 days of receiving a dose of study vaccine (Proximate Pregnancies). The  outcome  of  pregnancies  that  occurred  within  30  days  of  a  vaccination  reported  1  case  in  the placebo group but none in the qHPV group.  In the group of subjects whose EDCn greater that 30 days following any vaccination were 3 cases of congenital anomalies reported in the qHPV group but 1 in the placebo group. Analysis  of  pregnancy  outcomes  in  subsets  of  subjects  in  the  phase  III  clinical  program  for qHPV vaccine A total of 14 infants born to 14 subjects in the qHPV vaccine group experienced a SAE. None was judged to be vaccine related. A total of 14 infants born to 14 subjects in the placebo group experienced a SAE. Serious adverse experiences reported in women who reported pregnancies Twelve (12) SAEs were reported by subjects during pregnancy. None of these SAEs were determined to be vaccine/placebo related. Administration of qHPV vaccine to lactating women No  SAEs  were  reported  among  subjects  who  were  breast-feeding  during  the  study.  Data  were provided in cumulative tabulations of the combined protocols as described below. 1.4.2 Protocols 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 combined Patient exposure For the integrated summaries, 2 safety populations were specified (as for the initial MAA and previous Type-II variations).  Safety population: includes all subjects who were enrolled in Protocols 007, 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 who received only qHPV vaccine or placebo (aluminium or non-aluminium), regardless of surveillance method. This population included 25,274 subjects; 13,686 subjects who received qHPV vaccine (as the subjects who received qHPV vaccine in the extension to Protocol 007 are not included) and 11,588 subjects who received placebo.  Detailed Safety Population: includes all subjects who were enrolled in protocols 007, 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 who received only qHPV vaccine or placebo (aluminium or non-aluminium) who were followed using the VRC-aided surveillance method. This population included 14,034 subjects; 8,068 subjects who received qHPV vaccine and 5,966 subjects who received placebo. All subjects in Protocol 019 were followed using VRC-aided surveillance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

A  higher  percentage  of  subjects  in  the  integrated  data  set  who  received  qHPV  vaccine  (49.1%) reported  an  injection  site  experience  than  subjects  who  received  placebo  (37.1%).  The  rates  of discontinuation were not impacted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  the  detailed  safety  population  the  frequency  by  age of  injection  site  reactions  were  higher  in  the younger age groups (9-17 years old) with more erythema and swelling.

The proportions of subjects reporting a systemic AE were comparable between the vaccination groups. The  most  common  systemic  AEs  were  headache,  pyrexia,  nausea  and  nasopharyngitis.  A  great majority of systemic AEs were mild or moderate in intensity both in the vaccine and placebo groups.

In  the  qHPV  group  the  proportions  of  subjects  reporting  systemic  AEs  were  generally  comparable across age groups. The only exception was a higher frequency of pain in the extremity in the older age category. The most common SAEs in both vaccination groups were pregnancy related. None of the SAEs was determined to be related to study vaccine or placebo. New medical conditions  potentially  consistent  with  autoimmune  phenomena  reported  post-month  7 among  all  subjects  by  vaccination  group  showed  proportions  of  such  reported  events  comparable between the vaccine and placebo groups. Overall  data  from  the  combined  study  protocols  showed  that  the  proportions  of  pregnancies  with natural outcome that ended in a negative outcome were comparable between the vaccination groups. A total of 70 cases of congenital anomaly included 40 cases in the qHPV vaccine group and 30 cases in the  placebo  group.  The  proportions  of  live  births  resulting  congenital  anomalies  were  comparable: 2.6% (38/1447) in the qHPV vaccine group and 1.9% (27/1424) in the placebo group. The number of pregnancies resulting in congenital anomaly was within the incidence rate of 3% to 4% in large health care systems. No specific medical conditions could be related to any of the vaccine groups. The follow-up of breast-fed infants of mothers vaccinated identifies more SAEs in the qHPV group compared  to  the  placebo  group.  There  were  no  patterns  or  trends  in  the  types  of  serious  adverse experiences reported in infants who were breastfed during the vaccination phase of clinical studies. No safety signals of clinical concern were identified among these infants. 1.4.3 Discussion No  new  or  significant  safety  signals  were  identified  with  the  exception  of  increased  incidences  of transient  injection-site  adverse  experiences  and  low-grade  fever  following  vaccination  in  the  new Medical History safety data from P019 or the Protocols 013, 015, 016, 018 and 019 combined. The proportions  of  subjects  who  reported  SAEs  or  who  discontinued  due  to  a  SAE  were  low  and comparable between the vaccination groups. Vaccine-related SAEs occurred in &lt;1% of the subjects. Reporting frequency of adverse events was similar in the different age ranges except for the higher frequency of pain in the extremity in older subjects and somewhat higher frequency of erythema and swelling in the younger age range. The MAH proposed to delete the 'Injection-site bruising' from section 4.8 of the SPC. The tabulation of subjects with Injection Site Adverse Experiences (&gt;1% in one or more vaccination groups) indicate that the AE 'Injection Site Bruising' occurs in  2,1%  reports in the qHPV group and in 2.2% of the non-aluminium containing placebo vs 2.3% of the aluminium containing placebo. The injection site adverse reactions may be well covered by the remaining PTs. 'Bruising' is most likely associated with the injection procedure rather than the nature of the injected product and would thus be considered to be an adverse effect of vaccination although very rarely occurring. Therefore, the CHMP considers that 'bruising' should remain listed. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The follow-up of breast-fed infants of mothers vaccinated identifies more SAEs in the qHPV group compared to the placebo group. However, the excess of AEs in the qHPV group was not specific and not considered related to vaccination.

Use of qHPV vaccine did not impact overall pregnancy outcomes. Nor did administration of qHPV vaccine to nursing mothers affect the health of the mother or the nursing child. Rates of foetal loss

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were slightly lower among subjects who received qHPV vaccine compared with the placebo groups. Slightly  more  foetuses/infants  with  congenital  anomalies  were  observed  in  subjects  who  became pregnant  in  the  qHPV  vaccine  group  compared  to  the  placebo  group.  However,  the  congenital anomalies that were observed were diverse and deemed to be highly unlikely related to the vaccine.

A comprehensive description of the reported arthritis/arthropathia cases has been provided. A causal relationship between these diagnoses and qHPV vaccination could not be proven in any of the cases. According to the cases narratives one case of arthritis was autoimmune in nature and one case was considered as reactive arthritis caused by an infection. One case reporting a low grade inflammatory arthropathy  was  an  onset  of  rheumatoid  arthritis  and  one  case  of  'inflammatory  joint'  was  later clarified  as  chondromalacia  patellae.  The  present  data  do  not  indicate  a  direct  connection  between qHPV  vaccination  and  arthritis/arthropathy.  However,  as  these  conditions  may  be  considered  as autoimmune  reactions  continuous  close  monitoring  and  cumulative  presentation  of  such  adverse events should be performed and all cases should be presented and discussed in future PSURs.

In addition, there is a need to have an appropriate safety follow-up in the EU for the MAW population. Therefore, the MAH should continuously and cumulatively  report vaccine  safety in older  women in future PSURs (see follow up measures).

Among the systemic SAEs determined to be caused by the qHPV vaccine in the combined group and previously reported in MAA and Type II variations were vaginal haemorrhage and ulcerative colitis. However, only one case of gastroenteritis was reported as a related SAE in study 019. The possible mechanisms for these reactions have not been discussed. Adverse  experiences  recommended  for  close  monitoring  shall  be  cumulatively  reported  on  in  the future PSURs. All autoimmune phenomena (including ulcerative colitis) as well as the events of the vaginal  haemorrhage  and  gastroenteritis  should  be  closely  monitored.  Vaccine  safety  in  mid-adult women should be specifically addressed in future PSURs. Regarding  pregnancy,  close  safety  surveillance  is  continuously  ongoing  as  the  MAH  maintains pregnancy  registries  in  the  US,  Canada  and  France.  Nordic  countries  collect  data  on  exposures  to qHPV during pregnancy. Standardised incidence ratio on congenital anomalies will be calculated by comparing  the  observed  and  expected  cases  of  congenital  anomaly  in  women  with  inadvertent exposure to qHPV vaccine during pregnancy. Studies in HIV infected children and adults are ongoing. In conclusion, there was no new significant safety signal identified associated with the administration of the qHPV vaccine in mid-adult women in study 019, nor in the combined protocols safety analyses. 1.5 Pharmacovigilance system 1.5.1 Risk Management Plan The MAH was requested by the CHMP to commit to perform long-term PMS surveillance in MAW. The MAH committed to provide the study synopsis and to submit the study protocol. A sentinel cohort of Protocol 019 participants is considered the best option for conducting long-term post-marketing surveillance in a cohort that has been vaccinated some years ago. The CHMP acknowledged that this cohort study is the most relevant for follow-up of qHPV vaccine efficacy and immunogenicity. The MAH committed to provide a revised RMP in December 2009. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.6 Overall discussion and benefit-risk assessment

## Efficacy

The claim of efficacy in MAW is based on one randomized controlled phase III efficacy trial (Protocol 019)  including  3819  healthy  sexually  active  24-  to  45-year  old  women.  The  median  duration  of follow-up for this study was 2.2 years. The main goal was to provide data to support that efficacy was comparable to that shown in young adult women (YAW). The MAH applied to extend the indication to  MAW, including a statement in the indication that  efficacy  against  premalignant  genital  lesions, cervical cancer and genital warts has been demonstrated in women up to the age of 45 years. Study 019  was  designed  to  demonstrate  the  efficacy  in  MAW  with  respect  to  the  composite  co-primary endpoints of HPV 6/11/16/18- and HPV 16/18-related persistent infection and clinical disease (CIN, AIS and EGLs) and one secondary endpoint HPV 6/11-related persistent infection and clinical disease. The scientific basis for these endpoints constituted the natural history of HPV and the results of the clinical  program  in  YAW.  The  original  licensure  of  the  qHPV  vaccine  in  YAW  was  based  on histologically-confirmed efficacy endpoints, i.e. HPV 16/18-related CIN 2/3 and AIS, as surrogates for cervical cancer, whereas in P019 a virological endpoint, persistent infection (6-month) was used. The primary efficacy population (PPE) (HPV naïve) was defined similarly to that in all previous studies in YAW. Two further populations  were  defined  that  resembled  the  MITT-2  and  MITT-3  populations used in the YAW studies: the HNRT and FAS population, respectively, The FAS (ITT) population included all women enrolled in the trial regardless of Day 1 HPV status, i.e. also those already infected or  with  clinical  disease  at  baseline.  No  prescreening  for  HPV  status  was  performed  before  study enrollment. At baseline 67% of MAW subjects were HPV naïve and, thus, susceptible to all 4 vaccine HPV types at study entry. Approximately 8% of MAW were infected (HPV DNA positive) with HPV 6, 11, 16 and/or HPV 18 at baseline. In  the  HPV  naïve  PPE  population  vaccine  efficacy  was  90.5%  (95%  CI:  73.7,  97.5)  against  HPV 6/11/16/18-related  persistent  infection  (PI)/disease,  83.1%  (50.6,  95.8)  against  HPV  16/18-related PI/disease and 100% (79.0, 100) against HPV 6/11-related PI/disease. Efficacy against CIN 2/3 could not be shown in the PPE population due to few cases (1 vs. 4 placebo cases) (VE: 75.2% (95% CI 150.6, 99.5).  In the HNRT population vaccine efficacy was lower 74.6% (58.1, 85.3), 71.6% (47.6, 85.5)  and  80.2%  (51.7,  93.3),  respectively.  Although  P019  was  not  powered  for  disease  endpoints (CIN 2/3), efficacy was only 25%, in the HNRT population with 3 cases in the vaccine group and 4 cases in the placebo group. In the FAS (ITT) population, very low efficacy was noted for the HPV 6/11/16/18-related  PI/disease  endpoint  (VE:  30.9%  (11.1,  46.5)  and  for  the  more  important  HPV 16/18-related  PI/disease  endpoint  only  nominal  reductions  were  seen  (VE:  22.6%  (-2.9,  41.9). Efficacy  for  the  HPV  6/11-related  endpoint  was  47.1%  (11.4,  69.2).  With  respect  to  vaccine  HPV type-related CIN 2/3, no efficacy at all was observed, not even a trend (VE; 9.9%). The number of cases in the vaccine group was the same as in the placebo group. In  the  initial  assessment  of  this  type  II  variation,  two  major  objections  were  identified.  The  first objection concerned the indication of the qHPV vaccine, which covers all women regardless of HPV status and therefore the ITT (FAS) population was considered the most representative population for MAW. The primary efficacy population, the HPV naïve (PPE) population does not reflect the general population of MAW that will be vaccinated in clinical practice. The poor efficacy results observed in the FAS population did not support the MAH´s proposal to include a statement in the indication that efficacy had been demonstrated in 27-45 year old women. A second objection (safety) was also raised with  respect  to  the  results  observed  in  the  PCR  positive/seronegative  subpopulation  suggesting  a negative impact of the vaccine on on-going HPV infection/disease. In addition, several other concerns were raised in the RSI. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In the MAH´s response to the CHMP´s first Request for Supplementary Information the CHMP agreed that  for  demonstration  of  prophylactic  efficacy,  the  PPE  population  is  the  optimal  population.  The results in study 019 showed significant efficacy in HPV naïve MAW and in similar magnitude as that shown  in  young  adult  women.  However,  this  target  HPV  naïve  population  is  difficult  to  identify among sexually experienced MAW and many non-naïve women will be vaccinated without deriving

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

little if any benefit. Therefore, the CHMP considered critical that the SPC and PI make it very clear to the  prescribers  and  patients  that  efficacy  cannot be expected in non-naïve women. In the indication referral should be made to section 4.4 (and section 5.1) where it should be stated that the vaccine is for prophylactic  use  only  and  that  the  vaccine  is  not  effective  against  already  established  HPV infection/disease  prior  to  vaccination.  Furthermore,  the  MAH  was  requested  to  discuss  all  possible tools on which to select the target population and to discuss the possibility and usefulness of screening for HPV DNA status prior to vaccination.

With  respect  to  the  safety  objection  the  MAH  performed  re-analyses  and  complementary  analyses. Overall, the most significant finding was the inconsistent results observed in the PCR positive group depending on its serostatus, which would not be expected, other than as a result of multiple analyses of subgroups with small sample size. Importantly it is difficult to hypothesize a plausible mechanism for a  negative  effect  of  the  vaccine  on  on-going  HPV  infections.  In  addition,  the  life  table  analysis  of time-to-clearance  of  HPV  6  and  HPV  16  infection  showed  no  conspicuous  difference  between  the vaccine and placebo groups. The 'similar' findings in the young adult women as regards HPV 16/18related CIN 2/3 in study 013 seemed to be an isolated event only seen in one study and one subset of the Day 1 PCR positive population and did not extend to the MAW population. It was concluded that the  overall  pattern  was  not  consistent  with  a  negative  impact  of  the  vaccine  on  prevalent  HPV infections. The  issue  whether  the  vaccine  has  a  negative  impact  accelerating  disease  progression  was  further investigated in the FAS population. Data on the cumulative incidence of HPV 6/11/16/18-related CIN 2/3 was lower in the vaccine group than in the placebo group suggesting no acceleration of vaccine HPV type-related disease progression. In contrast, the opposite pattern was shown for CIN 2/3 due to any HPV type with higher incidence and a steeper curve by time in the vaccine group. This increase in the  vaccine  group  could  indicate  the  occurrence  of  type  replacement  disease.  The  findings  raised major objections  and  the  MAH  was  requested  to  scrutinise  all  relevant  data  and  to  perform  formal statistical analyses to clarify this issue. In  the  MAH´s  response  to  the  CHMP´s  second  Request  for  Supplementary  Information,  the  major objection was only partly resolved. The higher incidence of CIN 2/3 or worse related to any HPV type in the qHPV vaccine group compared with the placebo group could be likely attributed to the baseline imbalance in prevalent infection related to non-vaccine HPV types. The data did not lend support to the  hypothesis  that  the  qHPV  vaccine  accelerates  progression  of  disease.  However,  further  analysis was requested as regards non-vaccine HPV types to fully clarify this issue. The results did not suggest type replacement disease due to the qHPV vaccine, but this issue needs to be closely monitored on a longer-term basis. In response to the `other concerns´ it became clear that the MAH has no valid data to support the use of persistent infection related to HPV 6/11 as an efficacy endpoint. Therefore the MAH was requested to  re-analyse  results  obtained  in  study  019  excluding  all  data  on  the  HPV  6/11-related  persistent infection. Based  on  recent  data,  including  the  Koshiol  et  al  meta  analysis,  persistent  infection  of  12  months duration appears to be the most valid endpoint to be used in clinical trials as a surrogate marker for cervical cancer. The MAH was further requested to address this issue and to provide available P019 data on 12 month persistent infection related to HPV 16/18. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The MAH´s evaluation of usefulness of possible pre-screening approaches of HPV status gave meagre positive incremental yield with respect to identifying women who would benefit from vaccination with the  qHPV  vaccine.  The  MAH  was  requested  to  address  the  issue  of  HPV  vaccination  resulting  in missed cancers in mid-adult women due to false security of being protected against cervical cancer and  subsequent  failing  attendance  to  the  routine  cervical  screening.  At  the  present  time,  with  the increasing use of HPV assays it is not unreasonable that genotyping could be used as a pre-screening tool  before  vaccination  of  women  above 30 years of age in countries where validated type-specific HPV  techniques  are  available,  to  target  vaccination  to  HPV  16/18  naïve  MAW.  The  MAH  was requested to address this issue.

The CHMP considered that efficacy has to be shown in the total population or it has to be possible to define  the  population  which  benefits  in  clinical  practice.  No  efficacy  was  shown  in  the  general population  and  pre-screening  will  be  apparently  a  difficult  option  in  clinical  practice.  Furthermore

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

vaccination of women who do not benefit is not acceptable and might lead to a false sense of security. Therefore, the CHMP considered that the indication should not be changed. CHMP recommended to revise sections 4.4 and 5.1 of the SPC to inform prescribers of the study results and that the use of Silgard  in  adult  women  should  take  into  consideration  the  variability  of  HPV  type  prevalence  in different  geographical  areas  in  the  general  population  of  24-  to  45-year-old  women,  and  that  no significant  efficacy  against  HPV  16/18-related  persistent  infection  and  clinical  disease  has  been demonstrated.  The  decision  to  vaccinate  an  individual  woman  24-45  years  old  should  take  into account her risk for previous HPV exposure and her potential benefit from vaccination. The SPC was also revised to inform that Silgard is not effective in women already infected/diseased at the start of vaccination.

The immunogenicity data in study 019 showed that the vaccine-induced immune responses in MAW were  inferior  to  those  observed  in  adolescents  and  young  women,  with  a  2  to  3  fold  lower  GMTs postdose 3 in MAW. The low Month 24 GMTs and seropositivity rate for HPV 18 raise concern. The consequence of these lower antibody responses in the MAW population for the durability of vaccine efficacy is not known, since no immunological correlate of protection has been defined. Among MAW who were seropositive to vaccine HPV types at Day 1, vaccine induced immune response to the types for which they were positive were comparable to those observed among YAW who were seropositive to the same type at Day 1. These results suggest that adult women can mount anamnestic responses that  appear  as  robust  as  those  observed  in  YAW.    Such  anamnestic  responses  are  critical  to  the durability  of  the  efficacy  of  vaccines  in  general,  but  whether  the  immune  memory  induced  by  the qHPV  vaccine  will  be  sufficient  to  protect  against  HPV  infection  in  subjects  who  have  lost seropositivity, remains to be shown. At the current stage after a relatively short duration of follow-up

In  the  MAH´s  response  to  the  CHMP´s  third Request  for  Supplementary  Information,  the  major objection was resolved with the submission of supplementary data on cumulative incidence of CIN2/3 or worse related to 10 non-vaccine HPV types in women who were PCR positive to the relevant HPV type at Day 1. These results do not suggest a clinically significant acceleration of disease progression in the vaccine group compared to the placebo group, however this issue will be readdressed at end of study,  month  48  results.  The  issue  of  pre-screening  of  women  &gt;30  years  of  age  for  HPV16/18 positivity prior to vaccination was resolved, since the low prevalence of these types (&lt;2.6%) in older women  makes  this  strategy  highly  cost-ineffective.  The  SPC  already  gives  a  clear  message  that continued attendance of cervical screening programs is critical. Furthermore, several paragraphs have been  amended  informing  the  prescribers  that  the  qHPV  vaccine  is  for  prophylactic  use  only,  that prevalence  of  HPV  types  and  the  women´s  risk  for  previous  HPV  exposure  should  be  taken  into account in the decision to vaccinate mid-adult women. In addition, the indication remains unchanged and states that efficacy has only been demonstrated in young women16 to 26 years of age. The CHMP considers these measures provide the necessary relevant information to prescribers. The reanalysis of the results of study P019 excluding the data on HPV 6/11 persistent infection showed that efficacy estimates  decreased  in  the  combined  primary  endpoint  from  90.5%  to  86.0%.  Although  the  large Koshiol meta-analysis has some limitations, data on the natural course of HPV disease suggest that the 12-month persistent infection is a more reliable and robust predictor of progression to CIN 2/3+ than the 6-month persistent infection. Therefore in future study reports, the CHMP considered that data on 12 month persistent infection should also be included. The results of the analyses of study 019 using a 12  month  persistent  infection  showed  that  efficacy  estimates  against  HPV  16/18-related  persistent infection and against the combined primary endpoint were in the same order of magnitude, although with wider confidence intervals, as the results of the analyses using the 6-month persistent infection. Overall, the CHMP considered that efficacy has to be shown in the total population or it has to be possible to define the population which benefits in clinical practice. Since no statistically significant efficacy was shown in the general population and pre-screening will be a difficult option in clinical practice,  the  CHMP  did  not  endorse  the  MAH´s  extension  of  indication  to  include  a  statement  in section  4.1  of  the  SPC  that  efficacy  had  been  demonstrated  in  27-45  year  old  women.  With  the indication  remaining  unchanged  and with  the  SPC  revisions  reflecting  the  results  of  study  019  and providing the relevant information to prescribers to decide on the vaccination of individual woman 27 to 45 years old the CHMP considered that the major objections were resolved, Immunogenicity Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(2.2 years), no obvious breakthrough infections in study 019 have been documented. However, longterm follow-up of efficacy and immunogenicity in MAW is mandatory. The MAH has committed to conduct  a  long-term  follow-up  study  of  immunogenicity  and  vaccine  efficacy  in  a  sentinel  cohort (n=1600)  in  study  019.  Furthermore,  section  (section  5.1)  of  the  SPC  was  modified  to  inform prescribers on results for anti-HPV 18 seropositivity.

In  the  MAH`s  response  to  the  CHMP  Request  for  Supplementary  Information,  the  majority  of immunogenicity concerns were resolved. However, it was clarified that the currently used serological cLIA assay might not be the optimal method to measure long-term vaccine induced HPV immunity. This assay might be too specific measuring only antibodies against a single type-specific neutralizing epitope on L1 VLPs and not all relevant neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, the MAH has committed to perform serological studies using broader neutralization assays, i.e. pseudo-neutralization assays, as well as to submit the validation protocol and final results using the newly developed assay measuring the VLP-specific total IgG. Relevant study reports were submitted on April 28, 2009 and are currently under assessment.

Safety According  to  the  new  information  presented  in  the  current  application  the  administration  of  qHPV vaccine was found to be generally well tolerated across all populations. The  proportions  of  subjects  who  reported  SAEs  or  who  discontinued  due  to  a  SAE  were  low  and comparable between the vaccination groups. Vaccine-related SAEs occurred in &lt;1% of the subjects. No safety signals were identified with the exception of increased incidences of transient injection-site adverse experiences and low-grade fever following vaccination. Reporting adverse events was similar in the different age ranges except for the higher frequency of pain in the extremity in older subjects and  somewhat  higher  frequency  of  erythema  and  swelling  in  the  younger  age  range.  The  MAH proposed to delete 'Injection-site bruising' from section 4.8 of the SPC since the incidence of this AE was shown to be low and very rarely occurring. Bruising most likely is associated with the injection procedure  rather  than  the  nature  of  the  injected  product  and  though  is  considered  to  be  an  adverse effect of vaccination. Therefore, the CHMP considers that 'bruising' should remain listed in the SPC. The follow-up of breast-fed infants of mothers vaccinated identifies more SAEs in the qHPV group compared to the placebo group. However the excess of AEs in the qHPV group was not specific and not considered related to vaccination. Use of qHPV vaccine did not impact overall pregnancy outcomes. Nor did administration of qHPV vaccine to nursing mothers affect the health of the mother or the nursing child. Rates of foetal loss were slightly lower among subjects who received qHPV vaccine compared with the placebo groups. Slightly  more  foetuses/infants  with  congenital  anomalies  were  observed  in  subjects  who  became pregnant  in  the  qHPV  vaccine  group  compared  to  the  placebo  group.  However,  the  congenital anomalies that were observed were diverse and deemed to be highly unlikely related to the vaccine. In conclusion all autoimmune phenomena (including ulcerative colitis) as well as the events of vaginal haemorrhage  and  gastroenteritis  should  be  closely  monitored  and  cumulatively  reported  on  in  the future PSURs. The  most  frequently  reported  new  medical  condition  potentially  indicative  of  an  autoimmune phenomenon as well as arthritis/arthropathy in temporal relationship with qHPV should be specifically watched over. Furthermore, concerning pregnancy, close safety surveillance is continuously ongoing as the MAH maintains pregnancy registries in the US, Canada and France. Nordic countries collect data on exposures to qHPV during pregnancy. Standardised incidence ratio on congenital anomalies should  be  analysed  and  calculated  by  comparing  the  observed  and  expected  cases  of  congenital anomaly in women with inadvertent exposure to qHPV vaccine during pregnancy. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  conclusion,  the  benefit  risk  balance  of  Silgard  remains  favorable  in  the  current  therapeutic indication,  and  the  changes  of  the  SPC  reflect  relevant  study  results  in  mid-adult  woman  for prescribers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.6 Changes to the product information

Further to the assessment of the different proposals of the MAH to amend the Product Information and in the light of the assessment of the submitted data, the Product Information was revised as follows:

## SPC

Section 4.1 'Therapeutic indication' The MAH's initially proposed to extend the age of indication for women up to 45 years old, based on submission of study 019. The claims for the requested indication were not accepted by the CHMP and were withdrawn by the MAH. This section remains unchanged. Section 4.2 'Posology and method of administration' The CHMP requested to replace the wording 'not recommended' by 'there is no experience' to better reflect the information on children below 9 years of age. Section 4.4 'Special warnings and precautions for use' This section was revised upon CHMP request to reinforce the message that Silgard is for prophylactic use only and has no effect on active HPV infections or established clinical disease  and to make clear that Silgard does not prevent lesions due to a vaccine HPV type in women already infected with that HPV type at the time of vaccination. A cross reference to section 5.1 was included. Furthermore a paragraph was included to guide prescribers on the decision to vaccinate an individual woman 27 to 45 years old as follows: The  use  of  Silgard  in  adult  women  should  take  into  consideration  the  variability  of  HPV  type prevalence in different geographical areas.  In the clinical study of adult women (24 to 45 years of age), no statistically significant vaccine efficacy was observed after 2.2 years of follow-up in the full analysis set that includes women regardless of baseline HPV status (see section 5.1). The decision to vaccinate an individual woman 27 to 45 years old should take into account her risk for previous HPV exposure and her potential benefit from vaccination. Section 4.5 'Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction' The MAH proposal to update the numbers on MAW using hormonal contraceptives was endorsed by the CHMP. Section 4.6 'Pregnancy and lactation ' The  MAH  proposal  to  update  the  numbers  of  women  in  the  clinical  development  program  that reported pregnancy was endorsed by the CHMP. Section 4.8 'Undesirable effects' The CHMP endorsed the update of the numbers in the safety population. The inclusion of the adverse reaction pain in the extremity as common was endorsed by the CHMP. The CHMP did not endorse the MAH proposal to delete 'Injection-site bruising'. Section 5.1 'Pharmacodynamic properties' Efficacy in woman 24 through 45 years. The wording was revised taking into consideration the following: Medicinal product no longer authorised

The proposed paragraph on vaccine efficacy in MAW in line with the young adult women was revised to mention the efficacy results in HPV naïve women and in the overall population women (ITT). The ITT population is the most representative population targeted in the indication. Data on efficacy results in the two co-primary endpoints were included of which the HPV 16/18-related infection and disease endpoint is considered the most important.

.

The number of women included in P019 was included as well as the duration of follow-up.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Reference to vulvar and vaginal cancers were removed since vaccine efficacy in these cancers has not been demonstrated.

## Immunogenicity

Since the CHMP considered important to inform prescribers on results for anti-HPV 18 seropositivity, a paragraph was introduced to include the observed reduced percentage of vaccinated individuals who remained seropositive (analysed per subtype) after a median follow up of 2.2 years.

<!-- image -->

In addition, the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) took the opportunity to introduce other minor changes to the SPC. PL The PL was updated with minor linguistic changes. The MAH has agreed with the changes as proposed by the CHMP. IV. CONCLUSION On 23  July  2009  the  CHMP  considered  this  Type  II  variation  to  be  acceptable  and  agreed  on  the amendments to be introduced in the Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet, based of the additional commitments undertaken as clarified below. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## VI. GLOSSARY

1. AAHS - Amorphous Aluminum Hydrxyphosphate Sulfate
2. AE - Adverse event
3. AIS - Cervical Adenocarcinoma in situ
4. CHMP - Committee for medical products for human use
5. CIN - Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia

6. CI - Confidence Interval 7. cLIA - Competitive Luminex Assay 8. EGL - External genital lesions 9. EMEA - European Medicines Agency 10. FAS - Full Analysis Set 11. FUTURE - Females United To Unilaterally Reduce Endo/Ectocervical Disease 12. HPV - Human Papilloma virus 13. HNRT - HPV-Naïve to the Relevant-HPV-Type 14. LEEP - Loop Electrosurgical Excision Procedure 15. LLOQ - Lower Limit Of Quantification 16. MAA - Marketing authorisation application 17. MAH - Marketing authorisation holder 18. MAW- Mid-Adult Women 19. mMU/ml - Milli-Merck Units per millilitre. 20. Pap - Papanicolau´s test 21. PCR - Polymerase chain reaction 22. PI - Persistent Infection 23. PL - Package Leaflet 24. PPE - Pre-protocol Efficacy 25. PPI - Per-Protocol immunogenicity 26. qHPV - Quadrivalent HPV vaccine 27. SIL - Squamous Intraepithelial Lesion 28. SPC - Summary of Product Characteristics 29. STD - Sexual transmitted diseases 30. VaIN - Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia 31. VE - Vaccine efficacy 32. VIN - Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia 33. VLP - Virus-like particles 34. YAW - Young Adult Woman 35. LR - Likelihood ratio 36. PPV - Positive predictive value. 37. MITT - Modified Intention to Treat38. SAES - Serious adverse events 39. PTS -Preferred terms 40. AES -Adverse events 41. RSI - Request for Supplementary information 42. FUM - Follow up measure Medicinal product no longer authorised