---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 16:59:44
document_pages: 31
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/viracept-h-c-164-z-109-epar-assessment-report-lifting-suspension_en.pdf
document_name: viracept-h-c-164-z-109-epar-assessment-report-lifting-suspension_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.5936738
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 12:13:41.476972
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 20 September 2007 Doc.Ref.: EMEA/CHMP/492059/2007

Medicinal product no longer authorised CHMP ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR VIRACEPT International Non-proprietary Name: NELFINAVIR Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/164/Z/109 Assessment Report on the lifting of the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation for Viracept as adopted by the CHMP

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Glossary of abbreviations used:

Medicinal product no longer authorised CH Switzerland CHMP Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use CoRapp Co-Rapporteur DHPC Dear Healthcare Professional Communication EC European Community, European Commission ECG European Crisis Group EEA European Economic Area EMEA European Medicines Agency EMS Ethyl Mesylate or Sulfonic acidic ethyl esther or Ethyl Methane Sulfonate ENU N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea ES Spain FCT Film-coated tablet FDA Food and Drug Administration (USA) Health CA Health Canada FUM Follow-up Measures FP batches Finished product batches GMP Good Manufacturing Practice HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus HMA Heads of Medicines Agencies HPRT Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase IPC In-Process Control LOEL Lowest Observed Effect Level LOQ/LOD Limit of Quantitation/ Limit of Detection LoQ List of Questions MAH Marketing Authorization Holder MMS Methyl Methane Sulfonate MNU N-Nitroso-N-Methylurea MSA Methane Sufonic acid MSC Methane Sufonic acid Chloride NRTIs Non reverse transcriptase inhibitors NMT Not More Than NOED No Observed Effect Dose NOEL No Observed Effect Level PhV Pharmacovigilance PhVWP Pharmacovigilance Working Party PI Protease inhibitors PL Package Leaflet ppm parts per million Proportional Reporting Ratio Periodic Safety Update Report Portugal Questions and Answers Qualified Person Rapp Rapporteur RMP Risk Management Plan

ADR

Adverse Drug Reaction

AE

Adverse Event

AS

Active Substance

APR

Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry

b.i.d.

bis in die, twice a day

CAPA

Corrective and Preventive Action

CD

Core Data Sheet

PRR

PSUR

PT

Q&amp;A

QP

S&amp;E

Safety &amp; Efficacy

SA

Supervisory Authority

SAEs

Serious Adverse Events

SPC

Summary of Product Characteristics

SWP

Safety Working Party

t.i.d.

ters in die, three times a day

TTC

Threshold of Toxicological Concern

UK

United Kingdom

WHO

World Health Organisation

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1 BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON THE PROCEDURE

On the evening of 5 June 2007 the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) was made aware by Roche Registration  Limited,  the  Marketing  Authorisation Holder  (MAH) of the contamination of Viracept (nelfinavir)  with  a  genotoxic  substance.  As  a  consequence,  Roche  recalled  the  product  from  the European Union markets with immediate effect. All packs of Viracept available on the market were affected,  including  packs  that  patients  may  have  had  at  home.  A  Direct  Healthcare  Professional Communication (DHPC) was released by the MAH on Thursday 7 June 2007 to inform prescribers about  the  incident  and  the  need  to  switch  patients  on  Viracept  to  other  alternative  antiretroviral therapies. The choice of alternatives was left to the prescriber. The EMEA issued a Press Release and Q&amp;A document on the same day.

During its June plenary session the CHMP reviewed the data submitted by the MAH as well as the recommendations of both the toxicology and pharmacovigilance ad-hoc expert group meetings and the report from the GMP inspection. As a result of these discussions, the CHMP recommended that the Marketing Authorisation for Viracept should be suspended until the MAH could satisfactorily address the deficiencies raised with regards to the manufacturing process of nelfinavir mesilate, which had let to the major quality defect.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  MAH  had  identified  the  presence  of  the  contaminant  ethyl  mesilate  (also  known  as  methane sulfonic acid ethyl ester or ethylmethane sulfonate, EMS) in some batches of nelfinavir mesilate (the active substance) following patients' complaints about a 'strange smell' and one adverse drug report of nausea and vomiting. EMS is known to be genotoxic, carcinogenic and teratogenic in animals. The level of risk to patients resulting from this contamination is currently not known and therefore needs to be further evaluated. In order to better characterise the toxicological risk associated with EMS, an ad-hoc expert group of toxicologists met at the EMEA on Wednesday, 13 June 2007. The group concluded that there were insufficient data to quantify the risk posed by exposure to the levels of EMS present as a contaminant in the affected batches of Viracept. On Monday, 18 June 2007 the EMEA  convened  a Pharmacovigilance expert meeting which discussed the follow-up and monitoring of patients exposed to  the  contaminant in Viracept and measures to be undertaken by the MAH in order to address the resulting public health concerns. Swissmedic, in collaboration with the EMEA, organised an inspection of the Basel active substance manufacturing site on 11 and 12 June 2007, in order to further investigate the root causes leading to the  contamination,  other  possible  GMP  failures,  and  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  MAH's  CAPA (Corrective and Preventive Action) plan. The results of the inspection were presented to the CHMP on 19 June 2007. Based on the critical GMP deficiencies found which led to the contamination of the active substance, concerns were raised about the quality of Viracept and its safety under normal conditions of use. Therefore, the European Commission (EC) initiated a procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No  726/2004  and  referred  the  matter  to  the  Committee  for  Medicinal  Products  for  Human  Use (CHMP). The EC requested the committee to assess all aspects of quality and safety of the centrally authorised  antiretroviral  medicinal  product  containing  nelfinavir  mesilate  (Viracept)  from  Roche Registration  Ltd  and  to  give  its  opinion  under  Article  20  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  726/2004,  on  the measures  necessary  to  ensure  the  quality  and  safe  use  of  Viracept  and  on  whether  the  Marketing Authorisation for this product should be maintained, varied, suspended or withdrawn. During its plenary session, the CHMP drafted a list of questions which were addressed by the MAH during an oral explanation on Wednesday, 20 June 2007.

Further to the June 2007 CHMP, a meeting was convened at the EMEA on 6 July 2007 between the Rapporteur,  Co-Rapporteur,  representatives  of  both  Swissmedic  and  WHO,  as  well  as  the  MAH  to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

further clarify the conditions to be met in order to convince the CHMP of the satisfactory quality of the product.

Based on the recommendations by the CHMP and the ad-hoc expert group on the non-clinical studies to  be  undertaken,  the  MAH  submitted  27  June  2007  a  study  proposal.  The  CHMP  reviewed  this proposal  and  endorsed  its  comments  during  the  July  2007  CHMP  plenary  session.  The  MAH submitted their responses to the comments on 17 August 2007. During the September 2007 CHMP plenary session, the Committee agreed to the proposed study outlines.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised During  the  July  sessions  of  both  the  CHMP  and  its  Pharmacovigilance  Working  Party,  the  draft protocols for the Viracept Registries 1 and 2 were discussed. On 19 July 2007, the CHMP concluded on a List of Outstanding Issues to be addressed by the MAH in writing before the protocols could be found to be acceptable. The MAH submitted their response to the outstanding issues on 3 September 2007.  These  responses  were  assessed  and  discussed  during  the  September  2007  CHMP  plenary meeting. Based on both the conclusion of the June 2007 CHMP and the above July 2007 meeting, the MAH submitted on 16 August 2007 their dossier in response to the quality issues raised by the CHMP and EMEA. On 7 September 2007, the Rapporteur circulated their assessment report on the MAH's responses to the raised quality, non-clinical and pharmacovigilance issues. A joint EU-Swissmedic re-inspection was organised at the Basel active substance manufacturing site from 5 to  7  September  2007,  in  order  to  assess  the  adequacy  of  the  MAH's  implementation  of  its CAPA (Corrective and Preventive Action) plan. The results of the inspection were presented to the CHMP on 17 September 2007. During its September plenary session the CHMP reviewed the MAH's responses and agreed with the Rapporteur's assessment that recommended  the lifting of the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation,  as  the  MAH  had  adequately  addressed  all  conditions  as  detailed  in  the  June  2007 Opinion. Both  the  reasons  for  the  suspension  as  well  as  the  measures  undertaken  in  response  to  this  major quality  defect  are  addressed  in  the  following  scientific  discussion,  which  addresses  the  concerned quality, non-clinical and pharmacovigilance issues.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 2.1 GMP and Quality aspects

## 2.1.1 Root cause investigation and corrective/preventive actions

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH established that the strange smell came from unexpectedly high residues of the impurity methylsulfonate ethylester or ethyl mesilate (EMS), a known  genotoxic compound. Further investigation revealed that there was a GMP failure at the level of the hold tank which is used to store the  starting  material  methanesulfonic  acid  (MSA).  MSA  is  used  in  the  last  step  of  the  synthesis  to convert  nelfinavir  base  into  nelfinavir  mesilate.  This  hold  tank  was  not  included  in  the  cleaning Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for the equipment used in this last step of the synthesis and had never been cleaned between 2001 and the end of the production campaign as of April 2006. Following non-routine maintenance the hold tank was cleaned according to the SOP procedure (i.e. with ethanol) but, crucially, no drying was performed. The hold tank, therefore, contained residues of ethanol. It was then filled with the starting material methylsulfonic acid (MSA). MSA is routinely tested on receipt from the supplier for its EMS content but not after transfer into the hold tank. The residual ethanol left in the tank reacted with MSA to form high levels of EMS contaminant. The reaction leading to the formation  of  EMS  is  an  esterification  reaction  between  the  ethanol  and  the  MSA  and  is  time dependant,  i.e.  slow  at  room  temperature.  Therefore,  the  extent  to  which  it  is  formed  is  variable depending on the time during which the alcohol and the acid have been in contact. This contaminated MSA was used for the next October 2006 campaign. Three batches of AS were spray  dried  and  contained  increasing  amounts  of  EMS  (from  &lt;1  ppm  to  8  ppm,  measured retrospectively). The remaining MSA was stored in the hold tank until the start of the next campaign in January 2007. Due to the long storage time more EMS was formed in the tank, which subsequently contaminated these batches of AS with EMS levels of up to 2300 ppm. This  main  root  cause  for  the  high  level  of  EMS  was  quickly  identified  by  the  MAH.  However,  on testing  retention  samples  from  previous  AS  batches  manufactured  before  the  October  2006  and Jan/Feb 2007 campaigns, high levels of EMS were observed with contents between 100 and 120 ppm in June 2005 and between 4 and 10 ppm in June 2004. An inspection of the Basel AS manufacturing site was organised by Swissmedic (competent authority for  the  site)  in  close  co-operation  with  the  EMEA  and  the  Spanish  agency  Agemed  (competent authority for the Finished Product manufacturing site for the Film-coated tablet presentation that is the most severely affected by this GMP failure with EMS levels above 1000 ppm). Two other root causes for the unexpectedly high levels were identified by the inspectors: -due  to  the  design/connections  of  pipes  for  ethanol  and  nitrogen,  both  used  in  the  final production step, variable quantities of vaporised ethanol may have been transported through the piping to the hold tank containing MSA -an  impurity  contained  in  the  MSA  named  methyl  methanesulfonate  (MMS)  may  be  slowly transformed into EMS through a transesterification reaction. This reaction can be accelerated by an excess of ethanol (e.g. residues in the AS). A more general root cause identified by the inspectors was the lack of knowledge and understanding with regard to the manufacturing process; this may be due to the fact that the production process was originally purchased from another company. As the pharmaceutical development was not performed by  the  MAH,  the  potential  risk  for  the  formation  of  EMS  in  the  manufacturing  and  maintenance processes may have been misjudged.

As an outcome of the inspection, the inspectors raised  one  critical  and  four  major  deficiencies  and discussed numerous preventative measures to be addressed in the areas of validation of the last step of the process, cleaning procedures and validation, handling of the key starting material MSA, analytical testing and training.

In  addition,  the  MAH  noted  as  a  further  possibility  that  MMS  is  converted  to  EMS  under  the conditions of the spray drying of nelfinavir. This inherent risk of alkyl-mesilate formation, in a process

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

in  which  low  alcohols  (ethanol)  and  MSA  are  present  together,  is  acknowledged  in  compendial monographs regarding active substances in mesilate form (e.g. see nelfinavir mesilate monograph in the International Pharmacopoeia) and specific requirements to validate the manufacturing method.

The issue of EMS and MMS formation during the manufacture of nelfinavir mesilate had already been considered by the CHMP and addressed by the MAH in Follow-up Measures (FUM 010 and 011 dated 28 June 2001).

The conclusion of the assessment with regard to FUM 010 and 011 was that they could be considered fulfilled  as  far  as  the  validation  of  a  suitable  assay  method,  but  the  CHMP  requested  that  a specification of NMT 3 ppm EMS in MSA should be added to the specification for MSA. The assay of each batch of MSA for EMS content should be continued until an adequate number of batches have been assessed to allow the testing frequency to be reduced to a periodic test.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised At  that  time,  based  on  the  batch  data  provided  in  FUM  010,  it  was  considered  appropriate  not  to recommend any limits for the MMS and EMS in the active substance because sufficient evidence had been provided that the active substance manufacturing process gave MMS or EMS level below 0.5 ppm in the AS manufactured in the new spray drying facilities. Any excessive increase in the EMS level in the active substance is considered to be a GMP issue. Arising from the FUMs, a specification limit of 3 ppm for EMS in MSA is currently in place. As a general principle, the inclusion of relevant limit tests for impurities in reagents prior to use is an accepted way of establishing the purity of the active substance. The MAH has been instructed not to resume nelfinavir mesilate production until all root causes are identified definitively and with certainty and without prior evaluation and approval of the CAPA plan and without a written authorisation from Swissmedic. The MAH had also been instructed by Swissmedic and the EMEA not to release any further Viracept finished product batches to their respective markets, i.e. Switzerland and the EU. The MAH presented an initial CAPA plan on 15 June addressing the observations made during the inspection prior to the issuance of the inspection report. An updated version was presented within the oral explanation to the CHMP on 20 June in the form of a roadmap: Re-evaluation of salt formation and spray drying process Preparation of lab study protocol (pH, temp. time): ongoing - 22.06.2007 Lab experiments: 22.06.2007 - 05.07.2007 Quality risk analysis and implementation of CAPA (Corrective Actions &amp; Preventative Actions) Quality risk analysis: ongoing - 30.06.2007 Implementation of CAPA (e.g. elimination of hold tank): ongoing - 07.07.2007 MMS/EMS testing Revalidation and implementation of MMS/EMS analytical method: ongoing - 30.06.2007 Process validation Preparation of process validation protocol: 06.07.2007 - 13.07.2007 -Need approval for technical lots of spray drying: 16.07.2007 Production of technical lots: 16.07.2007 - 20.07.2007 Proposal for MMS/EMS specification: 22.07.2007 -Need approval for validation lots of spray drying: 23.07.2007 Production of validation lots: 23.07.2007 - 29.07.2007 Extended testing and completion of validation report: 24.07.2007 - 10.08.2007 Submission of data: 14.08.2007

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the meantime, by 30 June the MAH finalised the complete retrospective testing of all AS batches back to 1998 (date of the initial  Marketing Authorisation) to establish the complete list of affected batches.  Further  analytical  investigations  (i.e.  revalidation  of  the  method  to  ascertain  its  suitability over the range of the observed EMS contamination values and investigation on the variation of the EMS  level  during  storage  and  processing)  allow  a  complete  and  accurate  overview  of  the  EMS contamination.

## 2.1.2 Conclusion of the June 2007 CHMP meeting

2.

3. Based on the revised process, a suitable specification limit for EMS and MMS in the active substance should be introduced. This limit should reflect the capability of the process to deliver the lowest achievable level, and in any case should be below the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC), as stated in the Guideline on the Limits of Genotoxic Impurities.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Considering  the  deficiencies  identified in the  inspection  of  the  Basel  (CH)  active  substance manufacturing  site  and  the  inability  of  the  MAH  to  reassure  the  CHMP  on  the  quality  of  the manufacturing  and  maintenance  processes  involved  in  the  manufacture  of  the  active  substance  of Viracept,  the  CHMP identified a potential risk  associated  with  the  safety  of  Viracept  under  normal conditions of use. The contamination of the active substance with EMS was considered to be a serious product defect. During the oral  explanation  held  on  20  June  2007,  the  MAH  proposed  a  corrective  and  preventive actions  plan  as  well  as  plans  to  conduct  non-clinical in  vivo and in  vitro studies  and  to  establish  a registry  to  follow-up  on  all  patients  exposed  to  high  levels  of  EMS  and  vulnerable  populations exposed to any level of EMS (i.e. pregnant women, children exposed in utero and children up to the age of 18 years). The full realisation of these proposed measures to be undertaken will take some time. Following the assessment of all available data and having heard oral explanations of the MAH, the CHMP concluded that the quality of Viracept cannot be guaranteed. The identified quality concerns have  implications  on  the  safety  of  Viracept  under  normal  conditions  of  use.  Therefore,  the  CHMP considered that the benefit risk balance of Viracept is currently negative. The  CHMP  considered  that  there  are  therapeutic  alternatives  available,  to  which  patients  can  be switched. Therefore, the CHMP recommended the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation of Viracept. Such suspension may be lifted, provided the MAH can reassure the CHMP on the quality of Viracept as indicated below. The CHMP considered the following requirements must be fulfilled before the suspension of the MA can be lifted: CAPA 1. The MAH is required to put measures in place to ensure that the GMP deficiencies identified during  the  inspection  on  11  and  12  June  2007  of  the  active  substance  manufacturing  site  F Hoffmann La Roche, Basel (CH) are corrected and prevented from future occurrence. These measures will have to be approved by the inspectors before resumption of nelfinavir mesilate manufacture for commercial production. Quality A  comprehensive  process  risk  analysis  should  be  presented  for  the  synthesis  of  nelfinavir mesilate and the manufacture of the finished product Viracept tablets, film-coated tablets and oral powder. In particular, appropriate re-validation studies of the last step in the manufacturing process of the active substance should be carried out and the results should be provided.

4. The MAH should provide an appropriate and validated analytical method in order to detect and quantify EMS and MMS in the active substance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## In addition, the following follow-up measures should be undertaken by the MAH:

## Quality

5. The risk of further formation of EMS or MMS in the active substance during storage as a result of possible interaction with any alcohol residues in the active substance should be considered.
6. Based  on  the  information  gathered  in  this  case,  the  MAH  should  assess  the  possibility  of formation of MMS and EMS in other medicinal products containing active substances in the form of the mesilate salt, and inform the CHMP on all necessary and appropriate preventive measures to be taken.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 7. The MAH should discuss how he will review the quality of his manufacturing and maintenance processes given the recent experience of quality failures for a number of Roche's medicinal products. 8. The MAH should analyse all retention samples of AS. 9. The MAH should establish the stability of EMS in the AS during storage in order to validate the EMS levels found for the re-testing of retention samples. 10.  The  MAH  should  develop  an  analytical  method  to  quantify  EMS  /  MMS  in  the  finished product. In addition, the MAH was requested to address other CAPA and quality related issues arising from a meeting on 6 July 2007, while emphasis was given to certain points already raised before (e.g. points 11 and 12) This meeting took place at the EMEA and was attended by experts and representatives from all involved competent authorities (EMEA, UK MHRA, Spanish Agemed, Swissmedic, World Health Organisation and European Commission). 11.  In the area of Corrective and Preventive Actions, in addition to the inspection deficiencies the MAH  is  requested  to  address  the  issues  of  the  increase  of  residual  EMS  during  Active Substance storage by reaction of residual MSA with residual ethanol as well as the relevance of this reaction for the dosage forms, and of use of recovered ethanol potentially carrying residual EMS. 12.  In the area of Quality / process risk analysis and validation, the MAH is expected to cover as requested both the Active substance process and the Finished product processes (for all forms) to  support  the  assumption  that  the  data  from  the  active  substance  manufacturing  process  are reliable for any decision with respect to the Finished products. The storage implications should also be considered. 13.  With respect to the quarantined batches to which the MAH referred, the MAH was requested to provide a specific risk assessment on the production and control methods used. Analytical data on the level of EMS and MMS in the active substance batches used should be provided using the 2007 newly validated method. 14.  It  was  acknowledged  that  it  will  not  be  possible  for  process  capability  information  to  be provided  immediately,  but  it  would  be  important  to  have  a  commitment  that  this  would  be provided at a later stage. 2.1.3 Data submitted on GMP and Quality aspects and assessment The  MAH  submitted  a  full  response  package  on  16th  August  2007  addressing  each  one  of  the 14 issues as mentioned above. The data provided and discussion follows hereafter. CAPA

The investigation conducted by the MAH focused basically on identifying all root causes leading to the contamination of the active substance (AS). The root causes related to the elevated EMS levels in the AS and the Corrective and Preventative actions (CAPAs) taken are listed below:

1. Remaining ethanol in MSA hold tank after cleaning. CAPA: Elimination of MSA hold tank and direct charging from disposable MSA container.
2. Ethanol contamination of the MSA hold tank via exhaust gas and/or vacuum piping. CAPA: Elimination of MSA hold tank and direct charging from disposable MSA container.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

3. MSA containing elevated levels of EMS or methane sulfonic acid chloride (MSC). CAPA:    Specification  limit  for  MSC:  max.  0.1ppm  (will  be  implemented  prior  to  the  next manufacturing campaign). In addition: The existing specification limit of 3ppm MMS is reduced to max. 1 ppm MMS/EMS total.
4. Slow formation of EMS during storage of the AS when excess of MSA is present. CAPA: Restriction of the range of MSA equivalents compared to nelfinavir base from 0.97 - 1.03 to 0.97 to 0.995.

The MAH has provided satisfactory responses and fulfilled the Quality requirements of the CHMP Assessment report dated 28 June 2007 and the additional requirements from the meeting on 6 July 2007, except for some confirmatory issues arising from the response, and the 5-7 September 2007 EUSwissmedic follow-up inspection of the AS manufacturing site has led to a positive conclusion.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Corresponding restriction of allowed pH range from 3.5 - 1.2 to 3.5 - 3.0 (working range) after salt formation. Firstly charging of only ca. 90% of the needed MSA and final adjustment of the pH (3.5 - 3.0) by charging the rest of MSA. Routine testing of the AS for the MSA equivalent. 5. Potentially: Slightly increased formation of EMS during mixing of MSA with the suspension of nelfinavir base in ethanol when suspension exhibits reduced mixing properties. CAPA: Slower charging of MSA into the suspension of nelfinavir base in ethanol and optimisation of the MSA inlet pipe with regard to improving mixing conditions. All the CAPAs have been implemented by the time of this assessment and only the following items are still open: · Review of identification of pipe work: due date: end of 2007 · Review of retest periods: due date: end of 2007 The  implementation  of  the  CAPAs  is  considered  sufficient  to  ensure  a  robust  process,  providing nelfinavir  mesylate  consistently  within  EMS/MMS  specification  of  max  0.5  ppm  MMS/EMS. However, additional QC testing is implemented which includes: · MMS/EMS in the AS. Maximum 0.5 ppm (Based on TTC and current process capability, to be reviewed by MAH as more data are available.) · MSA in the AS. 0.97-0.995 mol equivalent compared to nelfinavir · MMS/EMS in the MSA. Maximum 1 ppm. · MSC in the MSA: The specification limit of max. 0.1 ppm MSC is not yet reflected in the specification but will be included prior to the next manufacturing campaign. · MMS/EMS in the ethanol recycled. Maximum 0.01 ppm · Finally, the trending of the process parameters has been implemented. 2.1.4 Discussion on Quality The CHMP considered that all CAPAs have been satisfactorily identified and implemented. The MSA tank, the major root cause of the GMP failure and high levels of EMS in the AS, has been eliminated. MSA will be charged via a disposable container, thus eliminating contamination of MSA with ethanol vapour  due  to  exhaust/vacuum  piping.  Swissmedic  has  assessed  the  MAH  response  to  CAPA  and closed the 11-12 June inspection with the letter of 9 August 2007; however, a joint EU-Swissmedic follow-up  inspection  was  scheduled  on  5-7  Sep  2007  to  verify  the  correct  implementation  of  the corrective measures. The outcome of this inspection is positive. The MAH is considered to have fulfilled CAPA requirement.

Specifically, the MAH has fulfilled four main requirements set out by the CHMP Assessment Report: namely the implementation of the CAPA measures, the comprehensive process risk analysis including process validation, the introduction of a suitable specification limit for EMS and MMS in the active substance and the provision of an appropriate and validated analytical method in order to detect and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

quantify EMS and MMS in the active substance (requirements 1, 2, 3 and 4). The fulfilment of these requirements determines the decision on the lifting of the Suspension of the MA.

In addition, requirements 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12 have also been fulfilled, whereas requirements 10, 11, 13 and 14 have only been partially fulfilled.

The following issues  remain  to  be  solved.  The  MAH  committed  to  address  these  within  an  agreed timeframe:

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1) It should be confirmed that the MAH will develop analytical methods to quantify MMS/EMS in the finished products, with an improved quantitation limit than the 10 ppm in the current method for tablets. (Arising from Q10). 2) The MAH should discuss in depth on the hydrolysis products of the EMS especially on the aspects of the chemical pathways of hydrolysis of EMS in contact with water and the potential of  these  degradation products of hydrolysis to be genotoxic. The MAH is also requested to clarify what these alkylate reactive centres of the tablets/powder matrix are. 3) The MAH should confirm that a stability program will be set up addressing the low levels of MMS/EMS in dosage forms as soon as method is available that can detect MMS/EMS down to levels ≤ 0.5 ppm (Arising from Q 11). 4) The MAH has provided the general risk assessment of the quarantined batches, but not the specific data related to these batches. This should be provided with a listing of AS batches linked to the quarantined stock, MMS/EMS levels in the AS (determined by the new method HPD99GC1.1), MSA in AS and the corresponding pH value (Arising from Q 13). Any release of these batches will be subject to approval from Supervisory Authorities responsible for the batch release sites. 5) The MAH should review the proposed limit of max. 0.5 ppm as soon as sufficient data are available from the revised process and process capability can be assessed. (Arising from Q 14) CHMP accepted the MAH's proposed specification limit of total 0.5 ppm MMS and EMS in the AS, as  well  as  the  proposed  specification  limits  for  the  MSA  in  the  AS:  0.97-0.995  mol  equivalent (compared  to  nelfinavir),  MMS/EMS  Maximum  0.01  ppm  in  the  ethanol  recycled,  MMS/EMS Maximum 1 ppm in MSA  and MSC Maximum 0.1 ppm in MSA. In addition the new IPC for pH range (PAR): 2.82-3.50 (working range is pH 3.00 - 3.50) at the last manufacturing step of nelfinavir mesilate (formation of nelfinavir mesylate and spray drying) is also accepted. 2.1.5 Conclusions and Recommendation on GMP and Quality aspects In  conclusion,  the  CHMP  having  assessed  the  totality  of  the  MAH's  responses  concerning  risk analysis,  process  re-validation,  analytical  methodology  development  and  validation,  revised  tighter specification limits for alkyl mesilates, as well as all the measures proposed by the MAH to ensure that the  manufacturing  processes  for  the  active  substance  and  the  finished  products  are  under  control, considers  that  the  MAH's  proposals  are  now  sufficient  to  guarantee  the  satisfactory  quality  of nelfinavir mesilate active substance and finished products.

Although a number of remaining quality issues have been identified, the CHMP considered that these are minor, and should not preclude the lifting of the Suspension of the Marketing Authorisation, as the MAH has committed to resolve these outstanding issues, within acceptable time frames.

Therefore, and taking into account the positive outcome of the Swissmedic follow-up inspection, the CHMP recommends the lifting of the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation on the basis of the MAH's having resolved the concerns raised that led to the suspension. The CHMP is of the opinion that the MAH has satisfactorily shown that the quality of Viracept can be ensured due to the MAH's CAPA measures.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.2 Non-clinical issues

## 2.2.1 Introduction

EMS is known to be a mutagenic carcinogen in animals and has also been shown to be teratogenic in animals. Published data from carcinogenicity studies such as that of Ueo et al., 1979 and Ueo et al., 1981 as well as the review paper on the genetic effects of EMS by Sega, 1984 have established this fact.  EMS is characterised as a monofunctional ethylating agent that interacts with DNA. However, unlike  other  alkylating  agents  such  as  methylnitrosourea  (N-Nitroso-N-Methylurea,  MNU),  EMS primarily alkylates N 7 -G and only rarely O 6 -G atoms. This mechanism of action seems to allow for homeostatic maintenance by DNA repair at low EMS doses, as shown by the non-linear dose-response of EMS in micronucleus and gene mutation assays in human lymphoblastoid cells (Doak et al., 2007). Therefore, it may be justified to assume a threshold below which the mutagenic effect of EMS can be effectively counteracted by the human DNA repair system. The same study also showed that for EMS, in this experimental setting, the LOEL is the same for the induction of chromosomal damage and for point  mutations.  Although  these in  vitro data  indicate  a  non-linear  dose-effect-relationship  for  the genotoxicity  of  EMS  suggesting  an  exposure  level  below  which  there  are  no  effects,  there  are  no available in vivo data to support this view.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The available studies with EMS were conducted primarily for academic research purposes and there are no studies that would allow an estimation of a NOEL in animal models, still less a translation into the human situation. This lack of data with regard to EMS exposure and correlation of dose-response makes  it  impossible  to  reliably  quantify  the  risk  at  lower  doses/exposures  in  animals  and  humans. Therefore,  non-clinical  studies,  designed  to  allow  a  correlation  of  systemic  exposure  with in-vivo mutagenic  studies,  are  necessary  in  order  to  allow  for  the  estimation  of  a  threshold  dose  for  EMS below which induction of genotoxic effects might be considered to be highly unlikely. Based on such data,  a  worst  case  calculation,  together  with  some  general  assumptions,  might  allow  for  the extrapolation of such a threshold to the human situation. The  CHMP  concluded  in  June  2007  that  such  studies  should  be  carefully  designed,  allowing  for different  scenarios.  They  should  be  carefully  evaluated  prior  to  initiation.  Points  to  be  taken  into consideration include selection of appropriate endpoints (gene mutation versus chromosomal damage) and  appropriate  test  models  (transgenic  gene  mutation  models  versus  HPRT  model),  selection  of appropriate  dose  levels  including  doses  which  allow  a  reliable  estimation  of  the  NOED/LOED transition, repeated dose and acute dosing schemes, selection of appropriate target tissues (based on estimated  highest  exposure,  target  organs  for  tumour  formation),  and  integrated  TK  studies  to carefully  monitor  exposure.  In  order  to  prove in  vivo the  non-linear  dose-response  (=  threshold) hypothesis  for  EMS  according  to  the  Doak  et  al.  paper,  this  study  should  include  one  of  the compounds showing a linear dose-response (MNU or ENU) as a positive control. Following these recommendations, the MAH submitted 27 June 2007 a study proposal to address the above.  The  CHMP  reviewed  this  proposal  and  concluded  on  its  comments  during  the  July  2007 CHMP plenary  session.  The  MAH  submitted  his  responses  to  the  comments  on  17  August  2007. During the September 2007 CHMP plenary, the Committee agreed to the study proposals as outlined below. 2.2.2 Non-clinical activities and studies initiated or planned

- Comparative in  vivo MNT  (micronuclei)  studies  with  EMS  and  ENU  (Induction  of chromosomal damage)

## Aim:

- a) To  provide  evidence  for  a  sub  linear/threshold  dose  response  for  EMS  in  low  dose  region  in contrast to a linear dose response for ENU
- b) To provide further data for dose setting in gene mutation study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Duration / Design:

7  days  oral  (gavage)  treatment.  6  animals  per  group.  EMS:  5  dose  levels,  ENU  3  dose  levels. Endpoint: Micronuclei from bone marrow cells 24h after last dosing. Exposure assessed by formation of haemoglobin adducts. Please note that this study has in agreement with the CHMP commenced.

## Status / Timelines:

EMS Study start:

16.07.07

ENU Study start:

23.07.07

•

Aim:

Medicinal product no longer authorised Preliminary Data available Draft Report: Oct. 2007 · Induction of LacZ gene mutations in the CD2-lac/80/Hazf/BR mouse (MutaMouse study) - Comparative studies with EMS and ENU Aim: To provide evidence for a sub linear/threshold dose response for EMS in low dose region in contrast to a linear dose response for ENU. Duration / Design: 28 days and acute oral (gavage) treatments. 6 animals per group. EMS: 7 dose levels, ENU 5 dose levels.  Endpoint:  LacZ  mutations  in  cells  from  bone  marrow,  small  intestine,  and  liver.  Exposure assessed by formation of haemoglobin adducts. Status / Timelines: Study start: as  soon  as  sufficient  numbers  of  transgenic  mice  available  (currently predicted to be December 2007) Results expected by: ca April 2008 · General  4-week  repeat  dose  toxicity  study  with  EMS  in  the  rat  followed  by  a  4-week recovery phase Aim: Characterisation  of  systemic  organ  toxicity  of  EMS,  identification  of  potential  target  organs  with assessment of reversibility of effects Duration / Design: 4 weeks oral (gavage) treatment + 4 weeks recovery. 3 Dose levels, 10 males/10 females per group + 10 satellite  animals  per  group  for  TK  and  recovery  assessment.  Exposure  assessed  by  formation  of haemoglobin adducts. Status / Timelines: Study start: Oct. 2007 Data availability: Dec. 2007 Draft Report: Feb. 2008 Cross-species in  vitro and in  vivo evaluation  of  exposure  to  EMS  and  retroactive judgement of exposure to EMS in batches of Viracept containing elevated levels of EMS To facilitate  retroactively  exposure  judgement  in  patients  having  taken  elevated  levels  of  EMS  via Viracept.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

This overall aim will be addressed in the following list of sub-studies:

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2.2.4 Discussion In the absence of both NOEL and LOEL values, calculations which define the risk for patients as low cannot be accepted. The CHMP therefore concluded that further studies are urgently needed in order to  allow  a  more  informed  risk  assessment.  The  suggestion  of  a  threshold  for  the  mutagenic  risk  of EMS is supported by the available in vitro data and may enable the establishment of a daily exposure with  negligible  risk.  This  could  have  the  potential  to  re-assure  patients  having  been  exposed  to contaminated batches of Viracept and refine the patient population requiring follow-up. In this respect, the MAH's study proposals are considered to be appropriate, given the commitment to discuss the need for either longer or further studies to fully elucidate the quantitative risk associated with the EMS exposure in patients having taken those batches of Viracept with high EMS levels. However,  given  the  current  lack  of  available  data,  any  quantitative  risk  assessment  remains speculative.  Therefore,  the  limit  of  EMS  should  be  specified  to  be  in  line  with  the  Threshold  of Toxicological Concern (TTC), as stated in the Guideline on the Limits of Genotoxic Impurities. The TTC (Threshold of Toxicological Concern) is defined in the CHMP Guideline on the Limits of Genotoxic Impurities as a limit of 1.5 µg maximum daily dose of a potentially genotoxic substance. Based on this recommendation, it could be considered as acceptable for establishing a specification of the sum of MMS and EMS in the active substance. Taking the Maximum Daily Dose in an approved Viracept regimen into account, this translates to a maximum of not more than 0.6 ppm for the sum of MMS and EMS in the active substance nelfinavir mesilate.

| Study / Activity                                                                                                                          | Duration / Design                                             | Status / Timelines                                                |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Establish relationship between concentration and EMS-haemoglobin adduct formation in mouse blood and kinetics of haemoglobin adducts      | Blood in vitro and in vivo (see in vivo genotoxicity studies) | In life part done; sample analysis until mid Oct. 2007            |
| Establish relationship between concentration and EMS-haemoglobin adduct formation in cynomolgus blood and kinetics of haemoglobin adducts | Blood in vitro and in vivo                                    | authorised In life part done; sample analysis until mid Oct. 2007 |
| Establish EMS-haemoglobin adduct formation in cynomolgus blood after administration of Viracept batch contaminated with high EMS          | Blood in vitro and in vivo                                    | Oct. - Nov. 2007                                                  |
| In vitro determination of Ki (interaction EMS - Hb) using human erythrocytes incubated with EMS                                           | Blood in vitro                                                | Oct. - Nov. 2007                                                  |
| In vitro stability of EMS to check feasibility of analysis of unchanged EMS                                                               | In vitro                                                      | Oct. - Nov. 2007                                                  |
| Pharmacokinetics of EMS in mice and if feasible monkey (provided analysis of unchanged EMS feasible)                                      | In vivo mouse and monkey (under consideration)                | Nov. - Dec. 2007                                                  |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.2.5 Conclusion

Taking into account the data presented a bove, the CHMP concluded the following:

- Patients exposed to EMS during the 3-month period in 2007 of possible contamination of above 1000 ppm should be monitored for adverse effects.
- Pregnant women and children, including those exposed in utero, who have taken Viracept at any given time, should be monitored as well. In the case of pregnant women, the purpose is to followup the outcome of the pregnancy.

The MAH was also requested to consider how existing cohorts such as EUROSIDA, CHIC, DAD, MITOC and COHERE could be used to assess the risk associated with the exposure of patients to the high EMS levels in the affected Viracept batches.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · The  TTC  (Threshold  of  Toxicological  Concern)  limit  of  1.5  µg  maximum  daily  dose  of  a potentially  genotoxic  substance  as  defined  in  the  CHMP  Guideline  on  the  Limits  of  Genotoxic Impurities could be considered as acceptable for establishing a specification of the sum of MMS and EMS in the active substance. This translates into a maximum of 0.6 ppm. · The MAH has agreed to undertake both the studies as outlined above, to discuss the study protocol for the one month repeat dose study to establish dose-effect for mutation induction by EMS over a wide  range  of  doses  in  transgenic  mice  prior  to  its  initiation  with  the  toxicology  experts  of  the CHMP and to discuss the need for further studies in the light of the results obtained with the above outlined studies. 2.3 Pharmacovigilance 2.3.1 EU Risk Management Plan The MAH's initial draft RMP was considered by the CHMP at its June and July meetings and the CHMP  advised  that  the  draft  RMP  needed  to  contain  more  detail  on  the  MAH's  proposals  and timelines for submission of study protocols. The key concerns of the CHMP in relation to the three main sections of the RMP were as follows: Safety Specification The MAH's draft version lacked details on safety profile of EMS and needed be amended to: · fully reflect all data on EMS, referenced as appropriate; · reflect the conclusions of the expert group meeting on toxicological risk. The  tabular  summary  on  identified  and  potential  risks  required  considerable  amendment  -  it  was considered  to  down  play  the  seriousness  of  risk,  implied  low  frequency  and  the  section  on preventability focused on recall and communication but did not consider any corrective measures to address  the  identified  issues  surrounding  the  manufacturing  processes  or  the  need  for  long  term monitoring of exposed patients. Pharmacovigilance Plan This section needed to be amended to include: · full detail of MAH's proposals for further studies, including proposals for long term follow-up and monitoring, via a registry, of the following patient groups; · all patients exposed to the batches with high level EMS (i.e. above 1000 ppm); · all pregnant women exposed during therapy (in order to follow pregnancy outcome); · all children exposed during therapy; · all children exposed in utero (including those born HIV negative).

In  addition,  the  MAH needed to consider establishing an expert panel to evaluate the results of the non-clinical studies as they emerged. The findings of these studies would then be used as a basis to devise  a  plan  for  specific  screening  for  patients  exposed  to  EMS  levels  with  an  insufficient  safety margin.  The MAH was asked to submit to the CHMP an action plan on how to implement such a screening program.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Risk Minimisation Plan

This section of the RMP required amendment to provide full details of the corrective action plan to address the identified issues surrounding the manufacturing processes. The MAH was also asked to consider the need for targeted follow up of spontaneous reports, in particular to gain full information on patients' past medical history. The MAH was also asked to consider the possibility of publishing the final agreed Risk Management Plan.

## Final Revision 1 of Risk Management Plan

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  MAH  submitted  its  revised  draft  Risk  Management  Plan  on  9  August  2007,  which  seeks  to address the CHMP concerns detailed above. The efforts of the MAH in improving the quality of this Risk Management Plan are acknowledge. A detailed assessment of this revised Risk Management Plan is  attached in attachment 2, however, outlined below are the key outstanding points that need to be addressed by the MAH: Table Summary of the risk management plan

| Safety issue                              | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                                                                                                              |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Identified Risks                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Exposure to EMS (EMS impurity)            | longer Analysis of reports and frequency of reports in 6 monthly cycles on the WHOdatabase and on Roche internal database in order to detect changes of frequency or changes of terms of reported drug reactions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Elimination of further exposure to all affected drug via a patient level recall of all possible affected drug. A detailed CAPA plan to prevent further impurities. |
| Important potential risks                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Exposure of pregnant women (EMS impurity) | no Close observation through Antiretroviral pregnancy registry for HAART. Roche will use the Registry to collect information and the outcome of pregnancies of all patients exposed to nelfinavir (with and without exposure to affected batches).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | DHCP letter was sent to inform providers and patients.                                                                                                             |
| Genotoxicity (EMS impurity)               | Medicinal product Gain more information on possible genotoxicity by animal studies. Close observation of reported events in the Antiretroviral pregnancy registry for HAART. Conduct of in vivo repeat dose mutation induction study in transgenic mice to establish information on whether mutations as induced by EMS have non-linear dose- response characteristics and whether the exposure to EMS via Viracept was reliably below a level for mutation induction. Further, cross-species evaluation of protein alkylation by EMS will form a basis of comparison of exposure required to induce mutations versus likely exposure as given by EMS in humans via Viracept. |                                                                                                                                                                    |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Safety issue                                          | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Proposed risk minimisation activities                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Carcinogenicity (EMS impurity)                        | Gain more information on possible genotoxicity by animal studies. Close observation of reported events in the Registries. Conduct of in vivo repeat dose mutation induction study in rodents. Genotoxicity is likely the major underlying cause for the carcinogenicity of EMS. This will drive the risk assessment for the exposure scenarios that occurred with EMS as an impurity in Viracept. Roche will use Registries to collect follow up information on patients exposed to the affected batches. In addition, patient populations most at risk will be followed up if they have taken Viracept at any given time. Gain more information on possible | authorised                                                                     |
| Teratogenicity (EMS impurity)                         | no longer genotoxicity by animal studies. Close observation of reported events in the Antiretroviral pregnancy registry for HAART. Conduct in vivo repeat dose mutation induction study in rodents as genotoxicity is the basis for teratogenicity. The study shall provide data for a better quantitative risk assessment, which is currently based on linear incidence calculation from animal teratogenicity data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                |
| Exposure of infants through lactation (EMS impurity)  | product Close observation of reported events in the Antiretroviral pregnancy registry for HAART.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | The SPC contains a corresponding warning not to use Viracept during lactation. |
| Direct toxicity of EMS after ingestion (EMS impurity) | Analysis of reports and frequency of reports in 6 monthly cycles on the WHOdatabase and on Roche internal database in order to detect changes of frequency or changes of terms of reported drug reaction.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                |

- The MAH should provide detailed information on the actions that need to be completed before the RMP can be approved along with firm timelines for completion of each of these actions.
- It should be made clear throughout the RMP what the MAH consider to be high and low doses of EMS and short and long-term exposure.  The MAH should state where appropriate whether single dose or multi dose data from EMS animal studies are used and what NOELs and LOEL concentrations are or if  they  have not yet been  determined,  and reflect  more  accurately  the uncertainties regarding EMS toxicity.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The section  on  exposure  figures  from  the  table  shows  that  the  UK  received  1958  packs  of Viracept film coated tablets containing 200-999ppm EMS, however this is not reflected in the corresponding pie chart.
- The analysis of spontaneous reports will need to be repeated since there is often a long delay before  national  authorities  submit  reports  to  the  WHO  database  and  since  many  exposed pregnancies  may  not  yet  be  delivered.  It  would  be  helpful  for  repeat  analyses  if  the  MAH obtain the earliest and latest report dates for each group.
- The MAH has provided an analysis on production of secondary cancers by alkylating agents. This should be related more closely to the implications for EMS exposure.
- Nelfinavir  has  been  a  standard  component  of  Post-Exposure  Prophylaxis  (PEP)  treatment since 2004 until the beginning of 2007 in some member states.  The MAH should discuss the effects  of  nelfinavir  contamination on this group and detail how they will ensure that those exposed through post-exposure prophylaxis to the highest levels of EMS contamination will be included in the registry.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · The MAH should discuss how they will measure the success of the product recall. · The MAH should provide a response to previous recommendation to publish this RMP. · The Pharmacovigilance Plan and Risk Minimisation Plan should be updated as follows: - section 2.2 - summary of safety concerns - there should be reference to specific studies/registries, protocol numbers. - section 2.4- Study protocols are missing in this chapter, MAH should refer to specific studies using their unique identifiers - section 3.1 - All safety concerns (identified and potential risks and missing info) should be included here for assessment of a need for risk minimisation · A summary table of the Risk Management Plan is missing and needs to be included. · The MAH should ensure that RMP version control is employed. · The MAH is currently in discussion with the French competent authority about the possibility of conducting epidemiologic studies within the existing French cohorts of HIV patients. Once agreed these studies should be included in this Risk Management Plan. Pregnant and Lactating Mothers · The MAH has highlighted a publication which showed that tamoxifen had a modulating effect on EMS toxicity.  The MAH should indicate whether the effects of oestrogen on EMS toxicity will  be  investigated  in  the  pre-clinical  studies.    The  MAH  should  also  consider  if  this information could be of relevance to pregnant women or breastfeeding mothers. · The MAH need to clarify whether breastfeeding mothers or their children will be captured in these registries. · It was noted in the 12 th PSUR that Pfizer is conducting a study of nelfinavir in pregnancy, but this is not mentioned here; this study should be discussed in the RMP. Children · The MAH has stated that a linear incidence extrapolation from animal lowest observed effect data to the potential body burden of EMS in pregnant women for the occurrence of effects on the  developing  embryo  shows  that  the  calculated  risk  is  at  least  two  orders  of  magnitude below the spontaneous malformation incidence in the human population.  The MAH should clarify  what  is  meant  by  this  statement  and  its  relevance  to  detecting  adverse  effects  in exposed populations. · The MAH has confirmed that Viracept powder was not contaminated with EMS, however it is not  clear  if  it  has  been  contaminated  in  the  past  and  doesn't  obviate  the  need  to  include children in registries since some may have been taking tablets. Post-Exposure Prophylaxis

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.3.2 Registry proposals

The MAH submitted draft protocol synopses for registries for patients exposed to Viracept containing EMS at high levels (&gt;1,000 ppm) and pregnant women and children. At the request of the CHMP these were discussed at the July meeting of the Pharmacovigilance Working Party (PhVWP).

The  CHMP  and  its  PhVWP  considered  that  greater  detail  was  required  in  relation  to  the  MAH's registry protocols and it was recommended that the MAH should provide updated registry proposals taking  into  account  the  relevant  comments  (including  those  relating  to  duration  of  follow-up, identification of patients, data capture and  analysis), or provide  reasonable  justification  why outstanding issues have not been addressed.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH was requested to update the registry proposals to take on board these recommendations and submit by 31 August 2007 full detailed protocols for consideration by the CHMP at its September meeting. The MAH's response and revised registry proposals were submitted on 3 September 2007. Overview of revised registry proposals Registry 1 A  Safety  Registry  of  Patients  with  Potential  Exposure  to  Viracept  containing &gt;1,000 ppm EMS Objectives Primary Objectives ♦ To detect new onset neoplasms in patients with potential exposure to EMS in Viracept produced from active substance containing EMS at levels &gt; 1,000 ppm in the 01/03/07 to 30/06/07 time period. ♦ To estimate the incidence of specific new onset neoplasms in patients with potential exposure to Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt; 1,000 ppm EMS. ♦ To  compare  incidence  of  specific  new  onset  neoplasm  in  patients  with  potential exposure to EMS in Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt; 1,000 ppm EMS to comparison groups with no such exposure. Secondary Objectives ♦ To explore possible exposure response relationship of level and duration of exposure to EMS and new onset neoplasm. Study Design The  Registry  will  consist  of  a  Registry  of  Existing  HIV/AIDS  Registries  in  affected  countries  and where no registries are available a Patient Log of non-registered exposed patients. The Registry will conduct  baseline  and  follow-up  assessments,  on  a  6-month  basis,  on  new  onset  neoplasms  among Viracept-exposed and comparison groups. The Registry of existing registries  will  be  a  non-interventional,  long-term,  observational  registry  of existing HIV registries in all affected countries, composed of: a) Patients who were potentially exposed to EMS in Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt; 1,000ppm EMS, and b) Comparator patients not exposed to Viracept during the period 01/03/07 to 30/06/07.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1. Subject Selection for Vira-EMS Registry 1

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised For each country, an estimate of the number of patients believed to be exposed to Viracept will be developed  from  distribution  information.  This  estimate  will  then  be  compared  with  the  number  of identified patients known to be exposed to Viracept in the time period of interest based upon the data in existing registries. If the latter number is &lt;85% of the estimated number of patients in a particular country or region, one or both of the following strategies might be implemented: a) The existing HIV registries will be encouraged to reach out for further recruitment of all or a portion of the remaining potentially exposed individuals. b) For those who are not covered by any existing HIV/AIDS registries, a Patient Log of the remaining potentially exposed individuals will be established. Exposed patients will be assessed on a 6-monthly basis and the duration of the observation period will be 10 years after the registry enrolment. It is proposed that there will be one Coordinating Organisation charged with organising the Registry of registries as well as the patient log, segmented by country.

## Study Population

The  primary  target  population  is  made  up  of  individuals  who  took  Viracept  produced  from  active substance containing EMS at levels &gt;1,000 ppm at any time between 01/03/2007 and 30/06/2007.

The suitable comparator patients are those individuals who are matched to Viracept subject by age, gender, HIV status and treatment, and documented not to have been exposed to Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt;1,000 ppm EMS.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Exclusion criteria

- ♦ Individuals exposed to Viracept exclusively in the US, Canada or Japan.
- ♦ Patients  receiving  Viracept  where  it  can  be  documented  that  no  lots  received  by  patient contained Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt;1,000 ppm EMS.
- ♦ Cancer history prior to first Viracept exposure during period 01/03/2007 to 30/06/2007.
- ♦ Patients receiving Viracept where it can be documented that there was no distribution of any lots with Viracept produced from active substance containing &gt;1,000 ppm EMS.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Data Collection This Registry will collect data on patients who potentially or ideally were documented to have taken Viracept any time during the period 01/03/2007 to 30/06/2007 in countries where Viracept containing EMS impurity at levels &gt;1,000ppm were distributed. Data collection may be partially or wholly webbased with appropriate security and confidentiality safeguards. The Registry will work with existing HIV registries/observational cohorts in order to provide data both retrospectively and prospectively to meet the study objectives.  Where subjects may also be eligible for Registries 2A or 2B, efforts will be made to identify and flag up any duplication in order to avoid double counting across the registries. For  the  Patient  Log,  where  possible,  basic  background  history,  HIV  status  and  treatment  will  be recorded along with relevant contact information for follow-up.  The MAH considers that in order to maximise participation in such Patient Logs the procedures and data collection must be kept as simple as  possible  and  afford  patient  confidentiality.  Efforts  will  be  made  to  identify  any  duplication  of patients in the log and the registries. Assessments At baseline information will be collected on start and end dates of Viracept exposure (if possible with lot numbers and dates dispensed), medical history (including cancer history), HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and major HIV-related co-morbidities and therapy. For the registry, follow up visits will collect health status, particularly whether the patients has experienced any new onset neoplasms since last visit, HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and most recent treatment regimens. For the Patient Log, follow up information will be collected on any new onset neoplasms. Data Analysis Primary Analysis Rates of new onset neoplasms will be compared between the Viracept group and comparator group. The specific analysis plan will be developed in conjunction with representatives of the existing HIV registries/observational cohorts, as well as the Viracept Registry Scientific Advisory Committee. Additional Analyses Where possible, patients will be stratified as per potential exposure to EMS based on i) documented lot number distributed to or received from patients, and b) lot numbers known to have been available for distribution at the site or pharmacy from which the patient received Viracept: ♦ Patients  who  took  Viracept  during  the  period  01/03/2007  to  30/06/2007  with  potential exposure to EMS at unknown level of exposure. ♦ Patients  with  definite  maximum  exposure  to  Viracept  produced  from  active  substance containing  &gt;1,000ppm  EMS  based  on  lot  numbers  dispensed  to/  returned  from  patients  or based on lot numbers available for distribution at site or pharmacy.

- ♦ Patients  with  potential  maximum  exposure  to  EMS  &gt;1,000  ppm  based  on  lot  numbers available for distribution at site or pharmacy.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Registry 2A A  Safety  Registry  of  Pregnant  Women  with  Potential  Exposure  to  EMS  in Viracept

## Objectives

## Primary Objectives

- ♦ To  assess  pregnancy  outcomes  in  women  potentially  exposed  to  EMS  impurity  in Viracept during pregnancy at any time between 01/01/1998 to 30/06/07.
- ♦ To measure the rate of birth defects in children potentially exposed in utero to EMS contained in Viracept.

Medicinal product no longer authorised ♦ To  compare  the  incidence  of  birth  outcomes  and  defects  in  children  potentially exposed in utero to EMS contained in Viracept in comparison with groups with no such exposure. Secondary Objectives ♦ To explore possible exposure response relationship of level and duration of exposure to EMS with rates of birth defects. Study Design The  Registry  will  consist  of  a  Registry  of  Existing  HIV/AIDS  Pregnancy  Registries  in  affected countries and where no registries are available a Patient Log of non-registered exposed patients. The Registry  will  conduct  baseline  and  follow-up  assessments  of  birth  outcomes  at  birth  and  6  months post-birth, among Viracept-exposed and comparator women. The Registry of existing registries  will  be  a  non-interventional,  long-term,  observational  registry  of existing HIV registries in all affected countries, composed of: a)  Women  who  took  Viracept  during  pregnancy  and  were  potentially  exposed  to  EMS  in Viracept at any time between 01/01/1998 to 30/06/2007. b) Comparator women on ART who were not exposed to Viracept during pregnancy. For each country, an estimate of the number of pregnant women believed to be exposed to Viracept will be provided. This estimate will then be compared with the number of identified women known to be exposed to Viracept in the time period of interest based upon the data in existing registries. If the latter  number is &lt;85% of the estimated number of patients in a particular country or region, one or both of the following strategies might then be implemented: a) The existing HIV registries will be encouraged to reach out for further recruitment of all or a portion of the remaining potentially exposed individuals. b) For those who are not covered by any existing HIV/AIDS pregnancy registries, a Patient Log of the remaining potentially exposed pregnant women will be established. The observation of birth outcomes will occur immediately after birth and at 6 months post birth. As  for  Registry  1,  it  is  proposed  that  there  will  be  one  Coordinating  Organisation  charged  with organising the Registry of registries as well as the patient log, segmented by country. Study Population The primary target population is made up of pregnant women who took Viracept during pregnancy at any time between 01/01/1998 and 30/06/2007. The suitable comparator patients are those pregnant women documented not to have been exposed to Viracept during pregnancy in a comparative time period.

## Exclusion criteria

- ♦ Pregnant women exposed to Viracept exclusively in the US, Canada or Japan.
- ♦ Known foetal abnormality prior to first Viracept exposure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Data Collection

This Registry will collect data both retrospectively and prospectively to capture all women potentially exposed to Viracept through to the time of withdrawal plus 3 months (30/09/2007). Data collection may be partially or wholly web-based with appropriate security and confidentiality safeguards.

The  Registry  will  work  with  existing  HIV  pregnancy  registries/observational  cohorts  in  order  to provide data both retrospectively and prospectively to meet the study objectives.  Where subjects or their offspring may also be eligible for Registries 1 or 2B, efforts will be made to identify and flag up any duplication in order to avoid double counting across the registries.

Objectives

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- ♦ To estimate the incidence of specific new onset neoplasms in these potentially EMS exposed children.

Medicinal product no longer authorised For  the  Patient  Log,  where  possible,  basic  background  history,  pregnancy  status,  HIV  status  and treatment will be recorded along with relevant contact information for follow-up.  As with Registry 1, the MAH considers that in order to maximise participation in such a Patient Log the procedures and data collection must be kept as simple as possible and afford patient confidentiality. Efforts will be made to identify and flag up any duplication of patients in the log and the registries. Assessments At baseline information will be collected on demographics of pregnant women, start and end dates of Viracept exposure (if possible with lot numbers and dates dispensed), obstetric/gynaelogical history, pregnancy status, history of foetal abnormality, HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and major HIVrelated co-morbidities and therapy. For the registry, follow up visits will collect pregnancy outcomes, breast feeding, neonate birth weight, birth defects, vital status of neonates, HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and most recent treatment regimens. Data Analysis Primary Analysis Birth  outcomes  and  rates  of  birth  defects  will  be  compared  between  the  Viracept  group  and comparator group. The specific analysis plan will be developed in conjunction with representatives of the existing HIV pregnancy registries/observational cohorts, as well as the Viracept Registry Scientific Advisory Committee. Additional Analyses Where  possible,  pregnant  women  will  be  stratified  as  per  potential  exposure  to  EMS  based  on  i) documented lot number distributed to or received from patients, and b) lot numbers known to have been available for distribution at the site or pharmacy from which the patient received Viracept: ♦ Women who took Viracept  during  pregnancy  with  potential  exposure  to  EMS  at  unknown level of exposure. ♦ Women  with  definite  maximum  exposure  to  Viracept  based  on  lot  numbers  dispensed  to/ returned from patients or based on lot numbers available for distribution at site or pharmacy. ♦ Women with  potential  maximum  exposure  to  Viracept  based  on  lot  numbers  available  for distribution at site or pharmacy. Registry 2B A Safety Registry of Children with Potential Exposure to EMS in Viracept Primary Objectives ♦ To detect new onset neoplasms in children under 18 years old with potential exposure to EMS in Viracept during the 01/01/1998 to 30/06/07 time period.

- ♦ To compare incidence of specific new onset neoplasm in children potentially exposed to EMS in Viracept in comparison to groups with no such exposure.

## Secondary Objectives

- ♦ To explore possible exposure response relationship of level and duration of exposure to EMS and new onset neoplasm.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Study Design

The  Registry  will  consist  of  a  Registry  of  Existing  HIV/AIDS  Paediatric  Registries  in  affected countries and where no registries are available a Patient Log of non-registered exposed children.  The Registry  will  conduct  baseline  and  follow-up  assessments,  on  a  6-month  basis,  on  new  onset neoplasms among Viracept-exposed and comparison groups.

The Registry of existing registries  will  be  a  non-interventional,  long-term,  observational  registry  of existing HIV paediatric registries in all affected countries, composed of:

Medicinal product no longer authorised a)  Children  who  took  Viracept  and/or  were  potentially  exposed  to  Viracept in  utero at  any time  between  01/01/1998  to  30/06/2007.  The  registry  will  enrol  both  HIV-  infected  and uninfected children who took ART for treatment or prophylaxis, and b) Comparator children not exposed to Viracept. For each country, an estimate of the number of children believed to be exposed to Viracept will be provided. This estimate will then be compared with the number of identified children in existing HIV registries known to be exposed to Viracept in the time period of interest based upon the data. If the latter  number is &lt;85% of the estimated number of patients in a particular country or region, one or both of the following strategies might then be implemented: a)  The  existing  HIV  paediatric  registries  will  be  encouraged  to  reach  out  for  further recruitment of all or a portion of the remaining potentially exposed individuals. b) For those who are not covered by any existing HIV/AIDS registries, a Patient Log of the remaining potentially exposed individuals will be established. The paediatric patients will be followed up to reaching age 18 for the long-term assessment of risk of cancer. It is proposed that there will be one Coordinating Organisation charged with organising the Registry of registries as well as the patient log, segmented by country. Study Population The primary target population is made up of children who took Viracept or were exposed to the drug in utero at any time between 01/01/1998 and 30/06/2007. The suitable comparator children are those children documented not to have been exposed to Viracept in a comparative period of time. Comparators will be matched to Viracept exposed children by age, gender, HIV status and treatment. Exclusion criteria ♦ Children exposed to Viracept exclusively in the US, Canada or Japan. ♦ Cancer history prior to first Viracept exposure. Data Collection This Registry will collect data both retrospectively and prospectively on children who were potentially exposed to Viracept. Data collection may be partially or wholly web-based with appropriate security and confidentiality safeguards. The Registry will work with existing HIV registries/observational cohorts in order to provide data both retrospectively and prospectively to meet the study objectives.  Where subjects may also be eligible for Registries 1 and 2A, efforts will be made to identify and flag up any duplication in order to avoid double counting across the registries.

For  the  Patient  Log,  where  possible,  basic  background  history,  HIV  status  and  treatment  will  be recorded along with relevant contact information for follow-up.  The MAH considers that in order to maximise participation in the Patient Logs the procedures and data collection must be kept as simple as  possible  and  afford  patient  confidentiality.  Efforts  will  be  made  to  identify  and  flag  up  any duplication of patients in the log and the registries.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Assessments

At baseline information will be collected on the demographics of the exposed children and/or mothers, the start and end dates of Viracept exposure (if possible with lot numbers and dates dispensed), medical history (including cancer history), HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and major HIVrelated co-morbidities and therapy.

For the registry, follow up visits will collect health status, particularly whether the patients has experienced any new onset neoplasms since last visit, HIV status, CD4 and Viral Load data, and most recent treatment regimens.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised For the Patient Log, follow up information will be collected on any new onset neoplasms. Data Analysis Primary Analysis Rates of new onset neoplasms will be compared between the Viracept group and comparator group. The specific analysis plan will be developed in conjunction with representatives of the existing HIV paediatric  registries/observational  cohorts,  as  well  as  the  Viracept  Registry  Scientific  Advisory Committee. Additional Analyses Where possible, patients will be stratified as per potential exposure to EMS based on i) documented lot number distributed to or received from patients, and b) lot numbers known to have been available for distribution at the site or pharmacy from which the patient received Viracept: ♦ Children  who took Viracept with potential  exposure  to  EMS  at unknown  level  of  exposure (unable to map lot numbers to patient or to site or pharmacy). ♦ Patients  with  definite  maximum  exposure  to  Viracept  produced  from  active  substance containing  &gt;1,000ppm  EMS  based  on  lot  numbers  dispensed  to/  returned  from  patients  or based on lot numbers available for distribution at site or pharmacy. ♦ Children potentially exposed in utero . Outstanding issues - Registry proposals The MAH's proposal to establish a Registry of registries is considered acceptable; however, there are a number of outstanding points that need to be addressed by the MAH and these are listed below: General points · The MAH should provide detailed information on the actions that need to be completed before the registries can be initiated along with firm timelines for completion of each of these actions. · The  MAH should  also  provide  regular  reports  on  these  Registries.  Once  the  Final  registry protocols  have  been  agreed  and  whilst  the  registries  are  in  the  initial  stages  of  being established the MAH should provide progress reports on a quarterly basis. Once the registries are established these reports should be submitted annually. Specific points · Figure 1 from Registry 1 will need to be amended to more accurately represent the patients selected  for  this  study.  In  particular  to  clarify  that  only  patients  potentially  exposed  to Viracept  containing  EMS  &gt;1,000  ppm  during  the  period  01/03/2007  to  30/06/2007  will  be included in this registry.

<!-- image -->

- The MAH will have to discuss, whether the cut-off date of 30/06/2007 is appropriate. This discussion will be based on the documented success of the recall. The need to add a larger safety  margin  to  the  proposed  cut-off  date  will  have  to  be  addressed  in  this  respect.  The CHMP recommends to prolong this date by 3 months in order to capture any patients which were  potentially  exposed  to  Viracept  batches  containing  &gt;1,000  ppm  EMS  beyond  the proposed cut-off date.
- The exclusion  criteria  for  registries  1  and  2B  are  not  acceptable.  The  exclusion  of  patients with a cancer history will reduce the power to detect any possible signal of acceleration of tumour growth. Matching on, adjusting for or stratifying by cancer history is considered to be a more advisable way forward.

Viracept-H-164-Z-109

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The MAH should also use the information obtained from the pre-clinical studies to determine whether there are any specific cancers which should be particularly closely monitored.
- The duration of follow-up proposed by the MAH for registry 2B  is not acceptable as it could mean that children/adolescents exposed will get very little follow-up. It is recommended that children  should  be  followed  up  for  at  least  10  years  or  until  they  reach  18  years  of  age, whichever is longest time period. The period of follow-up may need to be extended beyond 10 years  depending  on  the  findings  from  pre-clinical  studies  or  preliminary  findings  from  the registry analyses.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · The  MAH  should  provide  information  on  how  many  of  the  Viracept  exposed  patients  are likely to be included in the MAH's proposed Registry of registries. · With regard to the identification of duplicates, the MAH should provide information on how they will deal with patients who could potentially be in more than one registry at the same time (i.e. adolescent who becomes pregnant). · The MAH has provided information on the list of registries for inclusion and this list contains some surveillance surveys- the  MAH should provide clarification that these  will  be  able  to obtain the correct data and are not simply AIDS prevalence/incidence surveys. · In  the  supplementary  information  provided  by  the  MAH  the  rates  quoted  for  cancers  (after table 3) have no denominator. · In  the  supplementary  information  the  MAH  has  also  provided  Power  calculations.  It  is considered  that  as  we  are  dealing  with  rare  outcomes  standard  power  calculations  are  not helpful, a signal may be detected but there may be insufficient power to demonstrate statistical significance  according  to  clinical  trial  standards  for  efficacy.  In  relation  to  the  power calculations, the MAH is requested to provide the denominator for the rate. · With regard to Registry 2A, the MAH should clarify that the 6 month follow-up after birth applies to the infant and the child will then go into registry 2b. The MAH should also clarify whether the mother will go into registry 1 if they were exposed to high dose EMS. Also it is assumed  that  the  exclusion  criteria  relating  to  foetal  abnormality  prior  to  first  Viracept exposure apply to the current pregnancy. · For  Registry  2A  the  MAH  should  also  use  this  to  examine  the  rate  of  early  abortion  in pregnant women exposed to Viracept from March 2007. · The  MAH  should  also  provide  clarification  on  whether  adolescents  exposed  to  Viracept (initiating in registry 2b) will enter registry 1 on turning 18 if they have been exposed to high dose  EMS. Any adolescents initiating Viracept  will  otherwise  only  be  followed  for  a  short time  and  the  MAH  should  ensure  that  these  patients  will  continue  to  be  included  in  the Registry. · The  MAH  should  provide  updates  on  the  progress  made  with  respect  to  the  capture  of information  on  the  patients'  past  and  current  medical  and  treatment  history  as  the  data collection gets under way. This information should be included in the regular reports that are required to be submitted. · Once the main registry protocols have been agreed by the CHMP the MAH should also submit draft CRFs for agreement by the CHMP. · The  MAH  should  re-evaluate  whether  the  collection  of  blood  samples  for  examination  of possible  biomarkers  would  be  valuable  in  light  of  the  findings  from  the  the  pre-clinical studies. · With regard to the mechanisms to ensure that all neoplasms will be captured, the MAH should provide  an  update  regarding  this  issue  following  the  discussions  with  experts  in  Cancer registries.

- The MAH should explore further and discuss with relevant experts whether a pooled analysis across the separate registries will provide greater power to examine the overall incidence of cancers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.3.3 Discussion

While in the updated protocols for the Viracept Registries, the MAH has taken many comments into account and made some adequate progress, questions remain. With the proposal of the MAH to use a 'Registry  of  Registries'  the  issues  with  regards  to  feasibility  and  statistical  power  have  been addressed. Generally, this proposal is acceptable. However, there remain a series of both general and specific issues that need to be addressed by the MAH. It is expected that the revised protocols, which should be submitted by the end of November 2007 will take all of the above raised points into account. Mainly, the adequacy of the time of follow-up, the exclusion criteria and the degree to which Viracept exposed patients will be excluded in the Registries are in need of further clarification.

•

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2.3.4 Conclusion on Pharmacovigilance The outline of the Registries could be satisfactory, provided that the MAH takes the above comments into account and submits updated protocols by the end of November 2007. The MAH will have to take further comments by the CHMP into consideration when developing the final protocols. 3 OVERALL DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATION The CHMP, having reviewed the data submitted by the Marketing Authorisation Holder in the context of  the  suspension  and  having  re-assessed  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  the  medicinal  product,  on 20 September 2007, recommended the following: 3.1 Quality The CHMP, having assessed the totality of the MAH's responses concerning risk analysis, process revalidation, analytical methodology development and validation, revised tighter specification limits for alkyl mesilates, as well as all the measures proposed by the MAH to ensure that the manufacturing processes  for  the  active  substance  and  the  finished  products  are  under  control,  considers  that  the MAH's proposals are now sufficient  to  ensure  the  satisfactory  quality  of  nelfinavir  mesilate  active substance and finished products. Although a number of remaining quality issues have been identified, the CHMP considered that these are minor, and should not preclude the lifting of the Suspension of the Marketing Authorisation, as the MAH has committed to resolve these outstanding issues, within acceptable time frames. Therefore, and taking into account the positive outcome of the Swissmedic follow-up inspection, the CHMP recommends the lifting of the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation on the basis of the MAH having resolved the concerns raised that had led to the suspension. The CHMP is of the opinion that the MAH has satisfactorily shown that the quality of Viracept can be ensured due to the MAH's CAPA measures. However, as follow-up commitments the MAH should address the following remaining issues arising from their quality response. It should be confirmed that the MAH will develop analytical methods to quantify MMS/EMS in the finished products, with an improved quantitation limit than the 10 ppm in the current method for tablets.

- The MAH should discuss in depth on the hydrolysis products of the EMS especially on the aspects of the chemical pathways of hydrolysis of EMS in contact with water and the potential of  these  degradation products of hydrolysis to be genotoxic. The MAH is also requested to clarify what these alkylate reactive centres of the tablets/powder matrix are.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The MAH should confirm that a stability program will be set up addressing the low levels of MMS/EMS in dosage forms as soon as method is available that can detect MMS/EMS down to levels ≤ 0.5 ppm.
- The MAH has provided the general risk assessment of the quarantined batches, but not the specific data related to these batches. This should be provided with a listing of AS batches linked to the quarantined stock, MMS/EMS levels in the AS (determined by the new method HPD99GC1.1), MSA in AS and the corresponding pH value. Any release of these batches will be subject to approval from Supervisory Authorities responsible for the batch release sites.

The outline of the Registries could be satisfactory, provided that the MAH takes the above comments into account and submits updated protocols at the end of November 2007. The MAH will have to take further comments by the CHMP into consideration when developing the final protocols.

Medicinal product no longer authorised · The MAH should review the proposed limit of max. 0.5 ppm as soon as sufficient data are available from the revised process and process capability can be assessed. 3.2 Non-Clinical Based on the assessment of the non-clinical data available so far, the CHMP concluded the following: · Patients  exposed  to  EMS  during  the  3-month  period  in  2007  of  possible  contamination  of above 1000 ppm should be monitored for adverse effects. · Pregnant women and children, including those exposed in utero, who have taken Viracept at any given time, should be monitored as well. In the case of pregnant women, the purpose is to follow-up the outcome of the pregnancy. · The  TTC  (Threshold  of  Toxicological  Concern)  limit  of  1.5  µg  maximum  daily  dose  of  a potentially genotoxic substance as defined in the CHMP Guideline on the Limits of Genotoxic Impurities  could  be  considered  as  acceptable  for  establishing  a  specification  of  the  sum  of MMS and EMS in the active substance. This translates into a maximum of 0.6 ppm. The  MAH  has  addressed  the  comments  made  by  the  CHMP  during  its  June  2007  meeting  on  the assessment of the genotoxicity of EMS. The MAH has highlighted the fact that they consider all their proposals as forming the basis for further discussion with the CHMP, rather than being the MAH's final  decisions.  In  general,  the  CHMP  endorsed  the  MAH's  proposals,  seeking  from  the  MAH  one specific  commitment.  The  commitment  is  that  the  MAH  agree  to  conduct  a  MutaMouse  study  of longer duration than 28 days if the results of that study are considered to be insufficiently informative and/or raise further findings requiring clarification on the relationship between treatment duration and mutation formation. 3.3 Pharmacovigilance In relation to the Pharmacovigilance issues, a revised Risk Management Plan has been submitted by the MAH. This is a significant improvement on the previous version, however, there remain a number of issues which still need to be addressed and these are detailed in section 2.3.1 above. The revised registry proposals have been submitted and are considered to be acceptable, pragmatic and make  good  use  of  the  available  information.    The  revised  approach  will  ensure  that  appropriate comparator  data  are  available  and  it  is  hoped  will  maximise  healthcare  professional  involvement. There  are,  however,  a  number  of  outstanding  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  by  the  MAH  (see assessment as given in section 2.3.2 of this assessment report).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3.4 Overall Recommendation

Having reviewed all available data on quality, non-clinical issues and Pharmacovigilance, the CHMP considered during its September 2007 plenary meeting that the MAH has satisfactorily addressed the concerns raised during the June 2007 meeting.

The MAH has reassured the CHMP on the quality of Viracept he intends to release on the market. The corrective and preventive actions undertaken, as well as the validation of the modified manufacturing process have convinced the CHMP that the MAH is in a position to produce nelfinavir consistently with a satisfactory quality. As discussed in the quality section of this assessment report, the MAH has shown that the manufacturing process allows reducing the limit of the sum of EMS and MMS below the TTC limit of 0.6 ppm to 0.5ppm. The CHMP agreed to this new specification of NMT 0.5 ppm for the sum of EMS and MMS in the active substance.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The non-clinical study plans have been endorsed and will help to further characterise and quantify the risk  associated  with  the  EMS  exposure  of  affected  patients.  The  results  of  these  studies  will  be assessed and considered in the future follow-up of patients having been exposed to EMS in Viracept. The protocols for the requested registries have been endorsed and will be further refined. Thereby, the MAH will follow-up any patients more vulnerable to the exposure of a genotoxic substance as well as all patients having been exposed to the high levels of EMS in the batches marketed between March and June 2007. 4 CONCLUSION The CHMP consequently, on 20 September 2007 recommended the lifting of the suspension of the Community  Marketing  Authorisation  for  the  medicinal  product  Viracept,  subject  to  the  additional commitments undertaken (see below). The MAH quality response and the acceptability of the proposed limit of 0.5 ppm MMS/EMS in the active substance are considered sufficient to lift the suspension of the marketing authorisation. Relevant  changes  to  the  Annex  II  are  indicated  in  attachment  3  and  reflect  the  conditions  of  the Marketing Authorisation: 4.1 Conditions of the Marketing Authorisation The MAH commits to performing the studies and additional pharmacovigilance activities detailed in the Pharmacovigilance Plan. An  updated  Risk  Management  Plan  should  be  provided  as  per  the  CHMP  Guideline  on  Risk Management Systems for medicinal products for human use. 4.2 Follow-up measures following the lifting of the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation There  are  a  number  of  outstanding  quality,  non-clinical  and  pharmacovigilance  issues,  which  the MAH should address as follow-up commitments. As requested by the CHMP, the MAH agreed to submit the follow-up measures as listed below:

| Area    | Description                                                                                                                                                                           | Due date                                      |
|---------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Quality | The MAHcommits to develop an analytical method to quantify MMS/EMS in the finished product, with a limit of quantitation less than 10 ppm.                                            | Currently Ongoing Status Report by 31.12.2007 |
| Quality | Upon the availability of a method to detect MMS/EMS down to levels of <0.5 ppm a stability program for the film-coated tablet formulation will be set up addressing these low levels. | As soon as required test method is available  |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Quality       | The MAHwill discuss in depth the hydrolysis products of the EMS, especially the aspects of the chemical pathways of hydrolysis of EMS in contact with water and the potential of these degradation products of hydrolysis to be genotoxic. The MAHis also requested to clarify what these alkylate reactive centres of the tablets/powder matrix are.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 31.10.2007                                                                                         |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Quality       | A list with specific data of MMS/EMS levels of the API batches linked to the quarantined batches will be provided (determined by the new method HPDF99GC1.1), together with the levels of residual MSA in API and the corresponding pH value.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | 28.09.2007                                                                                         |
| Quality       | The MAHwill review the proposed limit of max. 0.5 ppm as soon as sufficient data are available from the revised process and process capability can be assessed. The number of available batches will depend on the market demand.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Annual update First: 31.3.2008                                                                     |
| Non- clinical | Comparative in vivo MNT studies with EMS and ENU (7 day daily treatment by oral gavage) To confirm the threshold dose-response curve for EMS in contrast to ENU under repeat dose conditions. Preliminary results unexpectedly showed no effects for EMS up to the highest dose of 80 mg/kg EMS but the expected linear dose response curve for ENU.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | authorised In-life phase completed, evaluation ongoing, Draft reports expected mid of October 2007 |
| Non- clinical | no longer A one month repeat dose study to establish dose-effect for mutation induction by EMS over a wide range of doses in transgenic mice To provide evidence for a sublinear/threshold dose response for genotoxic effects of the direct alkylating agent EMS into the low dose region as delineated from the Viracept impurity case Duration of treatment: extension to 3 months is not currently foreseen but may be considered dependent on the outcome of ongoing studies; this will be further discussed with the CHMP upon availability of the first results and in line with the assessment on the toxicological responses as submitted by the MAHon 16 August 2007. | Start expected in December 2007                                                                    |
| Non- clinical | product General 4-week toxicity study in the rat with EMS (new proposal). To provide data on EMS organ toxicity and clinical chemistry/haematology assessments in conjunction with exposure data.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Start October 2007                                                                                 |
| Non- clinical | Cross-species in vitro and in vivo evaluation of exposure to EMS To retroactively facilitate exposure judgement in patients having been exposed to elevated levels of EMS via Viracept Full details on the modelling approach to estimate the exposure in patients to be provided.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Activities ongoing                                                                                 |
| Non- clinical | Medicinal Furthermore the MAHcommits to discuss the implications of the results derived from the above outlined non-clinical studies (a risk assessment symposium involving all parties is planned). In case further studies are found necessary and appropriate in order to further substantiate the quantitative risk assessment for the levels of EMS found in Viracept and the duration/characteristics of exposure of patients the MAHwill be ready to undertake this.                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Pending data availability of studies mentioned under 1-4                                           |
| Non- clinical | The MAHexpresses their intention to publish the results of the non-clinical investigations on EMS and ENU and the outcome of the planned risk assessment symposium in a suitable peer reviewed journal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Intended for 2 nd -3 rd Q 2008                                                                     |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| PhV   | Risk Management Plan The Risk Management Plan (from Version 1) will be updated in line with the recommendations in both the Rapporteur's updated assessment report on the RMP dated 19 September 2007 and the CHMP Assessment Report dated 20 September 2007.       | Revised RMP submitted by 30. November 2007               |
|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| PhV   | Registries: The Registries protocols will be updated in line with the recommendations in the CHMP Assessment Report dated 20 September 2007. Reports will be submitted on a quarterly basis until the Registries are established and on an annual basis thereafter. | Revised Registry protocols submitted by 30 November 2007 |

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised recommendations in the CHMP Assessment Report dated 20 September 2007. Reports will be submitted on a quarterly basis until the Registries are established and on an annual basis thereafter. 4.3 Changes to the terms of the Marketing Authorisation The  lifting  of  the  Marketing  Authorisation  suspension  requires  amendments  to  the  terms  of  the Community Marketing Authorisation. The following annex has been amended: Annex II.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5 REFERENCES

CHMP Guideline on the Limits of Genotoxic Impurities (CPMP/SWP/5199/02, EMEA/CHMP/QWP/251344/2006); http://www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/swp/519902en.pdf

Ueo, H., R. Takaki, et al. (1979). \"High incidence of rat mammary carcinoma by oral administration of ethyl methanesulphonate.\" Cancer Lett 7(2-3): 79-84.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Ueo,  H.,  R.  Takaki,  et  al.  (1981).  \"Mammary  carcinoma  induced  by  oral  administration  of  ethyl methanesulphonate. Determination of some of the parameters affecting tumor induction.\" Carcinogenesis 2(12): 1223-8. Sega, G. A. (1984). \"A review of the genetic effects of ethyl methanesulfonate.\" Mutat Res 134(2-3): 113-42. Doak, S. H., G. J. S. Jenkins, et al. (2007). \"Mechanistic Influences for Mutation Induction Curves after Exposure to DNA-Reactive Carcinogens.\" Cancer Res 67(8): 3904-3911.