---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 20:18:20
document_pages: 22
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/viraferonpeg-h-c-329-ii-0086-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: viraferonpeg-h-c-329-ii-0086-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 14.9465641
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-25 00:36:50.450281
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

ASSESSMENT REPORT

FOR

ViraferonPeg

International non-proprietary name/Common name:

peginterferon alfa-2b

Procedure No: EMEA/H/C/329/II/86

Variation Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted. Medicinal product no longer authorise

7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK Tel. (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68 E-mail: mail@emea.europa.eu. http://www.emea.europa.eu

London, 20 January 2010

EMA/6059/2010

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

AE adverse event ALT alanine transaminase BMI body mass index BSA Body Surface Area CHC chronic hepatitis C CHMP Committee for Human Medicinal Products EOT End of Therapy FDA Food and Drug Administration HCC Hepatocellular carcinoma HCV hepatitis C virus IFN interferon NIH National Institutes of Health NNT number needed to treat NPV negative predictive value PPV positive predictive value PEG2b peginterferon alfa-2b (PegIntron/ViraferonPeg) RBV ribavirin RNA ribonucleic acid SAE Serious Adverse event sc subcutaneous SAG Scientific Advice Group SVR Sustained Virological response TSH Thyroid Stimulating Hormone ULN Upper limit normal Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## I.1 Introduction

PegIntron/Viraferonpeg is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with chronic hepatitis C who have elevated transaminases without liver decompensation and who are positive for serum Hepatitis C Virus ribonucleic  acid  (HCV-RNA)  or  anti-HCV,  including  naïve  patients  with  clinically  stable  HIV  coinfection in combination with ribavirin. This combination is indicated in naïve patients including patients with clinically stable HIV coinfection and in patients who have failed previous treatment with interferon alpha (pegylated or nonpegylated) and ribavirin combination therapy or interferon alpha monotherapy. The MAH applies to extend the therapeutic indication of pegylated interferon alfa-2b in combination with Rebetol capsules or oral solution (ribavirin) to the paediatric patients with chronic hepatitis C. A  Type  II  variation  application  has  been  submitted  in  parallel  for  both  PegIntron/ViraferonPeg  and Rebetol. To  support  this  variation  the  MAH  submitted  one  pivotal  study  (P02538)  evaluating  the  safety  and efficacy of peginterferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin in the treatment of Chronic Hepatitis C (CHC). There is a planned 5 year long- term follow-up portion of the study. I.2 Scientific overview and Discussion Hepatitis C is a milder disease in children than in adults with a less frequent and a slower progression. Severe hepatitis and cirrhosis are very infrequent complications (2-4%) in childhood up to 20 years post infection  in  the  absence  of  associated  conditions  (polytransfusion  infection,  chemotherapy,  HIV  or Hepatitis  B  Virus  (HBV)  co-infection)  [1,6].  Chronic  infection  is  asymptomatic  in  most  cases,  with minimal  histological  lesions  in  80%  cases,  as  assessed  when  analysing  results  of  biopsies  from  300 children aged 6-10 yrs with a chronic hepatitis C since 3-7 yrs. Significant fibrosis was present in 15% cases, cirrhosis in &lt; 4% [2.3.4.5]. Fibrosis progression, histological score, alanine transaminase (ALT) levels and viral load were lower in children when compared to adults over a 10 years period [6] Hepatocellular carcinoma as the result of CHC is extremely rare in childhood, and only a few cases have been reported. Even though important inter-individual variations exist, and severe evolution may be observed in childhood, some data demonstrate an overall mild pathology in children, with a low rate of complications in the adult age in the absence of alcohol consumption and of another hepatic disease. With regards to treatment, for adults the goal of therapy is to avoid progression towards the life threatening conditions that are cirrhosis and Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC). In adults, the standard of care is treatment of patients at risk of progression or of 'easy-to-treat' patients (genotypes 2/3 without co-factors), with the combination  of  ribavirin  and  pegylated  interferon.  In  the  difficult-to-treat  G1  patients,  the  efficacy  of pegylated  INF  plus  ribavirin  provided  an  approximately  10%  increase  in  the  rate  of  sustained  responders when compared to the combination with standard interferon. Regarding  treatment  in  children,  due  to  the  relatively  slow  progression  of  the  disease,  the  potential  for spontaneous  clearance  of  the  infection  (in  approximately  20%  of  cases  and  up  to  45%)  and  the  typically asymptomatic  or  mild  nature  of  the  disease,  it  is  mostly  considered  that  treatment  could  be  deferred  to adulthood or  initiated  only  in  the  presence  of  progressing  disease.  The  National  Institute  of  Health  (NIH) consensus conference for the management of hepatitis C confirmed the most frequent 'wait and see' strategy towards management of CHC in children. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There  is  to  date  no  clear  international  consensus  for  the  treatment  of  children  and  treatment  seems restricted to children  with rapidly progressive disease (most often polytransfused, receiving chemotherapy or HIV/HBV co-infected), and treatment strategy is assessed on a case by case basis.

In  January  2005,  interferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin  were  granted  an  extension  of  indication  for  use  in children from 3 years with chronic hepatitis C. The clinical development consisted of 4 open studies with only 1 phase III study (P00321) in 70 paediatric subjects aged 3 through 16 years. During the assessment of  the  dossier  several  safety  concerns  were  identified,  in  particular  growth  retardation  and  psychiatric disorders since a higher rate of suicidal attempt/ideation compared to adult patients was reported. Of note, the impact of growth was principally marked by a decrease in linear growth and weight gain. These data were  later  substantiated  by  data  from  97  children  enrolled  in  the  long-term  pediatric  study  P01906 showing that twenty (21 %) of 97 children had a &gt; 15 percentile decrease in height percentile, of whom 10 of the 20 children had a &gt; 30 percentile decrease in their height percentile from the start of treatment to the end of long-term follow-up (up to 5 years) raising a concern towards potential non reversibility of the growth inhibition. Although pegylated interferon is considered to have a clear therapeutic advantage over standard interferon in terms of efficacy (like for adults) the safety signal of non reversible growth inhibition identified with standard interferon raise the same safety concern on the use of the pegylated bitherapy in childhood. Taking  into  account  the  safety  concerns  of  bitherapy  in  children  the  CHMP  agreed  that  the  Scientific Advisory  Group  should  be  requested  to  consider  when  treatment  of  Hepatitis  C  should  be  initiated  in childhood, the safety profile of bitherapy in children and the place of bitherapy with standard interferon as compared to bitherapy with pegylated interferon. The list of Questions to the SAG was adopted in March 2009. The SAG meeting was held in May 2009. Overall the SAG experts were not reassured that there is no irreversible growth retardation associated with the bitherapy. Regarding  treatment  initiation  in  children,  the  SAG  concluded  that  early  fibrosis  is  a  criterion  for treatment initiation. Due to the high response rates of around 90% in patients with genotypes 2 and 3, as well as considering the potentially shorter treatment duration of 6 months, initiation of treatment in this population could also be considered. However, there was a mixed view amongst SAG experts whether in this case it might be more appropriate to defer treatment given the safety issues as well as the fact that treatment  in  (early)  adulthood  would  also  lead  to  similar  response  rates.  For  genotypes  1  and  4  the potential risks together with the lower response rates and the longer treatment period required made the SAG experts only recommended closer monitoring, i.e. every 3-5 years. The recommendation was that treatment initiation should only occur in case of early fibrosis. The  SAG  experts  agreed  that  treatment  can  be  initiated  after  the  pubertal  growth  spurt  as  the  risk  of growth retardation is no longer of clinical relevance. This recommendation can be given irrespective of genotype and the presence of early fibrosis as the treatment responses in children with genotypes 1 and 4 are superior to those in adults. The pubertal period should be avoided for treatment. Whether there is an option for treatment prior to pubertal period cannot be concluded due to the lack of sufficient data in final growth outcomes in younger children. The  SAG  experts  agreed  that  adequate  warnings  in  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  (SPC)/ Package Leaflet (PL) are an important element to highlight that the risk of irreversible growth inhibition cannot be excluded; the proposed wording was not discussed further. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

However, the SAG experts felt strongly that it needs to be ensured that information about the safety risk 'growth retardation' is provided to parents and - as appropriate - to the concerned child upfront in the consenting process prior to treatment initiation. It is acknowledged that parents have a particular role in the  treatment  decision  in  this  case,  and  might  request  treatment  if  deferral  is  recommended,  hence  full information is a pre-requisite.

I.4.1

Regarding  the  place  of  bitherapy  with  standard  interferon  as  compared  to  bitherapy  with  pegylated interferon there is higher response rates, shorter treatment duration for genotype 2 and 3 and once weekly dosing regimen versus 3 times a week for standard interferon. As such, the SAG experts felt confident that pegylated interferon would replace standard interferon in medical practice provided a license for the use of pegylated interferon in children was granted. I.3 Non clinical aspects No non clinical pharmacology, pharmacokinetics and toxicology studies have been submitted by the MAH in  support  of  this  extension  of  indication.  However  ribavirin  juvenile  toxicology  studies  have  been performed post approval of the paediatric indication of interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin. In order to better appreciate the potential impact of the ribavirin safety profile in children, and in particular the potential impact of ribavirin to affect growth, the MAH committed to conduct a dose range-finding study to define a  maximum  tolerated  dose  for  ribavirin  in  rat  pups  and  a  juvenile  toxicity  study  to  assess  effects  on growth, skeletal formation, and reproductive development and function. Assessment of these studies led to the update of the Rebetol SPC to draw the attention of prescribers to these non animal data in line with the concern raised in clinic. (Commission Decision 04/01/2007). As  for  standard  interferon,  no  juvenile  study  has  been  conducted  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  due  to feasibility issue (antibodies development in chronic treatment Environmental risk assessment No data were submitted by the MAH as regards the environmental risk assessment. As the PEC surface water  for  the  active  ingredient  peginterferon  alfa-2b  is  clearly  below  the  action  limit  of  0.01  µg/l  no further action is required and the environmental risk assessment can be stopped in Phase I. The MAH has not performed an octanol-water partition coefficient study with peginterferon alfa-2b and requested a waiver to perform this test given the nature of peginterferon alfa-2b, which is a polyethylene glycol-modified derivative of IntronA (human recombinant interferon alfa-2b). Proteins are polar, watersoluble compounds. Even if the log Kow has not been calculated, it can be assumed that it is below the trigger value of 4.5. I.4 Clinical aspects In support of this extension of indication of the combination peginterferon alfa-2b/Ribavirin to children and  adolescents  3  years  of  age  and  older,  the  MAH  submitted  study  P02538  (n=107).  The  primary objectives of this study  was  to  assess the efficacy, safety, tolerability  and  pharmacokinetics  of peginterferon alfa-2b 60µg/m 2 once weekly plus ribavirin 15 mg/kg/day in paediatric subjects with CHC. Pharmacokinetic The secondary objective of study P02538 was to measure the multiple-dose pharmacokinetics of PEG2b and ribavirin in paediatric subjects with CHC in order to develop population pharmacokinetic models to describe PEG2b and ribavirin disposition in HCV-infected paediatric subjects and to evaluate the effect of covariates on PEG2b and ribavirin pharmacokinetics. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Twenty one subjects were enrolled in the pharmacokinetic group (PK subjects) and had intensive blood sample  collections  at  Weeks  1,  4,  and  8.  The  other  86  subjects  (Profile  Pharmacokinetic  Group,  PPK subjects) had sparse blood sample collections at treatment weeks (TW) 4, 6, 12, 24, 30, and 48 for profile pharmacokinetics.

A nonlinear mixed effect modelling approach was used to analyse the ribavirin and PegIntron data. The primary  objective  of  the  PPK  analysis  was  to  estimate  exposure  of  peginterferon  in  the  paediatric population  receiving  60µg/m 2 /week.  On  the  basis  of  the  model,  it  was  shown  that  exposure  to peginterferon in children was 58% higher than observed in adults dosed with 1.5 µg/kg/week. However no particular  signal  was  raised  towards  a  worsening  of  the  haematologic  or  psychiatric  adverse  events  as compared  to  adults  in  relation  to  this  over-exposure.  Furthermore,  the  proposed  1.5µg/kg  dose  was considered acceptable as it allows an enhancement of the response rate as compared to standard IFN. I.4.2 Clinical pharmacology The dose of Rebetol and PegIntron selected for study P02538 are PegIntron 60 µg/m 2 once weekly (QW) plus Rebetol 15 mg/kg/day (in two divided doses). The dose of PegIntron to be used for this clinical study, 60 µg/m 2 QW, is approximately equivalent to the dose  licensed  for  adults  in  the  US  and  the  EU  based  on  calculated  conversion  to  body  surface  area (1.5µg/kg/week). A Body Surface Area (BSA)-based dosing of pegylated interferon was chosen by the MAH since judged appropriate to adjust the dose in paediatric patients on the basis of a similar  mean BSA-normalised  apparent  clearance  across  the  different  paediatric  age  groups.  No  comparison  with clearance from adults was nevertheless provided. A  dose  ranging  pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic ( PK/PD)  study  (P00018  cohort  1)  identified  the 15mg/kg dose as the optimal dosage of ribavirin in children. This dose was further evaluated in clinical phase II (P000018 cohort 2) and III (P00321) in combination with IntronA. I.4.3 Clinical efficacy The  clinical  study,  P02538,  is  provided  as  a  pivotal  study  to  support  the  efficacy  and  safety  of combination therapy pegylated interferon alfa-2b plus RBV in patients 3 years of age and older. The study is presented hereafter: Title Part  1:  Assessment  of  the  Safety,  Efficacy,  Tolerability,  and  Pharmacokinetics  of  peginterferon  alfa-2b Plus Ribavirin in Pediatric Patients With Chronic Hepatitis C Study design Phase 3/1B, open-label, global, multicenter study in paediatric patients who were all treated with PEG2b plus ribavirin for up to 48 weeks and followed for an additional 24 weeks post-treatment. Subjects with Genotype 1, 4, 5, 6, or high-viral-load ( ≥ 600,000 IU/mL) Genotype 3 whose Treatment Week (TW) 12 HCV-RNA  levels  were  above  the  lower  limit  of  quantitation  (LLQ)  and  had  dropped  &lt;2  log10  as compared to baseline values were to discontinue treatment at TW 18 and proceed to follow-up, unless the principal investigator discussed and obtained approval from the sponsor's project physician prior to the continuation of therapy beyond TW 18. Subjects who had TW 12 HCV-RNA levels that were below LLQ were to continue therapy to 48 weeks. Subjects whose TW 12 HCV-RNA levels were above LLQ and had dropped ≥ 2 log10 as compared to baseline values were to continue therapy and be reassessed at TW 24. If the TW 24 HCV RNA levels remained above LLQ, these subjects were to discontinue therapy at TW 30 and  proceed  to  follow-up.  Subjects  with  HCV  Genotype  2  or  low-viral-load  (&lt;600,000  IU/mL)  and Genotype 3 were to receive 24 weeks of treatment plus 24 weeks of follow-up. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Subjects who were treated with at least one dose of PEG2b and ribavirin and who completed the 24-week post-treatment  follow-up  were  eligible  for  enrollment  in  the  5-year  long-term  follow-up  portion  of  the study.

Objectives The primary objective of this study was to assess the safety, efficacy, and tolerability of the combination of  PEG2b 60 μ g/m 2 QW plus ribavirin  15  mg/kg/day  in  paediatric  subjects  with  CHC.  The  secondary objective  was  to  measure  the  multiple-dose  pharmacokinetics  of  PEG2b  and  ribavirin  in  paediatric subjects with CHC. There is a planned 5 year long- term follow-up portion of the study. Study Participants Planned enrolment was for 100 paediatric subjects with CHC. 107 subjects, including 67 aged 3-11 years and 40 aged 12- 17 years were enrolled and treated. Eligible  subjects  were  male  and  female  children  and  adolescents,  3  through  17  years  of  age,  weighing ≤ 90  kg,  who  had  a  diagnosis  of  CHC  documented  by  a  positive  anti-HCV  or  HCV-RNA  for  at  least 6 months prior to screening, with a liver biopsy (historical or pretreatment) showing evidence of fibrosis and/or  inflammatory  activity.  A  liver  biopsy  waiver  was  possible  for  children  3-11  years  old  with  an elevated ALT within 1 year prior to the Screening 1 visit. Patients were excluded from entry if having serum ALT level &gt;10 times ULN, evidence of decompensated liver disease, known coinfection with either HIV or HBV, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus or poorly controlled  noninsulin  dependent  diabetes  mellitus,  pre-existing  psychiatric  condition,  including  but  not limited to moderate to severe depression, or a history of severe psychiatric disorder, such as psychosis, suicidal ideation and/or suicidal attempt. Treatments PEG2b; 60 μ g/m2 QW; Administered by SC injection Ribavirin; 15 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for up to 48 weeks (the maximum dose of ribavirin was not to exceed 1200 mg/day); Administered PO with food. Efficacy Analyses The primary efficacy  variable  is  the  proportion  of  subjects  with  sustained  virologic  response  (SVR)  at 24 weeks following the end of treatment. For the primary efficacy analysis, any subject with undetectable HCV  RNA  level  at  the  Follow-Up  Week  24  visit  was  considered  a  sustained  virologic  responder. Additional, \"carry-forward\", efficacy analyses were conducted in subjects with undetectable HCV RNA level at the Follow-Up Week 12 visit and missing data for Follow-Up Week 24 were also considered to be sustained  responders  and  were  summarised  by  age  group.  The  proportion  of  sustained  virologic responders was estimated using the normal approximation to the binomial. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals  of  the  proportion  of  sustained  virologic  responders  were  computed  for  each  of  the  two  age groups (3-11 years old and 12-17 years old). Plasma HCV-RNA assay The MAH informed the CHMP in February 2007 that in some instances the HCV-RNA assays conducted in the company's laboratories (in-house Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) assay) to quantitatively assess HCV-RNA from  subjects  samples  in  this  clinical  trial  had  underreported  the  levels  of  HCV-RNA  as evidence by the underrecovery of the positive control. A substantial proportion of samples were impacted in  study  P02538  (23%).  A  corrective  action  plan  was  developed  by  the  MAH  that  included  the development  of  new  and  revised  procedures  with  additional  assay  and  laboratory  controls  to  ensure confidence in the robustness of the assay and retesting of the impacted samples. All but 11 samples in study P02538 were retested. Among the 11 subjects with insufficient plasma available to be retested, it is noteworthy that under-reporting  of  HCV  RNA due  to assay problem led to inadequate  management in Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

3 patients (early stopping rule was mistakenly not applied). SVR was however achieved in one of these patients. The data presented in this report constitutes the retested sample data.

## Results

Pre-therapy  biopsies  (performed  at  an  unspecified  time)  were  available  for  99%  of  subjects.  Twelve percent  of  patients  had  no  fibrosis  and  the  large  majority  of  patients  (82%)  had  minimal  fibrosis  (F1). Furthermore, most of the subjects had mild (44%) or moderate (30%) liver inflammation with only 18% having severe inflammatory activity. No patients had cirrhosis in this study. Biopsy results were similar

Patient disposition One hundred seven subjects were enrolled. Patient disposition was as follows and presented in table 1 below : All patients in the 24-weeks treatment arm (n=27) completed the treatment phase. On the contrary, only 64%  (51/80)  of  patients  in  the  48-week  treatment  arm  (equally  shared  between  the  2  age  groups) completed  treatment  phase  due  to  a  high  rate  of  treatment  failure.  Indeed,  contrarily  to  the  24-week treatment group, stopping rule (at TW 12 and TW24) were applied for subjects assigned to the 48-week treatment group (i.e. for G 1, 4, 5, or 6 or high-viral-load G3) Baseline characteristics Paediatric  patients  included  in  this  study  had  similar  demographic  characteristics  to  children  that  were included in the paediatric study using IntronA and RBV (P00321) although study P02538 included more Caucasians (89% vs 80%) and patients were a little younger in this study (median age: 9 vs 10.5). Subjects weighting less than 47kg were to receive RBV oral solution. As a consequence, 94% (63/67) of younger children (3-11 years old) received oral solution and 78% (31/40) of adolescents (12-17 years old) received RBV capsule.  63%  of  paediatric  patients  included  in  this  study  were  aged  3-11  years,  of  which  most (67%) were aged from 6-&lt;12 years. Similarly, in the previous paediatric study with IntronA plus RBV 67% of children were aged from 3-12, most of then being aged from 7-12 (64%). In  line  with  epidemiological  data,  vertical  transmission  was  the  primary  mode  of  contamination  in  the study  patients  (70%).  Median  year  since  exposure  was  8  years.  In  this  study,  67%  of  patients  were infected with genotype G1 (74% of patients had G1 in P00321). In study P02538, the more difficult to treat patients, i.e. G1 patients with high viral load, account for 29% of the study population. G2/3 account for 28% of patients (of which 1/3 having high viral load G3).As a consequence of the problem of HCVRNA under-reporting, 7 patients with G3 and high viral load (HVL) were mistakenly assigned to receive 24 weeks of treatment instead of 48 weeks. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

between both age groups. Median ALT was 0.87 ULN in this study and 59% of patients had normal ALT level at baseline. Overall, a large proportion of patients treated with peginterferon alfa-2b plus RBV in this study had only minimal hepatic disease. This is in line with the previous paediatric study with IntronA plus RBV.



Efficacy results The primary  analysis  was  to  include  all  subjects  who  were  assigned  a  subject  number. The secondary analysis was to include all subjects who received at least one dose of study medication. Since all subjects who  were  assigned  a  subject  number  received  at  least  one  dose  of  study  medication,  the  secondary efficacy analysis (All Treated population) is identical to the Intent-to-Treat population. Primary endpoints: SVR rates Overall, 64.5% (69/107) of the subjects achieved SVR. When carry-forward analysis was used, the SVR rates were similar (65.4% [70/107]), since only one additional subject with Genotype 1 (who had a rapid virologic  response  and  remained  negative  from  TW  4  to  FW  12)  was  considered  a  sustained  'carry forward' responder. Table 2 Carry-forward Sustained Virologic Response Rates by Genotype, Age Group, and Assigned Treatment Duration b: SVR rate at Follow-up Week 24, n = 14/26 (53.8%). c: SVR rate at Follow-up Week 24, n = 13/25 (52.0%). d: SVR rate at Follow-up Week 24, n = 43/80 (53.8%). e: SVR rate at Follow-up Week 24, n = 37/72 (51.4%). SVR rate were 72.5% in subjects aged 12 to 17 years and 61.2% in subjects ages 3 to 11 years.  However, when response rate is analyzed by genotype, no significant difference between both age groups is noticed. These results highlight the fact that the genotype but not the age drives the response to bitherapy. In G1 patients, SVR rate was 52.8% after 48-w treatment, which is substantially higher than the response rate previously reported in G1 paediatric patients that received 48 weeks of IntronA plus RBV therapy in the pivotal study P00321 (36%). Although less striking, combination therapy with pegylated interferon plus RBV enhances response rate when compared to combination therapy with standard interferon (93.3% vs 82%). Relapse rates Subjects who had undetectable HCV-RNA at the last treatment visit and detectable HCV-RNA at the last follow-up visit were considered relapsers. Among the 75 subjects who had undetectable HCV RNA at the end of study treatment, 5 relapsed (all had detectable HCV RNA at FU Week 4). Therefore, the overall relapse rate in the study was 6.7%. All 5 relapsers were female patients with G1. All had fibrosis grade F1. Of note, 4 /5 had &gt;80% adherence to ribavirin, PegIntron and treatment duration. Due to the small number of relapsers, relationship between relapse rate and baseline characteristics are difficult to assess. However, no relationship was apparent between relapse rate and baseline viral load, age or weight/Body Mass Index (BMI)/ Body Surface Area (BSA). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

| no   |
|------|

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## SVR by Baseline Demographics and Disease Characteristics

Sustained virologic response by baseline demographic data and disease characteristics is presented in the table 3 below:

<!-- image -->

|           | authorise   | authorise   |
|-----------|-------------|-------------|
| no longer |             |             |

The SVR rate in subjects with HCV Genotype 1 was much higher in subjects with a baseline low viral load (&lt;600,000 IU/ml) (71.8%) than in subjects with a baseline high viral load ( ≥ 600,000 IU/ml) (29%). Similarly,  an  additional  analysis  showed  that  the  SVR  rate  in  G1  subjects  with  baseline  viral  load &lt;400,000 IU/ml was notably higher than in subjects with baseline HCV-RNA ≥ 400,000 IU/ml (82.8% [24/29] vs 32.6% [14/43] including 2 subjects with missing baseline results). Furthermore, subjects with HCV Genotype 1 who took ribavirin capsules had a higher SVR rate compared with those who took oral solution (68.2% [15/22] vs. 46.0% [23/50], respectively). In  addition,  predictors  of  SVR  were  assessed  using  logistic  regression  analysis  in  logistic  regression models. HCV genotype, viral load and ribavirin form remain predictor of the response rate in multivariate analysis as shown in table 4 below: Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| authorise   |
|-------------|

ALT response

Effect of adherence on SVR

Positive and Negative Predictive Values for SVR Similarly to adults, TW12 and TW4 response were highly predictive of treatment response in G1 patient. In these difficult to treat patients, a SVR rate as high as 88.9% was reported in G1 paediatric patients who exhibited undetectable HCV RNA at TW4. However, only 9/72 G1 patients achieved this early endpoint. A larger  proportion  of  G1  patients  achieved  TW12  undetectability  (60%).  In  this  subgroup,  SVR  was 83.7%. For Genotypes 2, 3, and 4, the majority of subjects (29/35) attained EVR and SVR. In this group, the response rate was also high (2/2) in subjects who became negative later in the study. Due to protocol-defined stopping rules, subject with &lt; 2 log drop at TW12 as compared to baseline were to  discontinue  treatment  at  TW18.  Therefore,  the  negative  predictive  value  of  TW12  response  is  not available for pegylated interferon plus RBV combination therapy in children. By extrapolation from the NVP  of  TW12  response  observed  with  standard  interferon  plus  RBV  in  children,  it  is  proposed  to recommend treatment discontinuation in G1 (and G4) patients if their TW12 HCV RNA dropped &lt;2log10 compared to pre-treatment value or if they have detectable HCV RNA at TW24. Overall, normalisation of ALT occurred in 77.3% (34/44) of subjects who had elevated ALT at baseline. The ALT normalisation was mostly associated with SVR (79.4% [27/34]). Seven subjects demonstrated ALT normalization without having attained SVR. Subjects were considered adherent to the assigned treatment regimen if they received at least 80% of both PEG2b  and  ribavirin  doses  (according  to  the  assigned  dosing  regimen)  for  at  least  80%  of  treatment duration. If the subject's dose was reduced by the investigator according to protocol-specified criteria and Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the subject dosed according to the instructions given by the investigator, then the subject was considered compliant with his/her drug therapy but non-adherent to the therapy.

Per the predefined criterion, 71% (76/107) of subjects were considered at least 80% adherent to initiallyassigned doses and duration. Many subjects were considered nonadherent due to the protocol-specified early discontinuation requirement for poor virologic response (treatment failure).

Due to protocol-defined stopping rules, subject with &lt; 2 log drop at TW12 as compared to baseline were to  discontinue  treatment  at  TW18.  Therefore,  the  negative  predictive  value  of  TW12  response  is  not available for pegylated interferon plus RBV therapy.  However, by extrapolation from the NVP of TW12 response observed with standard interferon plus RBV in paediatric patients, it is proposed to recommend

Treatment adherence was similar in both age groups. To further  assess  the  effect  of  adherence  on  the  SVR  rate  in  this  study,  26  subjects  who  discontinued treatment  early  (had  &lt;80%  of  planned  duration  of  therapy),  were  excluded  from  the  analysis.  The remaining 81 subjects were at least 80% adherent to treatment duration. The dosing adherence of these subjects was very high; thus a comparison based on dose adherence is not meaningful because of the high proportion of subjects who received at least 80% of PEG2b and ribavirin doses (93.8%; 76/81). Of  note  the  4  patients  who  had  &lt;  80%  adherence  for  Peginterferon  and/or  ribavirin  dose  nevertheless achieved SVR in this study. Adherence was similar for ribavirin in both age groups, suggesting patients were similarly adherent to ribavirin oral solution and capsule. Discussion on the Clinical Efficacy Overall, the efficacy results from study P02538 show that, similarly to adults, use of combination therapy with  pegylated  interferon  compared  to  combination  therapy  with  standard  interferon  results  in  an enhanced response rate.  An approximate 17% gain is obtained in children infected with G1 (achieving a 53% SVR) and approx 14% for children infected with G2/3 (achieving a 93% SVR). This gain appears more marked as compared to adults (respectively of approx 9% and 3%).  Furthermore, the levels of SVR achieved with PegIFN plus ribavirin is higher in children as compared to adults (G1: around 50% vs 40%; G2/3: around 90% vs 80%).  No difference in treatment response rate was observed between both age groups (3-11 and 12-17 years of age). Similarly  to  adults,  high  baseline  viral  load  in  G1  patients  was  associated  with  a  poor  response  to treatment. Forty- eight week treatment with pegylated interferon plus RBV in G1 patients having low viral load defined as HCV RNA &lt; 400 000 IU/ml allows to achieve  response rate as high as 82.8%, which is close  to  the  response  rate  obtained  in  G2/3  patients.  Of  note,  baseline  viral  load  does  not  influence response rate in genotype 2 and 3 patients. In adult studies, it was shown that 41% of G1 patient with baseline low viral load (&lt;600 000 IU/ml) may achieve RVR, allowing for a SVR rate of 92% with an as short as 24 weeks treatment duration. The MAH did  not  explore  different  treatment  durations  for  paediatric  Genotype  1  patients  in  study  P02538. However, the MAH considered that extrapolation from adult data is acceptable given that children have been  shown  to  have  a  better  response  to  bitherapy.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  practice  the  reduction  of treatment duration might have to be discussed only in a marginal subgroup of paediatric patients given that, as illustrated in study P02538, only 15% of G1 children with LVL achieved RVR. In order to better appreciate to whether reduction of treatment duration might be proposed, the CHMP requested that any differences in the proportion of G1 patients achieving 4 weeks RVR between adults and paediatric patients be discussed as this might represent a difference in the kinetics of viral load decrease/clearance making the  4  weeks  RVR  less  predictable  in  children  than  in  adults.  The  MAH  has  committed  to  provide  a response to this issue as a follow up commitment. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treatment discontinuation in G1 (and G4) patients if their TW12 HCV RNA dropped &lt;2log10 compared to pre-treatment value or if they have detectable HCV RNA at TW24.

Lower response rates were consistently reported in patients treated with oral solution in each genotype group with a marked difference in G1 patients: 68.2% of G1 patients that received RBV capsule had SVR versus  46%  of  G1  patients  that  received  RBV  oral  solution.  Furthermore  the  pharmaceutical  form  of ribavirin  was  found  to  be  predictive  of  treatment  response  in  univariate  and  multivariate  logistic regression analysis. The CHMP requested the MAH to provide reassurance as regards the comparability of exposure between children  dosed  with  the  ribavirin  capsule  and  the  oral  solution.  The  MAH  provided  a  limited  PK assessment with data available from 5 children dosed with the capsule and 11 children dosed with the oral solution. No significant difference in exposure was found between both formulations. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that SVR rates in children dosed with the oral solution was consistently lower than SVR rates in  the  capsule  group.  The  MAH  considered  this  is  due  to  an  artefact  of  the  small  sample  size.  The difference in SVR seems striking in G1 children with HVL (SVR capsule: 56% vs SVR solution: 18%). According to the MAH this difference is driven by the unexplained poor response rate observed in the HVL youngest children (3-5 years) where only 1 out of 8 patients achieved SVR. If not explained by a difference in the PK parameters in relation to the formulation, the lower response rate levels observed in young  children  as  compared  to  adolescents  in  this  study  might  be  explained  by  a  difference  in  the likelihood  of  response  between  both  patient  populations,  related  or  non  related  to  the  disease,  such  as difference in tolerance, or in compliance (driven by the acceptability of the oral solution).However based on  the  available  data  the  CHMP  concluded  that    it  is  unlikely  that  tolerability/acceptability  issue  has driven the virological failure in children treated with the oral solution. In order to better address this issue the MAH has committed to perform a bioequivalence study of the oral solution in relation to the capsules. An initial proposal has been made that raised some comments from the CHMP. The MAH will revise the protocol in the frame of a follow up measure and specify the timelines for study initiation and completion . I.4.4 Clinical Safety Patient exposure All  safety  assessments  were  based  on  data  from  all  107  enrolled  subjects.  All  27  subjects  who  were assigned to 24 weeks of treatment (HCV Genotype 2 and low viral load HCV Genotype 3) completed the treatment with a mean treatment duration of 169 days. Sixty-four percent (51/80) of subjects who were assigned to 48 weeks of treatment (HCV Genotype 1, 4, and high viral load HCV Genotype 3) completed the  treatment,  and  29  subjects  discontinued  the  treatment  mostly  due  to  poor  response  to  the  treatment (90%,  26/29),  according  to  discontinuation  stopping  rules  defined  in  the  study  protocol,  with  a  mean treatment duration of 273 days. Only one subject discontinued due to an adverse event (AE). The overall mean treatment duration was 247 (SD: 92) days in this study. Overall safety profile The overall safety profile of the PEG2b plus ribavirin observed in this paediatric study is consistent with that observed in previous adult clinical studies and also in the paediatric population treated with interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin. No new safety issues were identified in this study. All patients experienced AEs in this study. However, very few patients presented serious AEs and only 1 discontinued the study from AEs. Furthermore,  a  slightly  lower  rate  of  dose  modification  due  to  AE  was  reported  in  this  study  when compared to previous paediatric studies with interferon alfa-2b plus RBV. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5 Summary of safety

| Subjects Aged 3 -11 yr (n=67)   | Subjects Aged 12 -17 yr (0t=u)   | All Subjects (n=107)   | All Subjects (n=107)   |
|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|

Common treatment-emergent AEs The frequency and pattern of treatment-emergent adverse events are overall consistent with what has been reported  in  adults  treated  with  peginterferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin.  As  previously  noted  in  paediatric studies with interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin, injection site disorders, pyrexia, anorexia, abdominal pain and  vomiting  were  reported  more  frequently  in  children  compared  to  adult  patients.  Furthermore, nervousness was also more frequently reported (8%) in this study. The safety profile of peginterferon plus ribavirin combination in children is also similar to that reported with interferon alfa-2b plus RBV combination in this population, with the exception of a lower rate of psychiatric adverse events reported in pegylated interferon plus RBV treated children. It  is  noteworthy that vomiting was reported in 48% of children aged 3-11 years but in 24% of children aged  12-17  years.  Notably,  a  large  majority  of  cases  were  reported  in  the  first  12  weeks  of  treatment. However, surprisingly, no difference in compliance between both ribavirin formulations was reported in this study. Treatment-related AEs The  most  prevalent  treatment-related  AEs  in  all  subjects  were  pyrexia  (80%),  headache  (62%), neutropenia (33%), fatigue (30%), anorexia (29%), injection-site erythema (29%) and vomiting (27%): Severe adverse events (SAEs) The majority of treatment-related AEs reported in this study were mild or moderate in severity. Severe AEs were reported in 8% (9/107) of all subjects: 10% (7/67) of subjects aged 3 to 11 years and 5% (2/40) of subjects aged 12 to 17 years, as shown in table 10. Table 6 - Severe adverse events Serious adverse events Serious AEs were reported in 3 subjects in the 12 to 17 years of age group; these events were considered by the investigator to be unlikely related to study drugs. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discontinuation of Study and Dose Modification Due to Adverse Events

Adverse event leading to discontinuation: thrombocytopenia led to discontinuation of study medication in one  subject  in  the  group  12  to  17  years  of  age  (platelet  count  =  45  x  109/l)  at  Week  42,  considered resolved on Day 298). This subject attained SVR.

Adverse event leading to dose modification: reductions in the dose of one or both study medications were permitted if necessary for the management of AEs. While at the first reduced dose level, the subject was to return for assessment at a minimum of every 2 weeks until the AE resolved or the subject was stable. If further dose reduction was required, the second level of dose reduction was to be utilized. Reduced doses of PEG2b and ribavirin are summarised in table 7 below: Table 7 Reduced dose of PEG2b and ribavirin A total of 27 (25%) subjects modified their dose. The AEs that most commonly led to dose modifications included  anaemia  (7%,  7/107)  neutropenia  (12%,  13/107),  and  weight  loss  (10%,  11/107).  Dose modifications were more common in 12- to 17-year-old subjects (35%, 14/40) than in 3- to 11-year-old subjects (19%, 13/67). Neutropenia (neutrophil count &lt;0.75 x 109/l) was the most common AE that led to PEG2b dose modification. Anaemia (haemoglobin &lt;10 g/dl) and weight loss were the most common AEs that led to ribavirin dose modifications. Dose-modification  rate  in  this  study  was  close  to  that  observed  in  paediatric  interferon  alfa-2b  plus ribavirin studies, in which 31% (37/118) of subjects experienced dose modification and 6% (8/118) were discontinued  due  to  AE.  Fewer  paediatric  subjects  needed  dose  modifications  compared  with  adult subjects receiving similar treatment. 43.3%  (441/1019)  of  adult  patients  that  received  PegIntron 1.5µg/kg+RBV (1000-1200mg/d) in the IDEAL study had dose reductions and 12.7% (129/1019) were discontinued due to AE. Clinical laboratory findings Most of the changes in laboratory values with PEG2b plus ribavirin therapy were mild or moderate, as classified by modified WHO criteria. Grade 3 decreases in neutrophil count occurred in 13% (8/107) of subjects  and  Grade  4  decreases  in  neutrophil  count  occurred  in  3%  (3/107)  of  subjects.  Occurrence  of Grade 3/4 neutropenia did not correlate with occurrence of infectious disorders. Grade 3 thrombocytopenia was reported for one subject in the 12- to 17-year-old group, which resulted in the only discontinuation of study treatment due to an AE. Grade 2 anaemia occurred in 2% (2/107) of subjects, the remaining  cases  were  all  grade  1.  The  events  of  anaemia  were  managed  through  dose  reductions.  No subject  received  growth  factor  (eg,  erythropoietin)  or  required  blood  transfusion,  and  no  subject discontinued treatment because of anaemia. Haematologic AEs were more common in 12- to 17-year-old subjects than in 3- to 11-year-old subjects, possibly due to a better compensatory bone marrow function in 3- to 11-year-old subjects. Furthermore, Grade 3 ALT elevation was reported in 3% (3/107) of subjects. Laboratory abnormalities occurred with a similar frequency in children treated with pegylated interferon alfa-2b plus RBV when compared to children treated with standard interferon alfa-2b plus RBV. A better haematological tolerance seems to be observed in children, notably as regards the rate of anaemia (38% of grade 1 anaemia and 15% of grade 2 anaemia were reported in the IDEAL study). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Adverse events associated with endocrine function (including Thyroid related disorders)

There were no cases of diabetes. Treatment-emergent abnormalities in fasting glucose level were mild and transient in nature and included fasting glucose values slightly below or above normal reference range.

Height

Hypothyroidism was reported in three female subjects (3%, 3/107). Five subjects, all females, received levothyroxine treatment for hypothyroidism or elevated TSH. TSH  abnormalities  at  one  or  more  visits  during  the  treatment  period,  occurred  in  23%  (25/107)  of subjects: 28% (19/67) of subjects 3 to 11 years old and 15% (6/40) of subjects 12 to 17 years old. Most of these  abnormalities  (92%,  23/25)  were  TSH  elevations  above  normal  range;  16  subjects  had  only  mild TSH elevations (&lt;10 mU/L). Elevation of TSH occurred earlier in treatment in the younger children (3-11 years old) than in adolescents (12-17 years old): elevated TSH was reported for five (8%) subjects at TW 12 and nine (16%) subjects at TW 24, in contrast to the older group, in which only one (3%) subject had elevated TSH before TW 40. Female  subjects  were  more  likely  to  have  clinical  or  subclinical  hypothyroidism  on  PEG2b  treatment compared with male subjects. At least one elevated TSH value was reported in 32% (18/56) of female subjects and in 10% (5/52) of males subjects. Three  female  subjects  had  elevated  TSH  at  the  end  of  the  follow-up  period  (FW  24)  and  stayed  on levothyroxine.  Subjects are being followed for thyroid problems for an additional 5 years in the long-term follow-up study. Overall the incidence of thyroid disorders in this study were similar to that reported in previous paediatric studies  with  interferon  alfa-2b  plus  RBV  (hypothyroidism  was  reported  in  4%)  and  to  that  reported  in adults (hypothyroidism was reported in 5% of patients treated with PEG2B 1.5mg/kg/week plus RBV in the IDEAL study). Psychiatric Adverse events Twenty-eight  percent  (30/107)  of  subjects  had  at  least  one  adverse  event  that  is  categorized  under  the body system/organ class of 'psychiatric disorders.' Psychiatric disorders were less frequent in subjects aged 12 to 17 years (18%; 7/40) as compared to subjects aged 3 to 11 years (34%, 23/67). All AEs within the psychiatric disorder category were deemed mild or moderate in severity, and none met the criteria for an SAE. No subjects were discontinued or had dose modifications because of psychiatric AEs. No subject received antidepressants in this study. Body height and weight assessments Height and weight were measured at baseline and at the end of treatment and follow-up periods to assess the  effect  of  the  study  medications  on  growth.  Each  subject's  available  height  and  weight  data  were converted to an age- and sex specific percentile for the baseline, end of treatment, and end of follow-up time points. Percentile assignments were made using the 2000 standard growth charts developed by the Centres for Disease Control. The mean change in height percentile from baseline to the end of treatment was -10.85 for subjects 3 to 11 years old and -2.5 for subjects 12 to 17 years old. The mean change in height percentiles from the end of treatment to the end of follow-up was 2.03 for subjects 3 to 11 years old and -0.42 for subjects 12 to 17 years old . The mean last height percentile in the follow-up period (44.25) was slightly below the median. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>



Table 8 presents the distribution of patients who had a &gt; 15 percentile decrease in height percentile among the 107 patients enrolled. In study P02538, 20% (21/107) of patients had &gt;15 -&lt;30 percentile decreases in height between Baseline and End of 24 weeks follow-up, and 2% (2/107) had &gt; 30 percentile decreases in height: 21/107 (20%) had &gt;15 percentiles decreases in height from baseline to EOT of which 7 (6.5% of total population) had &gt;30 percentiles decreases.



Inhibited  growth  (&lt;3rd  percentile)  was  observed  in  70%  of  subjects  during  the  treatment  phase  of  the study. During the follow-up period, of those subjects who had clearly inhibited growth during treatment, 34.67% had faster than normal growth (&gt;97th percentile), 36% attained improved growth velocity (3rd to 97 th percentile), and 20% continued to have inhibited growth (remained &lt;3rd percentile after stopping the treatment).

Table 8 - Decrease in height percentiles by All subjects For this subpopulation, Table 8 shows height percentile change for baseline to end of treatment, end of treatment  to  end  of  24  week  follow-up,  and  baseline  to  end  of  24  week  follow-up.  Of  the  patients receiving the longer duration of therapy, 31% (17/55) had a height percentile decrease to between 15 and 30 percentiles. In the shorter duration group, 8% (4/52) had a height percentile decrease of between 15 and 30 percentiles. A greater than 30 percentile decrease in height percentile was reported in 0 subjects in the shorter treatment group and 4% (2/55) of the subjects in the longer treatment group. Weight The mean change in weight percentile from baseline to the end of treatment was -17.06 for subjects 3 to 11 years old and -12.8 for subjects 12 to 17 years old. The mean change in weight percentile from the end of treatment to the end of follow-up was 12.68 for subjects 3 to 11 years old and 11.63 for subjects 12 to 17 years old. These data suggest that there was a compensatory, catch-up weight gain for affected subjects after treatment ended. The mean last weight percentile for all subjects (53.39), including both age groups, was slightly above the median. Growth velocity Mean  growth  velocity  for  the  follow-up  period  (5.73  +/-4.10  cm/yr)  was  twice  that  for  the  treatment period (2.47 +/-2.22 cm/yr). The mean growth velocities in girls were slightly slower than those of boys in both study periods. Mean growth velocities for subjects &lt;11 years old were higher than those for subjects ≥ 11  years  old  during  both  study  periods.  Mean  growth  velocities  are  expected  to  be  lower  in  subjects whose growth had reached a plateau during the late teenage years. To assess the impact of treatment on growth, the growth velocities during study treatment and follow-up were compared to age- and sex-standardized norms  for  the  US  population;  growth  velocity  percentiles relative  to  these  norms  were  determined.  The  mean  growth  velocity percentile  for  the  treatment  period (9.43  +/18.64)  was  below  the  median  (50th  percentile),  but  that  for  the  24-week  follow-up  (58.35  +/41.12) was above the median, thus suggesting that some catch-up growth may have occurred after the end of treatment. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Interim data from Long term follow up study of pegylated interferon

Interim data from the ongoing long term (5y) follow-up of children treated with the pegylated biotherapy show that  22 % (16/74) of children had a &gt; 15 percentile decrease in height percentile, of whom 3 (4 %) children had a &gt; 30 percentile decrease despite being off treatment for more than 1 year. In particular, decrease in mean height percentile at year 1 of long term follow-up was most prominent in prepubertal age children.

Discussion on the Clinical Safety The overall safety profile of the PEG2b plus ribavirin observed in this paediatric study is consistent with that observed in previous adult clinical studies and also in the paediatric population treated with interferon alfa-2b plus ribavirin. With regards to psychiatric disorders, whereas a concern about a higher rate of suicidal ideation/attempt in children had been identified in previous paediatric studies with standard interferon alfa-2bplus RBV as compared  to  adults  (2.4%  vs  1%  in  adults),  no  patient  experienced  such  an  event  in  this  study. Furthermore,  51%  of  children/adolescent  treated  with  interferon  alfa-2b/RBV  in  previous  paediatric studies experienced psychiatric adverse events vs 28% in this study.  Notably, a lower rate of depression is reported  in  this  study  (2%  of  depression  plus  2%  of  depressed  mood,  half  of  which  being  judged treatment-related) when compared to previous paediatric studies with standard INF plus RBV (13%) or when compared to adults (26% depression reported in the IDEAL study). Of note, 3% of mood altered, 8% of nervousness and 3% of aggression were nevertheless reported in this study. Although this study demonstrated low incidence of  psychiatric  events,  based  on  PEG2b  treatment  experience  in  adults  and previous experience with interferon alfa-2b studies in a paediatric population, the risk of severe depression and associated life-threatening events (such as suicidal ideation and suicidal attempt) cannot be ruled out. All  pediatric  subjects  must  be  closely  monitored  for  psychiatric  events  throughout  therapy  and  during follow-up. In  line  with  the  signal  previously  identified  in  children  that  received  interferon  alfa-2  plus  RBV,  a significant impact of treatment on height and weight is again observed in this study. Whereas a compensatory catch up gain in weight seems to occur after treatment cessation, this is not the case as regards height. Mean decrease in height percentile from baseline to EOT was -7.73 (-10.85 for children aged 3-1, -2.5 for children aged 12-17) and mean change in height percentile from EOT to EOF was only +1.11 (+2.03 for children aged 3-11 and -0.42 for children aged 12-17), reflecting that reversal of the growth inhibition that occurred during treatment is largely incomplete at the end of the 24 week follow-up  period.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  children/adolescents  aged  12-17  continue  to  experience decrease  in  mean  height  percentile  after  treatment  discontinuation  further  questions  the  reversibility  of growth inhibition due to combination therapy in paediatric patients. Twenty one out of one hundred and seven (20%) had &gt;15 percentiles decreases in height from baseline to EOT of which 7 (6.5% of total population) had &gt;30 percentiles decreases. These data are comparable to observation  from  paediatric  studies  with  standard  interferon  where  20/97  (21%)  of  children  had  &gt;15 percentiles  decreases  in  height  from  baseline  to  EOT  of  which  10  (10%  of  total  population)  had  &gt;30 percentiles  decreases.  Therefore,  at  equal  treatment  duration  both  standard  and  pegylated  IFN  impact growth in the same way. At 6 months follow-up, 21.5% (23/107) of patients had &gt;15 percentiles decreases in height between baseline and EFU with 20% (21/107) of patients had &gt;15-&lt;30 percentiles decreases and 2% (2/107) had &gt;30 percentiles decreases. Of note, according to the height for age percentile curves, a 15 percentiles  decrease  represents  a  difference  of  around  4  cm  in  height  and  a  30  percentiles  decrease represents a difference of around 6-10 cm in height. It is noteworthy that the proportion of patients with &gt; 15 percentiles decreases in height was substantially higher in patients treated with &gt;48 weeks of treatment as compared to patients who received &lt;48 weeks of pegylated interferon plus ribavirin. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

With  regards  to  mean  growth  velocity  a  clear  and  significant  growth  inhibition  of  children  due  to  the bitherapy was  identified in this study, with as much as 70% of children having growth velocity falling to &lt;3 rd percentile  during  treatment  (in  previous  paediatric  study  with  IntronA  plus  RBV,  59%  (57/97)  of children  had  experienced  &lt;3 rd percentile  decrease  in  growth  velocity).  Even  though  a  faster  growth velocity  was  observed  after  treatment  discontinuation  in  some  children,  it  is  noteworthy  that  20% continued  to  have  inhibited  growth  (remained  &lt;3 rd percentile)  at  the  end  of  24-week  follow-up,  which clearly show that growth spurts on cessation of treatment did not occur for a considerable proportion of patients. For other children it was not specified whether they got back to their initial growth velocity.

<!-- image -->

Overall and in line with the SAG expert's conclusions the CHMP concluded that it cannot be ruled out that  the  negative  impact  on  growth  of  the  bi-therapy  is  irreversible.  Long-term  safety  data  from children/adolescents included in study P02538 are awaited to further characterise the long-term impact of bi-therapy on growth and sexual maturation. Parental height collection and sexual maturation assessment will  be  made  to  help  to  assess  the  effect  of  bi-therapy  on  growth  more  precisely.    TSH  levels  and medications  to  treat  thyroid  disorders  will  be  collected.  Nutritional  status  will  also  be  evaluated (annually). Paediatric Development The CHMP took note that: -   a waiver has been granted for children from 0 to less than 3 years of age (Decision P/92/2008 adopted on 14 October 2008). -   and  that  the  PDCO  adopted  on  29  August  2008  an  Opinion  on  Compliance  with  the  agreed  PIP (Decision  P/92/2008  adopted  on  14  October  2008)  under  Article  23  of  Regulation  EC  (No) 1901/2006, as amended, for the above mentioned product and that the PDCO concluded in accordance with  Article  28(3)  and  Article  45(3)  of  the  said  Regulation  to  agree  that  the    development  of  this product has complied with all measures in the agreed PIP. For  the  purpose  of  the  application  of  the  Article  45(3)  of  Regulation  EC  (No)  1901/2006,  significant studies in the agreed paediatric investigation plan have been completed after the entry into force of that Regulation, In addition, the Summary of Product Characteristics reflects the results of studies conducted in compliance with this agreed paediatric investigation plan. Risk Management Plan The section 1.5.2.3.1 was not revised by the MAH, as requested with the appropriate safety data from the Study P02538. The MAH has submitted on the 24 September 2009 an updated version within the context of the PSUR, the assessment of which is ongoing. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## II. OVERALL CONCLUSION AND BENEFIT RISK ASSESSMENT

The MAH applied for an extension of the indication for pegylated interferon alfa-2b (Peginterferon/ViraferonPeg) plus ribavirin (Rebetol) in children from 3 years of age. As for adults, the pegylated  interferon  is  expected  to  improve  convenience  for  patients  (once  weekly  administration  vs  3 times a week).

Overall,  the  SPC  and  PIL  contain  the  key  issues  to  be  considered  in  the  decision  making  process  for treating paediatric patients, i.e. the decision to treat should be made on a case by case basis and the safety

A single pivotal study (P02538) is submitted to support the paediatric extension. Study P02538 is a Phase 3/1B,  open-label,  multicenter  study  (including  10  sites  in  EU),  where  107  pediatric  subjects  (two  age strata 3-11 n=67; 12-17 years of age, n=40) were all treated with PEG2b plus ribavirin for up to 48 weeks and followed for an additional 24 weeks post-treatment. The objectives of the Part 1 of the study were to assess the safety, the efficacy and the pharmacokinetics of peginterferon alfa-2b Plus Ribavirin in naïve pediatric patients with Chronic Hepatitis C. The second part of the study (long-term follow-up) has the objectives to confirm durability of the virologic response and to characterize the long-term safety of the combination, including growth and sexual maturation, in pediatric subjects. This 5 years long-term part of the study is still ongoing. Of note, an extension of the indication for the combination therapy of Rebetol with standard interferon alfa-2b was granted in 2005 on the basis of data from a pivotal study having a similar design. By the time the extension of indication of IFN plus ribavirin was granted in paediatric patients from 3 years of age the safety profile of both agents (psychiatric adverse events, negative growth impact during treatment with partial catch up at short term follow up) was a concern taking into account also the slowly progressive disease  in  most  children.  The  long-term  growth  data  have  added  particular  concerns  to  the  initial reservations  against  the  early  introduction  of  the  bitherapy  in  childhood.  Indeed,  based  on  the  5  years growth data with the standard IFN and ribavirin, the CHMP concluded that the reversibility of the marked growth impact observed during treatment is uncertain. This was also the conclusion of the recent SAG expert meeting Although pegylated interferon is considered to have a clear therapeutic advantage over standard interferon in terms of efficacy (like for adults) the safety signal of non reversible growth inhibition identified with standard interferon raise the same safety concern on the use of the pegylated bitherapy in childhood. The CHMP agreed that the benefit/risk assessment in the paediatric population is particularly  complex since several factors have to be taken into account making each child an individual case.  Factors related to the disease such as likelihood of therapeutic response in terms of genotype, co-morbidities such as HIVco-infection, and the histological evidence of disease progression, need to be taken into account as well as factors that may be pejorative in terms of growth impact. As such it is recommended that the treatment is initiated  after  the  pubertal  growth  spurt  i.e.  once  the  adult  height  has  been  achieved.  Furthermore,  the threat of a growth alteration might be differently handled in a child according to the predicted adult height. Beyond existing objective criteria that might justify the early introduction of the bitherapy in childhood, the  psychosocial  burden  of  a  continuous  replication  in  children  constitutes  a  subjective  factor  that influences the decision to treat children. Therefore  the  CHMP  agreed  that  the  most  reasonable  attitude  is  to  adequately  warn  prescribers  and patients about   the safety concerns so that a well balanced decision can be taken whether to treat or not on a case-by case basis. This is all the more reasonable that the benefit/risk assessment is multi-factorial (as also discussed by the SAG experts). Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

profile of the bitherapy should be carefully taken into account when deciding not to defer the treatment until adulthood.

In  particular,  it  is  important  to  consider  that  the  bitherapy  induced  a  growth  inhibition  of  which reversibility is currently uncertain. Furthermore the disease characteristics of the child are also important to  be  taken  into  account  in  this  decision  making  process,  i.e.  evidence  of  disease  progression  notably fibrosis, existence of co-morbidities that may negatively influence the disease progression (such as HIVco-infection), as well as prognostic factors for response, (HCV genotype and viral load).

<!-- image -->

Overall, expected benefit of treatment should be carefully weighed against the safety findings observed for children  and  adolescents  in  the  clinical  trials.  Whenever  possible  the  child  should  be  treated  after  the pubertal growth spurt. The MAH will have to make particular efforts to adequately collect growth data in the long term follow up of the pegylated IFN. The SAG experts have indeed significantly questioned the reliability  of  the  MAH  approach  (lack  of  standardisation  of  technique  for  taking  measurement,  lack  of collection of parental heights). Finally, the CHMP considered the benefit/risk balance of pegylated IFN/ribavirin in children from 3 years of age positive. The product information clearly highlights the factors that have to be taken into account in the decision making process when not deferring the treatment until adulthood. Medicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## REFERENCES

<!-- image -->