---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:39:57
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/xigris-h-c-396-s-29-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: xigris-h-c-396-s-29-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.742014
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-15 20:02:37.571803
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

European Medicines Agency

<!-- image -->

London, 22 April 2010 EMA/CHMP/338117/2010

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR Xigris International Nonproprietary Name: drotrecogin alfa (activated) Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/396/S/29 Marketing Authorisation Holder/Applicant: Eli Lilly Nederland B.V. Variation Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

| I. SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION   | I. SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION     |   I. SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.1                                                          | Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects                            |                                                            3 |
| 1.2                                                          | Preclinical aspects                                            |                                                            3 |
| 1.3                                                          | Clinical aspects                                               |                                                            3 |
| 1.3.1                                                        | Update on clinical trials during the past annual re-assessment |                                                            3 |
| 1.3.2                                                        | Publications occurring during the reporting period             |                                                            7 |
| 1.3.3                                                        | Update on spontaneous safety data from the market              |                                                           11 |
| II.                                                          | DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ONCLINICAL SPECTS                    |                                                           12 |
| 2.1                                                          | Discussion on clinical aspects                                 |                                                           12 |
| 2.2                                                          | Change of the Product Information                              |                                                           12 |
| III.                                                         | authorised OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED ORONGOING       |                                                           13 |
| 3.1                                                          | Specific Obligations (SOs)                                     |                                                           13 |
| 3.2                                                          | Follow-up Measures (FUMs)                                      |                                                           13 |
| IV.                                                          | BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT                                        |                                                           14 |
| V.                                                           | OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                          |                                                           14 |

3

3

3

3

7

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

## 1.1 Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

## 1.2 Preclinical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

## 1.3 Clinical aspects

Methods: This  was  a prospective, non-randomized, multi-center, open-label clinical trial of DrotAA in patients with septic shock. Eligible patients were ≥ 18 years of age with severe sepsis and vasopressordependent septic shock despite adequate fluid resuscitation, with a catheter for  hemodynamic management (N=43).  Patient  assignment  (Drotrecogin  Cohort  [n=22]  vs.  Control  Cohort  [n=21])  was determined  by  physician-directed  DrotAA  administration.  Patients  were  excluded  if  the  time  from  the onset of the first sepsis-induced organ dysfunction to enrollment exceeded 24 hours and for evidence of inadequate  right  heart  filling  pressures  (pulmonary  artery  occlusive  pressure  [PAOP]  &lt;12  mmHg,  or central  venous pressure [CVP] &lt;8 mmHg). Data were collected prospectively for 7 days. The primary endpoint was the CVI, an assessment of hemodynamic support, representing the relative use of vasoactive agents  applied  to  each  patient.  The  study  evaluated  multiple  secondary  endpoints  (hemodynamic measures, global tissue perfusion, and oxygenation).

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH has submitted the following documents to support the 7 th annual re-assessment of Xigris: -data from completed and ongoing clinical studies that have become available during the past 12 months -publications occurring during the reporting period -update on spontaneous safety data from the market 1.3.1  Update on clinical trials during the past annual re-assessment As of 21 August 2009, a total of up to 7711 adult patients have been exposed to Xigris in completed and ongoing clinical trials (7243 on 21 July 2008). One cohort study was finished in November 2007 and is discussed  below  (F1K-US-EVDA).  There  are  2  ongoing  trials:  RESPOND  and  PROWESS-SHOCK (discussed below). F1K-US-EVDA Study F1K-US-EVDA was a prospective, nonrandomized, multicentre, open-label clinical trial of Xigris in patients with septic shock. The study evaluated the vasopressor requirement, haemodynamic response, and measures of tissue perfusion with the administration of Xigris as part of physician-directed therapy in patients  with  septic  shock  compared  to  a  control  cohort  of  patients  with  septic  shock  in  which  the physician chooses not to treat with Xigris. A total of 43 patients were entered into the study. The first patient  entered  the  study  on  1  February  2006  and  enrolment  concluded  on  5  November  2007.  As  per company standard operating procedures, the study report for this study was planned to be the published manuscript. However the manuscript has yet to be accepted. This draft manuscript has been submitted for publication and a summary of the study results posted to clinicaltrials.gov . ABSTRACT (adapted by the Assessor) Introduction: The study investigates whether the vasopressor requirement, as measured by the change in Cumulative Vasopressor Index (CVI), will be reduced in patients receiving drotrecogin alfa (activated) (DrotAA) compared to patients not receiving DrotAA.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Results :  There  were  no  significant  differences  in  vasopressor  requirements  between  the  cohorts  as measured by the CVI at any study time point. The Drotrecogin Cohort had significant improvements in Protein C activity at 24 hours and change from baseline to 24 hours, lactate change from baseline at 6 hours,  and  lower  coagulation  component  Sequential  Organ  Failure  Assessment  (SOFA)  score  as compared to the Control Cohort. No other difference in secondary endpoints was noted. There were 2 serious bleeding events in the Drotrecogin Cohort (1 right-sided hemothorax,  1  intraperitoneal hemorrhage) and no serious bleeding events in the Control Cohort. There were no events of intracranial hemorrhage.  The  7-day  in-hospital  mortality  for  the  overall  study  population  (N  =  43)  was  4  in  the Drotrecogin Cohort and 8 in the Control Cohort.

Conclusions: The CVI, a measure of vasopressor support, was similar at all time points and mean arterial pressure  differed  only  at  12  hours  post-DrotAA  infusion  in  favour  of  DrotAA.  While  these  findings indicate an absence of a clear effect on macro-hemodynamics, the role of DrotAA in microcirculatory regulation deserves further exploration

As of 1 October 2009, the combined serious bleeding rate during the infusion was similar to the combined rate from PROWESS (2.4% Xigris and 1.2% placebo). There has been one fatal bleeding event; no CNS bleeding events have been reported. The combined blinded mortality rate for patients recruited as of 08 September 2009 was presented and reviewed by CHMP.

Medicinal product no longer authorised It  is  concluded by CHMP that no relevant information can be extracted from this study. The results of larger cohort studies performed across the world have been extensively discussed during the 6 th ALR and should be referred to for additional 'field' information. RESPOND (F1K-MC-EVDK) is a Phase 2 exploratory study investigating the potential role of protein C levels as a biomarker to help guide therapy with Xigris, specifically comparing higher doses and longer infusion  of  Xigris  with  standard  therapy.  Recruitment  was  completed  3  June  2009,  and,  following completion of 90-day follow up, data lock occurred on 5 October 2009. Full data analysis has not been completed. A full study report will be submitted to the CHMP when completed, which is planned in Q2 2010. PROWESS SHOCK (F1K-MC-EVDP) - Specific Obligation 051 First  patient  visit  took  place  20  March  2008.  The  current  performance  of  the  study  was  extensively discussed  as  part  of  the  recently  completed  6 th ALR.  As  of  7  October  2009,  476  patients  have  been randomised, which remains slightly ahead of the most recent plan communicated to the CHMP, and thus recruitment remains on track for a planned completion in Q1 2011. As discussed during the last ALR, the MAH has taken multiple steps to help ensure that recruitment continues to stay on track, including: · Increasing the total number of sites, particularly in countries and regions that have been recruiting well. This also includes some high recruiting sites (who fulfilled site equipoise criteria) from the recently completed RESPOND study. · Appointment of more country national coordinator investigators to help motivate sites in their country to recruit. · Provision of additional resources to enable additional site visits by Lilly study monitors (in addition to Parexcel monitoring visits) to identify and solve potential site recruitment issues. · Organisation of national and regional investigator meetings.

The  CHMP has previously  requested  that  the  MAH  provide  yearly  updates  on  the  following  in  each Annual Reassessment:

- (1)  the  names  of  centres  recruiting  patients  for  that  study → approximately  340  centres  have  been approved,
- (2) their worldwide allocation → all regions have been included,
- (3) the prescriptions and recommendations concerning the use of Xigris at

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

each participating centre → see discussion below,

- (4) the number of patients included → as of 7 October 2009, 476 patients have been randomised,
- (5)  and  the  blinded  opt-out  rate → of  the  476  patients  recruited,  none  have  been  unblinded  by  the investigator or received commercial Xigris.

During evaluation of the current 7 th ALR, the MAH was requested to comment on the overall mortality data %. Analysis of the baseline characteristics of all patients in the database as of 3 December 2009 (with and without 28-day mortality data, n=575 ; Table 1 in the response) demonstrates that although there are a number of demographic similarities between PROWESS and PROWESSSHOCK, patients in PROWESS-SHOCK have greater disease severity as measured by the degree of organ dysfunction (mean  of  3.4  in  the  new  study  instead  of  2.4  in  PROWESS;  100%  of  cardiovascular  failure  and vasopressor use as these are inclusion criteria; 71% of renal dysfunction instead of 42%, etc.), degree of  organ  support,  total  SOFA  score,  and  APACHE  II  score.  These  data  support  that  PROWESSSHOCK,  as  per  its  design,  is  in  fact  recruiting a  higher  disease  severity  population  compared  to PROWESS .

- Medicinal product no longer authorised The mean time from onset of vasopressors to start of study drug is 17.2 hours, indicating that patients are being treated reasonably early in the course of their septic shock episode. These data suggest that, from a clinical  perspective, the  study  is  recruiting  an  appropriately  severely  ill  patient  population. Thus the MAH does not plan to make any changes to the study inclusion and exclusion criteria. Factors to  consider  when  reviewing  mortality  rate from  an  ongoing  study  compared to  sample  size assumptions: · Mortality rates at a particular point in time may reflect random chance related to a relatively small sample size .  As  discussed previously with CHMP, mortality rates can fluctuate during the initial stages of a study. · Over time there may be a general trend of a reduction in mortality in severe sepsis patients treated in the ICU related to general improvements in the standard of ICU care. However, in the recently completed RESPOND study (last patient visit 29 August 2009; study report submitted Q2 2010), the 28-day mortality for Xigris patients was 27%, which is the same as a comparable population from PROWESS (multiple organ dysfunction and protein C less than or equal to the lower limit of normal)  that  was  completed  in  2000.  The  RESPOND  study  used  similar  exclusion  criteria  and definitions  of  organ  dysfunction  as  PROWESS.  Nor  was  there  any  change  in  28-day  placebo mortality rates over time noted in the INDEPTH clinical trial database (Laterre et al. 2007), which included patients recruited into severe sepsis clinical trials between 1996 and 2002. However, the recently  published  results  from  the  Surviving  Sepsis  Campaign  (Levy  et  al.  2010),  which completed in 2008, reported an adjusted absolute drop of 5.4% in hospital mortality over 2 years (95% confidence interval, 2.5 - 8.4) following a campaign to increase compliance with sepsis care bundles. · the difference in mortality between placebo and Xigris treated patients may be different from that assumed for the sample size calculations. ·   Does not reflect commercial Xigris use. There have been no recorded cases of commercial use so far during the study, so this is not currently an issue.

The MAH has provided a new power calculation. Based on the current situation with no 'opt-out' patients, the power of the study with various aggregate mortality rates and sample sizes is provided in Table 2.  These data demonstrate that, provided the aggregate mortality remains &gt;24%, the potential sample size increase of up to500 patients can maintain the planned 80% power for the study if the risk ratio is in truth 0.8.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Estimated Sample Size based on the Aggregate Mortality

Table 2. Rate

|   Aggregate Mortality Rate (%) |   Placebo Mortality Rate (%) |   Drotrecogin Alfa (Activated) MortalityRate(%o) |   Sample Size per Treatment Group for 80% Power |   Powerwith1000 Patients per TreatmentGroup |
|--------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
|                             30 |                        33.33 |                                            26.66 |                                             751 |                                          89 |
|                             28 |                        31.11 |                                            24.88 |                                             827 |                                          86 |
|                             26 |                        28.88 |                                            23.11 |                                             916 |                                          83 |
|                             25 |                        27.77 |                                            22.22 |                                             965 |                                          81 |

Regarding the request to provide mortality rates by region, the MAH states that it is currently only reviewing  28-day  aggregate  blinded  mortality  for  the  overall  study  population  and  believes  that it would be preferable not to review regional mortality rates for several reasons, including the wish to not influence the Steering Committee by changing recruitment now that the first interim analysis has been completed and the fact that PROWESS-SHOCK is continuing to recruit approximately two thirds of  patients  from  the  EU  region ,  so  mortality  in  this  region  will  be  a  key  determinant  of the overall mortality. At this stage, the US will have recruited less than 90 patients and the remaining countries, less than 150 patients, so mortality estimates from these relatively small populations will potentially be unreliable.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH proposes to follow the agreed protocol and await the decision of the Steering Committee on whether to increase the sample size . This decision is anticipated in Q2 2010 (i.e. when approximately 375 patients per group will be recruited). Provided that the mortality rate remains greater than 24%, the power of the study will be preserved at 80% provided that the risk ratio is in truth 0.8. As  a further  follow-up  question during  the  evaluation  of  the  current  7 th ALR  (March  2010),  the MAH was requested to provide (1) the mortality rates by region (USA, Europe, and rest of the world) in PROWESS-SHOCK; (2) written expert's opinions (at least one US and one EU expert) on whether the mortality rate of severe sepsis patients is indeed improving across the world, or in specific areas of the world. The MAH stated review of the most recent baseline characteristics based on 633 patients with 28-d follow-up  data  ( February 2010 )  demonstrate similar  high  levels  of  organ  dysfunction and  need  for organ support as was noted in the January response, indicating that, from a clinical perspective, the study  is  recruiting  an  appropriate  severely  ill  patient  population.  As  was  noted  in  the  previous response, it is anticipated that the Steering Committee will make a decision as to whether to increase the sample size in May/June 2010 , when 28-day follow-up data will be available from approximately 750 patients.

Regarding the need for an expert opinion 'on whether the mortality rate of severe sepsis patients is indeed improving across the world, or in specific areas of the world…', the MAH has provided a joint letter by Prof Taylor Thompson and Prof Marco Ranieri, the US and EU Principal Investigators for the study, respectively, and the Co-Chairs of the Steering Committee. The authors have quoted the Levy et al. 2010 study already mentioned in the MAH response, showing a 5.4% absolute decrease in hospital mortality in the 15,022 severe sepsis subjects treated between 2005 and 2008, as well as the ANZIC study, demonstrating an even greater reduction in hospital mortality (from 35.6% to 21.2%; n=7,250)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

over an eight year period ending in 2005 (Delaney, 2008). The experts have also quoted the results of two  clinical  trials  of  sepsis  therapies  conducted  within  the  past  few  years  and  showing  lower  than expected mortality, including a Ph II North American trial of eritoran in adults with severe sepsis or sepsis requiring mechanical ventilation with a predicted mortality of 53% based on APACHE II scores which showed an actual 28-d mortality of 24 and 25% in the placebo and active arms respectively (Tidswell, 2010). The crude mortality rates between studies are obviously difficult to compare as they rely on different inclusion and exclusion criteria.

In  this  letter,  the  two  Co-Chairs  of  the  PROWESS-SHOCK  Steering  Committee  reiterate  that  they have negotiated with the sponsor to provide the additional funds to enroll up to 2000 subjects using a conditional  power  design  based  on  aggregate  mortality  of  the  first  750  patients as  outlined  in  the PROWESS-SHOCK protocol. The Steering Committee anticipates having the 28-d outcome data upon which this decision rests in mid-May.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 1.3.2  Publications occurring during the reporting period The CHMP has previously requested that the annual licence reassessment should include a discussion of publications related to Xigris during the reporting period. A list of publications is included in Appendix 2. This list is based upon the MEDLINE database (July 2008 through August 2009) using the search terms: Xigris, drotrecogin alfa (activated), and recombinant human activated protein C. Below is a review of a selection of those that appear to have some clinical relevance to the use of Xigris. Nonclinical Studies One  study  in  a  mouse  model  of  metastasis  by  Bezuhly  et  al.  (2009a)  showed  that  rhAPC  treatment resulted  in  a  44%  reduction  in  lung  metastases,  probably  via  inhibition  of  tumour  cell  adhesion  and transmigration. Endothelial cells pretreated with rhAPC at concentrations of 10 to 25 nM (but not at 100 nM) showed significantly decreased adhesion and transmigration of melanoma cells.  Endogenous APC may also limit cancer cell extravasation through its sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor-1 (S1P1) signalling properties independent of its anticoagulant activity (Van Sluis et al., 2009). This observation is consistent with previous reports. However,  as  seen  in  last  year's  literature  review,  much  of  the  research  regarding  activated  protein  C (APC) during this reporting period has focused on APC's activity at the microvascular/ endothelial levels. The effects of APC in severe sepsis, particularly its effect on inflammation and the endothelium, were investigated in several studies. Elphick et al. (2009) found that rhAPC directly binds to β 1 and β 3 integrins at the neutrophil surface and inhibits neutrophil migration. This may be a novel target of APC and a potential mechanism by which rhAPC  protects  against  sepsis.  Similarly,  Yang  et  al.  (2009)  discovered  that  APC  ligation  to  ApoE receptor 2 initiates an intracellular signalling cascade in neutrophils. The ApoE receptor 2 may join EPCR and PAR-1 as candidates for cell receptors or co-receptors that mediate APC's actions. Regarding the crucial  role  of  PAR-1  in  these  actions,  Schuepbach  et  al.  (2009)  showed  that  in  endotoxin-challenged mice, APC significantly prevented pulmonary fluid accumulation in wild-type mice, but not in PAR-1 deficient mice. Waerhaug et al. (2008) found that rhAPC alleviates endotoxin (LPS)-induced lung injury in sheep as characterized by improvements in oxygenation, coagulation, and inflammation, as well as by reversal of pulmonary haemodynamic and volumetric changes. Pirrone et al. (2008) showed that rhAPC has a beneficial effect in acute lung injury in endotoxin-induced lung inflammation in Large White pigs and concluded that may depend in part on modulation of lung matrix metalloproteinase activity. APC partially prevented the reduction in blood pressure induced by LPS and improved both vascular reactivity and myocardial performance in a rat endotoxic shock model (Sennoun et al., 2009a). In this study, APC also decreased tissue leukocyte infiltration and activation. Niessen et al. (2009) showed that EPCR/APC PAR-1  signaling  by  rhAPC  or  a  S1P1  agonist  has  protective  functions  and  promotes  survival  by preventing vascular leakage in escalating systemic inflammation.

In addition, Deane et al. (2009), using a mouse brain vascular perfusion technique, showed that APC and reduced  anticoagulant  variants,  5A-APC  and  3K3A-APC,  cross  the  blood  brain  barrier  via  EPCR-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mediated saturated transport and reach therapeutic targets in the brain, suggesting that the effect of rhAPC on some neurologic diseases is worth investigating. For instance, Thiyagarajan et al. (2008) showed that mice given tissue-plasminogen activator (tPA) 6 hours after onset of brain ischaemia died within 2 days, whereas  mice  given  APC  at  6  or  24  hours  after  ischemia  onset  showed  significant  improvement  in functional  outcome  and reduced spread of the ischaemic lesion. These data suggest that delayed APC administration is neuroprotective.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In an effort to better understand how APC works, recent studies have sought to further understand the relationship  between  the  cytoprotective  and  anticoagulant  properties  of  APC.  This  research  has  been facilitated by the recent development of APC variants with predominantly PAR-1 or anticoagulant effects. Gupta et al. (2009) generated 2 APC variants, one with impaired anticoagulant activity (K193E) and one with  impaired  ability  to  modulate  PAR-1  (L8W),  and  demonstrated  that  PAR-1  agonism,  but  not  the anticoagulant function, reversed systemic hypotension in a rat model of LPS-induced renal microvascular dysfunction while both functions played a role in reversing decreases in renal blood flow and volume. Similarly,  Wang  et  al.  (2008)  showed  that  the  non-anticoagulant  APC  variant,  3K3A-APC,  exhibited greater  neuroprotective efficacy  with  no risk  for  bleeding  compared  with Xigris in  a  model  of  middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice. Qureshi et al. (2008) characterized an APC chimera in which the Gla domain of APC was substituted with the Gla domain of factor X (APC-FXGla). Results of this study support  the  hypothesis  that  variant  residues  of  the  N-terminal  Gla-domain  are  critical  for  binding  of rhAPC to EPCR and that those of the C-terminal domain are involved with specific interactions of APC with protein S. In other relevant animal models, Bezuhly et al. (2009b) found that systemic APC improved ischemic skin flap survival in rats and modulated genes involved in angiogenesis, inflammation, and apoptosis. In a rat model of heatstroke, Lin et al. (2009) demonstrated that both rats pretreated and treated with rhAPC had significantly increased survival time compared with vehicle-treated rats. Akima et al. (2009) found that rhAPC  prevented,  in  a  dose-dependent  manner,  the  instant  blood  mediated  inflammatory  reaction (IBMIR) associated with islet cell transplant. Teke at al. (2008) found that APC treatment prevented the delaying effects of intra-abdominal sepsis on the colonic anastomatic wound healing process. Clinical Studies/Case Series/Case Reports There  have  been  5  observational  studies  published  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis,  including  the PROGRESS  study.  These  studies  all  reported  results  consistent  with  other  previously  published observational  studies  of  Xigris.  In  the  3  studies  that  compared  Xigris  treatment  to  a  control  group (unadjusted or adjusted), evaluated treatment using statistical methods (propensity scoring), or compared to a predicted mortality, Xigris treatment was associated with lower mortality. The main clinical results of Xigris published in 2009 were the Edusepsis Study and the PROGRESS registry. The results of other studies are described in the sponsor's documentation. The Edusepsis Study Group published the results from a large prospective multicenter observational study in severe sepsis (Ferrer et al., Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2009). That study was conducted at 77 intensive care units and enrolled 2796 patients. It evaluated the impact of treatments for severe sepsis recommended in the sepsis guidelines on hospital mortality. The effectiveness of each treatment was estimated using propensity  scores.  Hospital  mortality  was  41.6%  and  the  treatments  associated  with  lower  hospital mortality were early broad spectrum antibiotic treatment and Xigris (odds ratio, 0.59; 95% confidence interval, 0.41-0.84; P=0.004). Fluid challenge and low dose steroids showed no benefits.

The  international  PROGRESS  registry  of  severe  sepsis  reported  on  Xigris  use  and  patient  outcomes (Martin et al., Crit Care 2009). Results from 12,492 patients with complete data showed that 882 (7%) patients overall received Xigris therapy. Although in-hospital mortality was similar for Xigris and nonXigris patients (49.6% and 49.7%, respectively), after adjusting for imbalances, patients receiving Xigris had a 28% reduction in the odds of death and a relative risk reduction of 17%.

In  publications  relating  to  bleeding  risks  with  Xigris,  Taylor  et  al.  (2009)  reviewed  100  consecutive patients from one hospital who had received Xigris for the treatment of severe sepsis and compared the incidence  of bleeding  complications in  surgical and  nonsurgical  cohorts.  During Xigris  administration,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

transfusion of greater than 3 units of blood, an intracranial hemorrhage, or other bleeding serious adverse events  were  considered  bleeding  complications.  They  found  no  significant  difference  in  the  rate  of bleeding complications between surgical and nonsurgical cohorts, with no mortalities ascribed to bleeding and no intracranial hemorrhage events.

The Gentry et al. (2009) study was discussed during the 6 th ALR. It compared outcomes, by retrospective medical  record  review,  of  patients  receiving  Xigris  with  or  without  baseline  bleeding  precautions  as defined by the PROWESS trial. Serious bleeding events occurred in 35% of patients with any baseline bleeding precaution versus 4% of patients without any bleeding precautions. Mortality in patients with a baseline bleeding precaution was 65% compared with 25% in patients without any bleeding precautions. Multivariate  analysis  demonstrated  that  the  presence  of  a  baseline  bleeding  precaution  was  the  only independent variable associated with occurrence of serious bleeding events. The authors concluded that strict  adherence  to  PROWESS  trial  exclusion  criteria  would  further  limit  serious  bleeding  events associated withthe use of Xigris). The United States FDA (Lorenz et al., 2009) commented on Gentry et al. and provided an explanation of the content and purpose of the sections of the US label questioned by Gentry.

Medicinal product no longer authorised There was one randomized, placebo-controlled study published during this reporting period. Dhainaut et al. 2009 reported results from the EXTEND (Extended Xigris treatment in patients with prolonged septic shock) trial. In this study, extended treatment (an additional 72 hours) with Xigris did not reduce 28-day all cause mortality or in-hospital mortality or improve organ function compared with placebo. The design, conduct, analysis and reporting of the PROWESS-SHOCK study was discussed by Finfer et al. (2008). It confirmed an academic steering committee will oversee the conduct of the study, write study manuscripts,  and  conduct  the  study  with  maximum  possible  transparency.  The  authors  concluded  that patients will only benefit if clinicians have confidence in the conduct, analysis and reporting of the trial. There have been a number of results and further reviews of data from previously published randomized trials (Laterre et al., 2008, on ADDRESS and PROWESS; van Ruler et al., 2009, and Vail et al., 2009, on PROWESS; Hodder et al., 2009, on ENHANCE; Shorr &amp; Williams, 2009, and Levy et al., 2009, on XPRESS).  These  conclusions  reached  by  all  these  authors  have  been  discussed  and  agreed  upon  in previous CHMP's ALR reports on Xigris. In a retrospective study to assess the health and cost outcomes of Xigris therapy, Chan et al. (2009) found that pharmacist intervention in prescribing Xigris for patients with severe sepsis led to reduced 28-day inhospital mortality and length of stay as well as earlier initiation of therapy. Durthaler et al. (2009) reported on  a  survey  of  critical  care  nurses  regarding  adherence  to  the  17  Surviving  Sepsis  Campaign  (SSC) treatment guidelines. Hospitals most frequently reported adherence to those concerning prompt ordering of  cultures,  prompt  administration  of  broad-spectrum  antibiotics,  and  prompt  initiation  of  DVT prophylaxis. Among all hospitals, the least followed guideline was prompt initiation of Xigris therapy. There has also been a number of case reports published describing use of Xigris, the results of which can be found in the sponsor's references. Notably, all reports relate to successful treatment with Xigris and none describes serious bleeding events. For instance, one patient received an accidental overdose, but had no bleeding complications (Bland et al., 2008). Rinaldi et al. (2008) describe their experiences with 5 liver transplantation patients treated for septic shock with Xigris. All patients showed septic shock, with ≥ 3 organ dysfunctions and thrombocytopenia with impairment of coagulation. No major bleeding occurred; 1 patient experienced minor bleeding events; and all patients were subsequently discharged from ICU.

There were some publications to aid identification of patients who may benefit from Xigris. Schauer et al. (2008)  created  a  patient-specific  decision  model  to  estimate  the  balance  between  treatment  risk  and benefit for individual patients to guide clinicians in the use of Xigris therapy. Ahishakiye et al. (2009) developed a model to identify patients in whom Xigris might be administered for periods shorter than the recommended  96  hours.  This  was  done  by  retrospective  chart  review  of  124  patients  treated  with  a standard 96-hour infusion of Xigris in a 31-bed intensive care unit. The authors found that a simple model based  on  sequential  organ  failure  assessment  score  and  arterial  pH  that  may  help  identify  patients  in whom a shorter duration of Xigris treatment may be justified.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Finally, a number of papers discussing the mechanism of action or physiological role of Xigris in humans were published. Many of them investigated the relationship between Xigris treatment and the evolution of specific inflammatory processes or fibrinolysis.

## Reviews/ commentaries

A number of reviews and commentaries have been published that focus specifically on Xigris or on the treatment  of  sepsis  in  general.  Many  of  the  reviews  are  positive  and  focus  on  the  proven  benefits  of Xigris, others are more cautious and urge careful consideration of patients for treatment, and others are negative, questioning the benefit/risk of Xigris. None of these points are new. A few comments worth mentioning are summarised below.

Medicinal product no longer authorised There were many commentaries on the design, analysis, or evaluation of Xigris use trials. For instance, the November 2008 issue of Intensive Care Medicine featured several editorials commenting on a special article in the same issue that described the design of the PROWESS-SHOCK trial (Finfer et al., 2008). Suter and Takala (2008) commented that although the PROWESS-SHOCK trial is a laudable effort to improve  collaboration  and  transparency,  the  protocol  should  include  unblinded  safety  monitoring, independent of the request of the data safety monitoring committee. Sweeny et al. (2008) claimed that the need for the PROWESS-SHOCK trial, years after regulatory approval of Xigris use, contains important lessons for health care providers, pharmaceutical industry, and regulatory agencies. The authors contend that 2 beneficial, randomized, controlled trials should be necessary for regulatory approval of any new sepsis therapy, with at least one being a confirmatory trial. In a letter published in the January 2009 issue of  the  same  journal,  Paramesh  and  Zwaal  (2009)  suggested  that  any  future  Xigris  trials  should  be conducted independently, without involvement of the manufacturer or anyone associated with prior trials, in  order  to  dispel  any  doubt  concerning  the  results  from  PROWESS-SHOCK.  Poole  et  al.  (2009) discussed 'errors' in the approval process and post-marketing evaluation of Xigris use during both the FDA  and  EMEA  review  processes.  The  authors  noted  that  subgroup  analyses  are  prone  to  overinterpretation and questioned their use for drug approval and labelling. They believed the choice of both agencies to license Xigris for use in patients with high risk of death only was in disagreement with their own  guidelines  and  the  CONSORT  statement  guidelines.  Further,  the  authors  claim  that  information gathered  in  the  post-marketing  phase  was  mostly  interpreted  in  the  interest  of  the  vendor,  which intensifies  concerns  about  the  methodologies  used  by  the  FDA  and  EMEA  for  the  drug  approval  and postmarketing assessment. Sweeney et al. (2009) commented on the use of Xigris in septic patients with baseline bleeding risks and the implications of a label warning instead of a contra-indication. The authors noted that in 6 of 7 studies of Xigris in patients who received treatment based on the US label, the incidence of serious bleeding was higher  than  in  trials  that  excluded  patients  with  bleeding  risk.  In  light  of  these  results,  the  authors concluded that one approach for increasing the safety of Xigris in the United States without compromising efficacy is not to administer it to patients with baseline bleeding risk, effectively changing the labelled warning to a contra-indication.

Other reviews considered the mode of action of APC and other anticoagulants in the treatment of sepsis and other conditions involving activation of the inflammatory or coagulation cascades. Gupta et al. (2009) summarized the emerging data suggesting the potential therapeutic effect of Xigris in the prevention and treatment of acute kidney injury. Levi et al. (2009) offered guidelines for the diagnosis and management of  disseminated intravascular coagulation  (DIC)  and recommended treating patients with severe sepsis and DIC who are not at high risk of bleeding with Xigris at the standard dose of 24 µg/kg/h for 96 hours. In a review of literature published over the last 5 years regarding treatment of severe pancreatitis, Darvis et al. (2008) noted that some treatments aim at reducing systematic inflammatory response and multiorgan dysfunction, and suggested that affecting the coagulation cascade by Xigris can play a role in reducing the inflammatory response.

Finigan (2008) reviewed the major signaling pathways governing endothelial permeability in acute lung injury with a particular focus on the role of endothelial proteins, such as APC. The author described a complex  system  featuring  receptor  cross-talk  and  anti-coagulant/  procoagulant  protein  interactions. Although the author notes the inconclusive study of APC in patients with acute lung injury cited in last

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

year's report (Liu et al 2008), he suggests that the APC may provide a protective effect in lung injury. In a review of the potential use of rhAPC variants with altered bioactivity in sepsis therapy, Weiler and Ruf (2008) concluded that activated protein C variants with selectively diminished antithrombotic activity but normal  cytoprotective  potential  may  allow  more  efficient  dosing  without  increasing  adverse  bleeding effects and therefore provide a safer and possibly more efficient alternative to normal activated protein C.

## 1.3.3  Update on spontaneous safety data from the market

## The last PSUR, submitted in January 2009, covered the period 22 November 2007 to

21 November 2008. Thus a safety report has been included in this submission, which reviews the 9 months safety data from 22 November 2008 to 21 August 2009. As of 21 August 2009, it is estimated that 143,333 patients have been exposed to marketed Xigris worldwide (10,078 within this reporting period). The rate of exposure to Xigris during this period is slightly less than the last PSUR period taking into account the different lengths of the reporting periods. The higher reporting rate from India noted  in  this  reporting  period  may  have  influenced  some  of  the  inter-regional  comparisons  with previous PSUR reporting periods.

Medicinal product no longer authorised a) Bleeding/CNS Bleeding Reactions An increased risk of bleeding is the only adverse event known to be associated with treatment with Xigris. Although there have been some fluctuations in reporting rates between reporting periods, there appeared to have been a general downward trend in the reporting of bleeding events between PSURs, and these rates now appear to have stabilised in the last 3 PSURs and the current reporting period. Rates  of  non-CNS  bleeds are  similar  between  EU  and  North  America (NA), but  in this  period  are higher in the  non-EU  Non-NA region,  which  appears  to  be  due  to  a  higher  reporting  rate  noted  in India..  Although,  as  in  previous  reports,  the  rate  of  reporting  CNS  bleeds  remains  higher  in  EU compared to the other 2 regions, the EU reporting rate (17/100,000) is lower than that reported in EU in  the  last  PSUR  (44/100,000)  but  is  similar  to  the  preceding  2  PSURs.  Although  the  reporting  of bleeding events was higher in the Non-EU Non-NA region this did not translate into an increase in CNS bleeds. b) Thrombocytopenia Reactions There have been some fluctuations in reporting rates of thrombocytopenia between reporting periods, and these rates now appear to have remained relatively stable over the last 5 periods. Thrombocytopenia is  a  common  finding  in  severe  sepsis  and  there  does  not  appear  to  be  a  causal association with treatment with Xigris. c) Convulsions In  response  to  a  CHMP  request,  a  cumulative  review  of  the  Lilly  safety  database  was  included  in PSUR #7 to assess the number of convulsions or seizures reported. The conclusion of that review was that a causal association of convulsion events with Xigris treatment could not be established. There were 4 spontaneous cases reported in this reporting period; two of the events were reported from India. In this patient population, the complexity of the disease processes and treatments confound the ability to ascribe causality of a seizure or convulsion to any one drug or condition. d) Use of Xigris in Paediatric Patients

During  the  reporting  period,  there  were  3  reports  from  paediatric  patients,  none  of  which  were reported by an EU Member State. Two patients were adolescents, aged 14 and 16 years (originating from Canada, the latter of which was published in a literature article during the reporting period). The other patient was 8 years old and originated from India. None reported haemorrhages.

## e) Maladministration

During  the  reporting  period,  5  cases  reported  Xigris  overdose.  This  rate  is  within  the  reporting fluctuations seen between previous PSURs. Two of these 5 cases contained reports of clinical adverse events attributed to the overdose. The overdoses ranged from 2 to 600 times the prescribed dose. The

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patient who received a double dose died of an unknown cause, whereas the 600 times dose did not correlate to a reported adverse event.

## f) CHMP Feedback on PSUR #9

PSUR #9,  covering  the  period  22  November  2007  through  21  November  2008,  was  submitted  19 January  2009.  On  25  June  2009,  the  CHMP adopted  the  request  for  follow  up  on  3  questions,  the responses to which were submitted 1 September 2009. These responses included a cumulative review of  all  cases  of  allergic  and  anaphylactic  reactions,  a  cumulative  review  of  safety  information pertaining to venous thromboembolism (VTE), and the submission of reports related to Study EVBQ and Study O014. These responses are currently under review.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Conclusion On  review  of  this  spontaneously  reported  data,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  new  clinically significant safety information that would warrant any alteration of the current labelling for Xigris. II. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS 2.1 Discussion on clinical aspects There is a growing scientific interest in the mechanisms of action of Xigris, and the recent generation of activated protein C variants (single amino acid substitution) with anti-inflammatory effects that are devoid  of  anticoagulant  properties  is  a  useful  addition  in  this  regard.  Xigris  interacts  with  PAR-1, EPCR, and possibly the ApoE receptor. A large number of recent publications describe clinical data, most of which comes from observational studies.  These  data  are  compatible  with  a  beneficial  effect  of  Xigris  and  none  of  them  raises  new concerns as compared with the assessments of all previous ALRs, especially with regard to the use of Xigris in Europe, which is more constrained than in the US due to additional warnings and contraindications. Overall, the worldwide scientific and clinical debate on the optimal use of Xigris continues and many stakeholders are eagerly awaiting the results of PROWESS-SHOCK.  If the aggregate mortality rate is lower than 30% at the planned review at approximately 750 patients, the total sample size may have to be increased up to a total maximum sample size of 2000 patients. As agreed in the protocol, this decision will be taken by the Steering Committee when approximately 750 patient have completed day 28 follow up (Q2 2010). The MAH has provided comments on the overall mortality data. Mortality rates in the study may reflect recent changes in clinical practice as well as the particular inclusion and exclusion criteria in PROWESS-SHOCK.  Based  on  their  own  responses  (' The  MAH  understands  that  demonstrating  a statistically  significant  mortality  difference  in  PROWESS-SHOCK  is  the  expectation  to  assert  the benefit/risk profile of Xigris '), the MAH is well aware that the absence of a statistically significant effect of  Xigris  in  a  septic  shock  population,  despite  a  low  mortality  rate,  will  have  serious  consequences regarding the marketing authorisation status of this medicinal product which remains under exceptional circumstances.

In summary, the decision of the PROWESS-SHOCK Steering Committee whether to increase the sample size  is  expected  in  Q2  2010. The  MAH  has  committed  to  provide  the  result  of  the  Steering Committee decision to the CHMP as soon as it is available (new FUM 068).

The  CHMP  has  also  requested  additional  analyses  of  pharmacogenomic  data  linked  to  the  effects  of Xigris. These data will be provided by the MAH and discussed by the CHMP in coming months.

## 2.2 Change of the Product Information

The CHMP agreed that no changes in the Summary of Product Characteristics, labelling and package leaflet are warranted as result of evaluation of the 7 th ALR.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## III. OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED OR ONGOING

## 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)

##  SPECIFIC OBLIGATION

EMEA SOB 051: 'Further to uncertain conclusions of the XPRESS study investigating the possible interaction between Xigris and heparin, additional clarifications on the benefit/risk balance of Xigris are required. Therefore the MAH has committed to performing a placebo-controlled study in patients (who were either on low-dose prophylactic heparin or not receiving any thrombosis prophylaxis) with severe sepsis and documented organ failure (e.g. MOD or vasopressor dependent septic shock) when treated  within  a  strictly  defined  time  window,  to  assert  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Xigris'.    See discussion in previous sections of this report.  The commitment is not yet fulfilled.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3.2 Follow-up Measures (FUMs) Assessment of FUM 063 The following FUM was agreed with the 6th Annual Licence Reassessment (S028): ' MAH  commits  to  update  CHMP  on  the  progress  of  recruitment  in  PROWESS-SHOCK  every  6 months '. The  first  planned  interim  analysis  occurred  on  8  February  2010.  The  Data  Monitoring  Committee reviewed data from approximately 500 patients with complete 28-d follow-up and recommended that the  study  continue  with  no  changes .  As  of 28  February  2010 ,  735  patients  have  been  randomised, which  meets  the  recruitment  plan  communicated  to  the  CHMP  in  September  2009.  Recruitment remains on track for a planned completion of enrolment of 1500 patients in Q1 2011. Figure 1 shows the projected and actual enrolment in the study. When approximately 750 patients have been recruited, i.e. some time in Q2 2010, the Steering Committee will make a decision on increasing the sample size based on the aggregate mortality rate. Thus, the first part of FUM 063 can be agreed. The second part of FUM 063 (an update of the recruitment rate) is expected in September 2010.

Figure 1. ActualandprojectedenrolmentinPROWESS-SHOcK.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## IV. BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT

The CHMP concluded that since the 6 th annual re-assessment, no further data has become available that  would  alter  the  B/R  of  Xigris.  The  CHMP  has  reiterated  the  importance  of  completing  the PROWESS-SCHOCK  study  within  the  shortest  possible  timeframe  as  this  study  will  assert  the benefit/risk  profile  of  Xigris.    This  study  remains  on  track  to  complete  recruitment  in  Q1  2011. However, following review of blinded 28-day mortality, the sample size may have to be increased to a total  maximum  sample  size  of  2000  patients.  This  would  obviously  have  an  impact  on  the  reporting timelines.  The decision of the study's Steering Committee whether to increase the sample size is expected in Q2 2010.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  product  remains  licensed  under  exceptional  circumstances  while  waiting  for  the  update  on recruitment status in the ongoing PROWESS-SHOCK study as well as for the results of that study which are now planned for Q2 2011. There is a need for further information on the pharmacogenetic data that were  not  part  of  this  submission  but  are  considered  important  for  the  annual  reassessment  of  the benefit/risk balance of Xigris. V. OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION The CHMP concluded by majority that, on the basis of the data submitted since the 6 th annual  reassessment, the benefit/risk profile for Xigris in the ' treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple  organ  failure  when  added  to  best  standard  care.  The  use  of  Xigris  should  be  considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure' remains positive. However the CHMP concluded that there was still a Specific Obligation that remained to be fulfilled. The assessment of the pending commitments will form the basis of the next annual re-assessment. Therefore the Marketing Authorisation for Xigris will remain under exceptional circumstances. On 22 April 2010, the CHMP adopted an Opinion by majority on the 7th annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile of Xigris, subject to the additional commitments undertaken. The Icelandic/Norwegian  CHMP  members  agreed  with  the  above  mentioned  recommendation  of  the CHMP. A  revised  Letter  of  Undertaking  dated  22  April  2010  including  the  amended  list  of  Follow-up Measures has been adopted accordingly by the CHMP