---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:05:04
document_pages: 30
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/variation-report/xigris-h-c-396-s-28-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
document_name: xigris-h-c-396-s-28-epar-assessment-report-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.1461993
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-22 17:33:09.012538
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

European Medicines Agency

London, 24 September 2009 EMA/CHMP/729233/2009

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised ASSESSMENT REPORT FOR Xigris International Nonproprietary Name: drotrecogin alfa (activated) Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/396/S/28 Marketing Authorisation Holder/Applicant: Eli Lilly Nederland B.V. Variation Assessment Report as adopted by the CHMP with all information of a commercially confidential nature deleted.

Tel.  (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68

E-mail: mail@emea.europa.eu      http://www.emea.europa.eu

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

| SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 3     | SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 3     |   SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 3 |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.1                                                                  | Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects                                  |                                                                  3 |
| 1.2                                                                  | Preclinical aspects                                                  |                                                                  3 |
| 1.3                                                                  | Clinical aspects                                                     |                                                                  3 |
| 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past annual re-assessment | 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past annual re-assessment |                                                                  3 |
| 1.3.2 Publications occurring during the reporting period             | 1.3.2 Publications occurring during the reporting period             |                                                                  6 |
| 1.3.3 Update on spontaneous safety data from the market              | 1.3.3 Update on spontaneous safety data from the market              |                                                                  9 |
| II. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ONCLINICAL SPECTS                      | II. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ONCLINICAL SPECTS                      |                                                                 11 |
| 2.1                                                                  | Discussion on clinical aspects                                       |                                                                 11 |
| 2.2                                                                  | Conclusion on clinical aspects                                       |                                                                 24 |
| 2.3                                                                  | Change of the Product Information                                    |                                                                 25 |
| authorised III. OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED ORONGOING        | authorised III. OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED ORONGOING        |                                                                 26 |
| 3.1                                                                  | Specific Obligations (SOs)                                           |                                                                 26 |
| IV.                                                                  | BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT                                              |                                                                 26 |
| V.                                                                   | OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                                |                                                                 27 |
| VI.                                                                  | REFERENCES                                                           |                                                                 28 |

3

3

3

3

6

9

Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

## 1.1 Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

## 1.2 Preclinical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

## 1.3 Clinical aspects

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH has submitted the following documents to support the 6 th annual re-assessment of Xigris: -data from completed and ongoing clinical studies that have become available during the past 12 months -update related to the current specific obligation -publications occurring during the reporting period -update on spontaneous safety data from the market -Protocol Amendment Summary - Study F1K-MC-EVDK -additional Safety Information received since the last PSUR  (22 November  2007  21 July 2008) 1.3.1  Update on clinical trials during the past annual re-assessment As of 21 July 2008, a total of up to 7243 adult patients have been exposed to Xigris in completed and ongoing  clinical  trials.  Studies  EXTEND,  RESPOND,  and  APEX  are  finalised.  Study  PROWESSSHOCK (new Specific Obligation) has started. Last year, 7190 adult patients had been exposed in clinical trials. Thus, 53 new patients have been exposed during the last 12 months. EXTEND (F1K-MC-EVBQ) The results of EXTEND 'a placebo-controlled Phase IIIb study to determine the efficacy and safety of extended  Xigris  therapy  in  patients  with  persistent  requirement  for  vasopressor  support  after  a  96-h infusion  with  commercial  Xigris',  have  been  submitted  in  April  2008  (FUM  056)  and  assessed.  The primary  objective  is  to  investigate  whether  continued  administration  of  Xigris  for  up  to  72  additional hours results in more rapid resolution of vasopressor-dependent hypotension versus placebo. The main conclusion of this study is that the primary outcome of  vasopressor-dependency was not significantly  affected  by  a  72-h  extended  infusion  of  DAA  after a  96-h  infusion  of the  commercial product.  The  baseline  difference  with  regard  to  cardiovascular  sequential  organ  failure  assessment (SOFA) score may have partly influenced these results. In addition, the reduction of the sample size may have resulted in an underpowered trial, because the treatment effect was less than anticipated. However, there was not the smallest trend for a benefit of extended treatment with Xigris beyond 72 h.

Since the primary outcome parameter of this study is not influenced by the treatment, it has no impact on the current indication.

The MAH was asked by the CHMP to indicate when they plan to publish, or otherwise make public, the results of this study and to discuss the potential description of these results in section 5.1 of the SPC and/or the addition of a warning that any prolongation of treatment beyond 4 days in patients with severe sepsis and at least 2 organ failures is futile. The  MAH answerd (FU2 056.1) that actions have been taken to make these results readily available to those in the intensive care community. The MAH also mentioned that, given that EXTEND was a relatively small exploratory study that neither proves or disproves the utility of infusions of drotrecogin alfa (activated) longer than 96 hours and that the soon to be completed RESPOND study will generate additional data in this regard, it would be appropriate to await the results of the RESPOND study before deciding on what information may be

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

relevant to provide in the SPC related to longer (or shorter) infusions of drotrecogin alfa (activated). These responses are currently under assessment (FU2 056.1).

APEX  (F1K-MC-O014) This  is  a  Phase  II  exploratory  study  of  adjuvant  treatment  of  pulmonary embolism  with  Xigris.  The  main  objective  is  to  assess  the  safety  of  a  short  (12-h)  infusion  of  Xigris combined with therapeutic doses of low molecular weight heparin versus low molecular weight heparin alone  in  treatment  of  acute  submassive  pulmonary  embolism.  Warfarin therapy  is  initiated  on  or  after Study Day 3.

First patient visit was in September 2004. In November 2007, the 47 th of 48 planned patients was reported to have a small subdural haematoma 4 days following administration of the study drug. This event was the only  serious  adverse  event  reported  during  this  reporting  period.  As  per  the  predefined  protocol guidelines, this event prompted a review of safety by the study data safety monitoring board (DSMB) who recommended: 'In consideration of the low recruitment rate of the other three participants in the APEX study, the completion of the trial should be envisaged in order to prevent further delays to obtaining final results'. Their final conclusion was: 'The DSMB recommends to stop recruitment of further patients and to finish the trial at this stage. The adverse events listed above do not reveal major safety problems arising within the study and can be considered to be associated in patients with high co-morbidity in the elderly patient suffering pulmonary embolism under the given antithrombotic medication'.

Following the first DMC meeting the following information was sent to sites on May 13 th 2008: 'The DMC for this trial met on 7 May 2008 to conduct a scheduled interim analysis on a locked database of 190 patients receiving randomized therapy. After receiving additional analyses, the DMC recommended that Lilly suspend enrolment in the study until the protocol can be amended due to a safety signal (higher mortality)  in  the  alternative  therapy  arm  of  the  moderate  protein  C  deficiency  subgroup.  The  specific recommendation is to suspend enrolment of all patients and amend the protocol so that all patients receive a minimum of 96 hours of Xigris. As per the protocol, the DMC agreed to a future dose increase in the severe protein C  deficiency alternative therapy group. Lilly has decided to accept  the  DMC recommendation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH has accepted the DSMB's recommendation and has ceased further recruitment into the study. Data lock for the study took place on 08 August 2008. The abbreviated study report for the APEX study was submitted to the CHMP in January 2009 and is currently under assessment (FUM 058). RESPOND (F1K-MC-EVDK) This is a Phase II exploratory study investigating the potential role of protein C levels as a biomarker to help guide therapy with Xigris, specifically comparing higher doses and longer (or shorter) infusion of Xigris with standard therapy (24 µg/kg/h for 96 hours). The first patient was entered into the study in November  2006,  which  is  currently  being  conducted  at  sites  in  the  following  European  countries: Belgium,  France,  Germany,  Finland,  Sweden,  Italy  and  the  United  Kingdom,  with  additional  sites  in Canada and the United States. The power calculation for the study was based on including a total of 422 ITT patients, comparing all patients  receiving  alternative  therapy  to  those  receiving  standard  therapy.  Three  interim  analyses conducted by an internal data monitoring committee (DMC) were planned, one before each dose increase in  the  alternative  therapy-higher  dose/variable  duration  group.  The  activities  of  this  internal  DMC  are defined within the DMC charter and function in a similar fashion as would an external DMC. Patients potentially receiving a higher dose of Xigris are those that remain severely protein C deficient after the 'common therapy lead-in period' where all patients receive standard dose Xigris for 24 hours. Based on assumptions made from the pattern of protein C results from PROWESS, it was predicted that approximately 40% of patients would have severe protein C deficiency at this time point. However, in the current RESPOND study, this number is rather ∼ 20%. Thus when the first interim analysis occurred on 7 May  2008,  although  there  were  approximately  20  patients  who  had  received  Xigris  at  a  dose  of 30 µg/kg/h as planned, ITT patients totalled 200 rather than ∼ 100 as initially predicted. If this pattern is maintained, the total planned sample size of 422 ITT patients will be achieved and the study will complete before the 2 highest dose groups (42 and 48 µg/kg/h) are reached.

The amended protocol was internally approved on 23 May 2008, and submitted for regulatory and ERB approval  as  appropriate.  As  recommended  by  the  DMC,  the  primary  change  to  the  protocol  was  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

removal of the option for infusions shorter than the standard therapy of 96 h. A few minor errors that had been  previously  noted  in  the  protocol  were  also  corrected.  The  first  patient  was  enrolled  under  the amended protocol on 23 July 2008. The RESPOND study team as well as all study sites remain blinded to the interim analysis data.

As of 21 July 2008, 240 patients have received any Xigris infusion, including 211 ITT patients. Although a number of sites are actively screening for patients, it is anticipated that recruitment will not get back to pre-amendment levels  until  late  September  2008,  and  it  is  now  predicted  that  recruitment  will  not  be completed until towards the end of Q3 2009.  This delay will also move the predicted completion of the study report into Q2 2010.

Medicinal product no longer authorised As  of    21  July  2008,  based  on  blinded  serious  adverse  event  reports,  out  of  240  patients  treated, 57 patients have reported at least one serious adverse event, of which 14 (5.8%) reported having serious bleeding  event,  of  which  3  were  CNS  bleeds.  These  rates  are  higher  than  those  reported  from  Xigris patients in PROWESS; however, they are more similar to the reported serious adverse event rates for the Phase 2 study to determine the safety, pharmacokinetics and effective dose range and dosing duration for rhAPC in severe sepsis (EVAA), and the serious bleeding event and CNS bleeding event rates from the open-label study ENHANCE (6.6%). These events were included in the DMC's assessment of safety during the interim analysis, where it was recommended to continue with the next highest dose of Xigris and also with the possibility of longer infusions. The CHMP was of the opinion that the explanations on the changes in protocol and in timelines of study RESPOND are acceptable. The CHMP noted that the completion of the study report is planned for Q2 2010, except if the DMC stops the study for futility or safety after 300 ITT patients have been treated. It is expected that the MAH will inform the CHMP should that occur. From the preliminary (blinded)  information  disclosed  so  far,  it  appears  that  infusions  of  Xigris  shorter  than  96  h  are  not recommendable. This does not impact the SPC or the benefit/risk balance of Xigris under the current conditions of use. Study F1K-US-EVDA This is a prospective, nonrandomised, multicentre, open-label clinical trial of Xigris in patients with septic shock. Although this study has been included in previous safety updates, because it was a relatively small, nonrandomised, exploratory study being performed at US sites only, it has not been reviewed in previous clinical  overviews.  The  study  evaluated  the  vasopressor  requirement,  haemodynamic  response,  and measures of tissue perfusion with the administration of Xigris as part of physician-directed therapy in patients  with  septic  shock  as  compared  to  a  control  cohort  of  patients  with  septic  shock  in  which  the physician chose not to treat with Xigris. A total of 43 patients were entered into the study. Two nonfatal treatment-related serious bleeding events were reported in patients receiving Xigris: a haemothorax during study drug infusion and a peritoneal haemorrhage post study drug infusion. No serious bleeding events were reported in control cohort patients not receiving Xigris. The MAH will provide the clinical study summary in the forthcoming annual reassessment application which will be submitted in October 2009. PROWESS-SHOCK (F1K-MC-EVDP)

This is the new placebo-controlled study in fulfilment of the current Specific Obligation for Xigris. This study is run in patients (who were either on low-dose prophylactic heparin or not receiving any thrombosis prophylaxis) with severe sepsis and documented organ failure (e.g. MOD or vasopressor dependent septic shock) when treated within a strictly defined time window.

The  CHMP  has  requested  that  the  MAH  provide  yearly  updates  on  the  following  in  each  Annual Reassessment with the following information

- (1) the names of centres recruiting patients for that study,
- (2) their worldwide allocation,
- (3) the  prescriptions  (and  recommendations  concerning  the  use  of  Xigris  at  each  participating centre,
- (4) the number of patients included,
- (5) the blinded opt-out rate.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

This study is discussed in section 2.1.1 of this report.

## 1.3.2 Publications occurring during the reporting period

The CHMP has previously requested that the annual licence reassessment should include a discussion of publications related to Xigris during the reporting period.  The MAH has provided a list of publications based  upon  the  MEDLINE  database  (July  2007  through  July  2008)  using  the  search  terms:  Xigris, drotrecogin alfa (activated), recombinant human activated protein C, and activated protein C. Below is a review of a selection of those that appear to have some clinical relevance to the use of Xigris.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Nonclinical Studies Research has focused on activated protein C's (APC) activity at the microvascular and endothelial levels, and  particularly  how  its  activity  may  be  mediated  though  signalling  pathways  (endothelial  protein  C receptor  [EPCR],  protease-activated  receptor  1  [PAR  1],  and  sphingosine-1-phosphate  receptor  1) independent of its anticoagulant and antfibrinolytic effects. This research has been facilitated by the recent development of APC variants with predominantly PAR 1 or anticoagulant effects. In addition, the use of animal  models  has  expanded  in  recent  years  with  the  realisation  that  species  specificity  may  be  less important  than  initially  thought  when  investigating  the  nonanticoagulant  properties  of  APC  and,  also, through the availability of rat and mouse rAPC. Yet, as was also highlighted in last year's report, some of the in vitro experiments have used very much higher concentrations of APC than plasma levels found in septic  patients  treated  with  24  µg/kg/h  Xigris  so  may  not  be  relevant  to  severe  sepsis  treatment.  For instance,  opposing  effects  of  APC  on  barrier  protection  of  endothelial  cells  have  been  reported independently by at least 3 laboratories in the previous years (Zeng et al. 2004; Feistritzer et al. 2005; Bae et  al.  2007).  At  therapeutic  concentrations  of  APC  (1  nM  or  less),  APC  reversed  endothelial  leakage induced by thrombin or other cytokines, such as IL-1 β . At high concentrations of APC (10 nM or higher depending on the type of endothelial cell used), APC induced endothelial leakage. These data illustrate that  some  of  the  effects  of  APC  at  very  high  concentrations  may  differ  from  those  at  pharmacologic levels. The CHMP noted that there is a tremendous increase in non-clinical research activity regarding APC. Multiple  effects  of  APC,  in  particular  on  microvascular  and  endothelial  structures,  are  being  reported beyond the simple anticoagulant action. Some of these effects could partly explain the beneficial effects of Xigris. The suggestion, made last year, that APC could facilitate some oncogenic processes, including angiogenesis, has not been supported based by recent literature. Overall, these non-clinical developments are  important  as  they  may  point  to  potential  ways  of  improving  the  selection  of  patients  who  should receive Xigris. Clinical Studies/Case Series/Case Reports - The Surviving Sepsis Campaign (Dellinger et al. 2008) published updated guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. The following are the recommendations related to Xigris: 'We  suggest  that  adult  patients  with  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction  associated  with  a  clinical assessment of high risk of death, most of whom will have APACHE II ≥ 25 or multiple organ failure, receive  rhAPC  if  there  are  no  contraindications  (weak  recommendation).  Relative  contraindications should also be considered in decision making. We recommend that adult patients with severe sepsis and low risk of death, most of whom will have APACHE II &lt;20 or one organ failure, do not receive rhAPC (strong recommendation)'.

The MAH was requested to discuss why the Surviving Sepsis Campaign has downgraded the level of evidence for Xigris in its 2008 guideline and whether PROWESS pivotal trial is now considered as a largely suboptimal trial.

The  MAH  in  its  response  was  of  the  opinion  that  above  mentioned  recommendations  may  reflect uncertainty related to the findings of several studies following PROWESS (ADDRESS, RESOLVE, and XPRESS) rather than reconsiderations concerning PROWESS. For example, the ADDRESS study found no benefit in low risk patients and, particularly, the finding of higher mortality in single organ dysfunction patients with recent surgery. The recommendations are also in keeping with the general level of equipoise within the critical care community. The MAH noted however, that within the original sepsis 'bundle' concept,  which  was  provided  as  a  tool  to  help  implement  the  original  guidelines  and  to  audit  process

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

improvements related to implementation of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines, compliance with the Xigris component of the bundle was deemed to have been fulfilled by the presence of a written policy in the ICU defining the use of Xigris, even if this policy was not to use or to restrict the use of Xigris beyond the SPC. Thus, hospitals only needed a policy as to how to use Xigris and did not have to use it at all  to  be  measured  as  being  'compliant  with  the  guidelines'.  Thus,  the  original  guideline  was  not  as favourable to Xigris as it may have appeared. The MAH was not of the opinion that the new Surviving Sepsis Campaign guidelines represent a specific 'downgrading' of the PROWESS study, but a reflection of a new grading system and new clinical trial data.

The  involvement  of  an  Ad  Hoc  Expert  Group  was  deemed  necessary  to  discuss  amongst  other, whether the downgrading of the 'evidence grade' for a recommendation for the use of Xigris by the Surviving  Sepsis  Campaign  (guideline  published  in  January  2008)  to  a  \"weak  recommendation\" changed the use of Xigris in clinical practice.

- Dhainaut et al. (2007) reported the findings of the PREMISS observational cost effectiveness study of adult patients recruited before and after licensure of rhAPC in France. Post-license patients were younger, had  less  co-morbid  conditions  and  had  failure  of  more  organs  than  did  pre-license  patients.  The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio was €33,797 per quality adjusted life-year (QALY) gained. This is higher than the previously published PROWESS-based estimates. They conclude that this is because of a lower absolute reduction in 28-day mortality (-3.3% versus -7.4% in the subgroup with multiple organ failure  in  PROWESS)  rather  than  being  due  to  hospital  costs.  However,  Rowan  et  al.  (2008)  report effectiveness  results  from  a  UK  national  audit  of  Xigris  use  similar  to  PROWESS.  Patients  receiving Xigris in clinical practice were younger and more severely ill (77% of patients had three or more organs failing) than in the pivotal study but had less co-morbidity. Nonrandomised estimates for the effectiveness of Xigris were consistent with the findings of PROWESS, which appeared greatest in those treated within the first 24 h and those with greater disease severity. In the UK audit, 61% of patients were treated within 24 h of the first organ failure. One or more serious adverse events, of which 77% were serious bleeding events,  occurred  in  8%  of  patients.  This  is  higher  than  what  was  seen  in  the  PROWESS  (3.5%)  and ADDRESS (3.9%) results but closer to the ENHANCE results (6.2%).

Medicinal product no longer authorised There  was  a  consensus  among  the  experts  that  the  downgrading  of  the  'evidence  grade'  for  a recommendation for the use of Xigris by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign to a \"weak recommendation\" has not been a driver in any way for a different clinical use of the product. The change of the guideline is  a  secondary  event  as  the  clinical  practice  is  not  driven  by  this  guideline  only.  Some  experts reminded the group that the Surviving Sepsis Campaign was not an evidence-based process but relied mostly on the opinion of experts. Several experts specified that the use of Xigris in their hospital or unit (selection of patients, timing, etc.) was controlled by strict protocols that had not been changed following the new (2008) SSC guideline. - The Gentry et al. study ( Crit Care Med , January 2009) is a retrospective medical record interview study  in  73  patients  in  2  tertiary  care  hospitals  in  Oklahoma  City,  OK,  USA,  showing  that  serious bleeding events occurred in 7 of 20 patients (35%) with any baseline 'bleeding precaution' (as defined in  the  US  label) vs only  2  of  53  patients  (3.8%)  without  any  bleeding  precautions  (p&lt;0.0001).  In addition, more patients with a baseline bleeding precaution died compared with patients without any bleeding  precautions  (65%  vs.  24.5%,  p=0.0015).  Most  of  the  baseline  'bleeding  precautions'  are contra-indications in the EU SPC so this retrospective analysis has not been considered by the CHMP as a new serious concern in the EU. - There has been only 1 randomised, placebo-controlled study published during this reporting period. Liu et  al.  (2008)  tested  the  utility  of  APC  versus  placebo  for  the  treatment  of  acute  lung  injury  (ALI)  in patients  not  indicated  for  commercial  treatment  because  of  severe  sepsis.  There  was  no  difference  in ventilator free  days,  mortality,  or lung  injury  score.  Given  that  there  was  no  difference  in  the primary objective of ventilator free days, the data safety monitoring board chose to stop the study at 75 patients, rather than allowing enrolment to the planned sample size of 90 patients. The results from a number of registries and audits of Xigris use in clinical practice have been published.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Also in the UK, Ridley et al. (2008) performed a retrospective review of ICU charts and medical records of patients who had received Xigris in 5 of the largest users' centres in England. Between December 2002 and November 2005, 351 patients received Xigris. They conclude that expected mortality derived from both the APACHE II score and organ dysfunctions suggests that Xigris does reduce mortality. Serious adverse incidents occurred in 5.1% patients.

-  Wheeler  et  al.  (2008)  also  reported  observational  data  collected  retrospectively  from  patients  who received Xigris as part of physician-directed treatment in 5 US teaching institutions. Patients treated in clinical practice were younger, had more co-morbidities, greater severity of illness, and longer mean time from  severe  sepsis  onset  to  the  start  of  Xigris  compared  to  PROWESS.  Although  overall  hospital mortality  in  clinical  practice  patients  was  higher  than  PROWESS, for patients treated  within  1 day  of severe sepsis onset it was similar to Xigris-treated PROWESS patients with an APACHE II score ≥ 25. Serious bleeding events during infusion were noted in 4.0% of clinical practice patients.

Medicinal product no longer authorised - Vincent et al. (2008) used a logistic regression equation, controlling for age and the presence or absence of organ dysfunction, in non-Xigris-treated patients from Belgium in the PROGRESS registry to calculate the  expected  mortality  rates  for  Xigris-treated  patients  in  the  Belgian  reimbursement  registry.  The observed  hospital  mortality  of  the  286  Belgian  registry  patients  was  50.7%  compared  to  a  predicted mortality of 63.5, implying an adjusted absolute mortality reduction of 12.8% with Xigris. - Afessa et al. (2008) concluded that the introduction of multiple evidence-based protocols in the Mayo Clinic was associated with improved outcome in critically ill medical patients. The use of Xigris was 1 of 4 evidence-based protocols (lung protective strategy for acute lung injury, activated protein C for severe sepsis/septic shock, intravenous insulin for hyperglycaemia control, and a protocol for sedation/analgesia) that were introduced in a medical ICU. There have been a number of case reports published describing use of Xigris within and also outside the current licensed indication. These were part of the annual licence reassessment dossier. There have also been a number of publications related to potential means of identification of patients who may benefit  most from  Xigris treatment,  including  the  use  of  an  appropriate  biomarker.  For  instance, Shorr et al. (2008) concluded that based on systematic analyses of 11 variables measured in severe sepsis clinical trials, protein C level at baseline and day 4 was the only variable consistently correlated with both Xigris treatment effect and survival, and John et al. (2007) reported that patients with severe sepsis who have  elevated  troponin  have  increased  mortality;  these  may  be  patients  in  whom  treatment  with  APC could improve outcome. Chapital et al. (2008) suggested that transcutaneous partial pressure of oxygen as an indicator of microcirculatory perfusion may help to identify which septic patients may benefit from APC. There  have  been  several  review  articles  regarding  the  use  of  Xigris  in  sepsis  patients.  Many  of  these reviews, if not all, highlight the same issues that were discussed during previous annual reassessments of the  Xigris  EU  licence.  For  instance,  Barie  (2007)  discussed  some  of  the  controversies  leading  to  and implications  of  performing  the  PROWESS SHOCK study. Kalil and Sun (2008) suggest that, using a Bayesian design, a confirmatory trial with approximately 600 patients with severe sepsis and high risk of death can provide a convincing answer for both the mild and moderate skeptic physicians concerning the efficacy of Xigris in severe sepsis.  However, such a Bayesian approach requires acceptance of previously generated data, and in effect an acceptance of a larger p-value indicating statistical significance, so would not provide the 'confirmatory' study that has been requested.

Marti-Carvajal et al. (2008) provided an update of the Cochrane Database review which was discussed in last year's report where the following was noted: 'in analysing those patients with APACHE ≥ 25, similar to the meta analysis published by Friedrich (2006) discussed in last year's clinical overview, a relatively high  weighting  has  been  given  to  the  ADDRESS  study,  even  though  PROWESS  provided  the  vast majority  of  patients  and  events  (Williams  et  al  2006).  The  authors  did  not  include  an  analysis  of ADDRESS and PROWESS using the EU indicated population with multiple organ dysfunction, and thus this publication has limited applicability to the EU'. The MAH has previously submitted to the CHMP as well as published (Williams et al. 2006) a combined analysis of multiple organ dysfunction patients from

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

PROWESS and ADDRESS indicating a significant treatment benefit. No new data analysis was provided in current Cochrane review.

Some review articles suggest new avenues for the use of rhAPC. For instance, Perri and Fumagali (2008) reviewed trials evaluating the use of Xigris in transplant recipients experiencing sepsis. They conclude that  'coagulation  inhibitors  represent  major  mechanisms  to  control  microvascular  dysfunction  during ischemia-reperfusion and sepsis, and additional clinical trials are necessary to evaluate the optimal timing and  dosing  of  Xigris  and  to  better  assess  its  efficacy  and  safety  in  transplant  recipients'.  Gilbert  and Marsden (2008) reviewed the potential role of activated protein C and diabetic nephropathy. Lust et al. (2008) proposed that the protein C pathway has an important role in governing intestinal microvascular inflammation and might provide a novel therapeutic target in the management of inflammatory bowel disease.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Investigator sponsored study Several investigator sponsored studies are currently ongoing in the EU. The CHMP was made aware of a large  non-sponsored,  prospective,  multicentre,  randomised,  blinded,  4-arm,  placebo-controlled  (1  arm) study comparing Xigris (standard posology; 1 arm) with low-dose corticoids (iv hydrocortisone TID + oral  fludrocortisone  QD;  1  arm)  and  with  the  combination  of  Xigris  and  corticoids  (1  arm)  in  1280 patients within 24 h of septic shock. The study will be run in the Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris). The endpoints are 28-day and 90-day mortality; safety will be closely monitored (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00625209). The study start date was March 2008 and its estimated primary completion date is December 2011. It is difficult at the present time to know if the results from that study will constitute a valuable addition to the Xigris outcome database. 1.3.3 Update on spontaneous safety data from the market PSUR 8, submitted in January 2008, covered the period 22 November 2006 to 21 November 2007. The  MAH  has  included  an  updated  safety  report  in  their  submission  (Module  5.3.6).  This  report reviews  the  8-month  safety  data  from  22  November  2007  to  21  July  2008.  An  estimated  12,249 patients have been treated with Xigris worldwide within this reporting period ( ∼ 10% of the current total).  The  rate  of  exposure  to  Xigris  during  this  period  is  slightly  less  than  the  last  PSUR  period taking into account the different lengths of the reporting periods. The review of spontaneous events reported  in  this  reporting  period  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  15  serious  bleeding  events  were received from the Italian regulatory authority that had actually occurred in previous reporting periods, as far back as 2003. These events are described in the current report but not included in the calculation in order to keep reporting trends over time understandable. The main observation points of PSUR 8 are the following: There had been a suggestion of lower reporting of CNS bleeding events in the non-EU regions in last year's report, and, in this reporting period, the rate of reporting has fallen lower in the non-EU regions and increased in the EU. Review of these cases does not reveal an apparent cause for this increase in reporting in the EU. Given that the rate of reporting of CNS bleeds in the non-EU regions fell, the global  rate  of  reporting  of  CNS  bleeds  for  this  period  has  not  increased  and  is  similar  to  PSUR  7. Because of the limitations of spontaneous reporting, particularly where the number of events is low, it cannot be determined at this stage if this represents a fluctuation or a change in the trend of reporting CNS bleeding events between regions.

Regarding use of Xigris in paediatric patients, only 1 current report in a patient less than 18 years old from an EU member state has been received in this reporting period. This report involved a 16-yearold  patient  with  meningococcal  sepsis  and  severe  disseminated  intravascular  coagulation  (DIC).  In addition, 1 report that was received during this reporting period related to a patient treated in Italy in 2003  and  so  was  not  included  in  the  tabulation  of  reports  for  this  period.  Since  the  cut-off  for submission of the responses to the PSUR 8 questions, 1 additional paediatric report (from Brazil) has been received, reporting 2 bleeding events (from the nose and mouth) in a 15-year-old patient. Also, since the submission of the PSUR responses, the severe DIC report above has now been listed as a bleeding event. However, the overall conclusion that there has been only 1 report for an EU member state during this reporting period remains unchanged.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

During  the  8-month  reporting  period,  4  case  reports  were  identified  that  met  the  criteria  for  an accidental overdose or involved a medication error. This rate is within the reporting fluctuations seen between previous PSURs.

PSUR 9 submitted in January 2009, covered the period 22 November 2007 to 21 November 2008. During the period  of  this  report,  reviews  of  serious  bleeding/serious  central  nervous  system  (CNS) bleeding reactions (especially in paediatric patients 17-years of age and younger), thrombocytopenia, convulsions,  ECG  ST  segment  elevation/troponin  increased/chest  pain  and  a  cumulative  overdose analysis were performed.

Medicinal product no longer authorised During the reporting period, a total of 16,575 courses of treatment estimated were administered in all global  markets.  This  corresponds  to  an  estimated  patient  exposure  of  16,575  worldwide.  In comparison, it was estimated that 19,523 courses of treatment of drotrecogin alfa (activated) were sold worldwide  during  the  previous  1-year  period  (decrease  of  +/-  15%).  The  estimated  cumulative worldwide exposure during the period 21 November 2001 through the cut off date of 21 November 2008 is 133,255 courses of treatment. A total of 260 health care professional (HCP) reports (containing 379 reactions) received during the reporting period are included in the line listing. Of these 379 reactions reported, 315 were classified as serious (185 unlisted and 130 listed) and 64 were non serious (55 unlisted and 9 listed). The number and  types  of  reports  and  the  demographics  from  this  PSUR  are  generally  consistent  with  the information presented in previous PSURs except for \"vascular disorders\". The increase in the number of  \"vascular  disorders\"  SOC  cases  reported  is  partly  due  to  a  larger  number  of  retrospective  cases added to the database from clinical trials and regulatory authorities during this reporting period. Thus,  the  highest  proportion  of  reactions  (16.1%)  was  from  the  \"vascular  disorders\"  SOC  and consisted mainly of haemorrhage (50/61 total reactions). The second highest proportion of reactions (13.7%) was from the \"investigations\" SOC and consisted mainly of activated partial thromboplastin time prolonged (15/52 total reactions) and platelet count decreased (11/52 total reactions). The third highest  proportion  of  reactions  (12.9%)  was  from  the  \"general  disorders  and  administration  site conditions\" SOC and consisted mainly of death (38/49 total reactions). A  total  of  275  HCP  reports  (containing  309  reactions)  received  during  the  reporting  period  are included in the line listing. The \"Investigations\" SOC accounts for the highest proportion of reactions (24.9%) of which activated partial thromboplastin time prolonged (21/77 total reactions) and platelet count  decreased  (20/77  total  reactions)  are  the  most  reported.  The  second  proportion  of  reactions (13.3%)  was  from  the  Vascular  disorders  SOC  and  consisted  mainly  of  haemorrhage  (32/41  total reactions) and haematoma (3/41 total reactions). This is consistent with the information provided in the previous PSUR. During the period  of  this  report,  reviews  of  serious  bleeding/serious  central  nervous  system  (CNS) bleeding reactions (especially in paediatric patients 17-years of age and younger), thrombocytopenia, convulsions,  ECG  ST  segment  elevation/troponin  increased/chest  pain;  and  a  cumulative  overdose analysis were performed.

Finally, during the current reporting period, one issue was identified with the overdose language in the current Reference Safety Information (RSI). A change to the RSI for drotrecogin alfa (activated) is recommended within Section C.9 regarding overdose: a case of drotrecogin alfa (activated) reported an administration rate overdose greater than that currently listed in the RSI.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## II. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS

## 2.1 Discussion on clinical aspects

## 2.1.1 Specific obligation 051 (PROWESS-SHOCK (F1K-MC-EVDP)

The MAH was asked by the CHMP to provide an update to the CHMP with regard to recruitment in the ongoing PROWESS-SHOCK study.

In July 2009 the MAH estimated that last patient visit will occur approximately 1 year later than initially communicated to the CHMP. Based on this timeline, provisional study results could be made available in Q4  2011,  during  the  then  ongoing  annual  licence  reassessment,  and  the  final  study  report  could  be submitted as part of the next 5-year renewal dossier in February 2012.

- The timeline communicated to the CHMP in May 2009 included the MAH's efforts to get the study timeline back on track as well as the need to be realistic. The planned number of sites to be initiated was increased from 250 to 300. New countries and non-US sites were added. In the 4 months since then, recruitment has exceeded this plan. The MAH now feels more confident that recruitment  targets  could  be  further  improved,  particularly  as  recruitment  has  continued  to increase in the early summer period. Based on site performance during the past 6 months, the MAH anticipates that patient enrolment can be completed 4 months earlier than communicated in the response submitted in May 2009. The MAH will also explore a number of options to ensure that the current recruitment rates are maintained and potentially improved.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  CHMP is  supportive  of  the  PROWESS  SHOCK  clinical  trial  as  it  will  help  better  define  the patient  population.  The  CHMP  was  however  concerned  by  the  fact  that  the  results  of  the  study  will become available later than initially expected. In  August  2009  the MAH provided updated timelines, and estimated that patients' enrolment can be completed 4 months earlier than communicated previously, and that a study report can be made available to the CHMP 2 months earlier than originally planned. This would lead to the submission of the final study report by Q2 2011. The  Ad  Hoc  Expert  Group  was  therefore  asked  to  discuss  whether  the  results  of  the  PROWESSSHOCK study could be obtained faster than currently proposed by the MAH and if additional means can be proposed to accelerate the study. There was a consensus among experts that the MAH is currently doing the maximum to ensure a good recruitment in the trial. No expert suggested additional means to accelerate the study. Some experts were however of the opinion that the suspension of the marketing authorisation could facilitate the enrolment. Regarding the impact of a potential suspension of the MA on the recruitment, there was not a full consensus among the experts. The majority view (7/11) was that a suspension of MA would seriously hurt  the  trial  through  reduced  or  halted  recruitment  and  would  jeopardise  its  scientific  validity, whereas 3/11 thought it would facilitate recruitment and 1/11 thought there would be no change. With regard to PROWESS-SHOCK, the MAH clarified the following: · When the proposed timeline for the study was communicated to the CHMP in February 2007, the protocol had not been finalised and a number of key factors were still uncertain (e.g., the protocol required the creation of a specific definition for septic shock). That took some additional time. · It was not clear that US recruitment would subsequently prove to be so much lower than it was in PROWESS.

- The study report of PROWESS-SHOCK will be made available to the CHMP more quickly. The MAH proposes  producing  a  '28-day'  final  study  report  based  on  locked,  validated  data  that includes the primary outcome (28-day mortality) and key secondary outcomes, including safety. This report would then be followed by another study report that includes 6 month follow up data

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

together  with  the  28-day  analyses  not  included  in  the  first  report.  The  first  report  could  be completed approximately 2 months earlier than originally planned.

- As defined in the protocol and agreed with the CHMP during the 5-year renewal procedure, in the event  that  lower  than  expected  mortality  or  higher  than  expected  use  of  commercial  Xigris  is observed during the study, the sample size will be increased by up to 500 patients, which would impact the timeline.
- The  MAH  is  committed  to  completing  PROWESS-SHOCK  as  part  of  its  EU  licensing requirements.

The MAH therefore committed to the timelines mentioned in the below table:

| Activity                                     | Feb 2007 Timeline   | July 2009 Timeline   | authorised New Proposed Timeline (September 2009)   |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| Last patient visit (28-day study period)     | Q3 2010             | Q3 2011              | Q1 2011                                             |
| Database lock                                | Q3 2010             | Q3 2011              | Q2 2011                                             |
| Study report completed (28-day study period) | Q1 2011             | Q1 2012              | Q2 2011                                             |
| Submission of study reporttoCHMP             | Q1 2011             | Q1 2012              | Q2 2011                                             |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Activity Feb 2007 Timeline Last patient visit (28-day study period) Database lock Study report completed (28-day study period) Submission of study report to CHMP The  MAH  committed  to  update  the  CHMP  on  the  progress  of  recruitment  and  overall  mortality  in PROWESS-SHOCK every 6 months. The  CHMP  notes  the  MAH's  efforts,  and  apparent  success,  to  speed  up  recruitment  in  PROWESSSHOCK and to  provide  the  28-day  results  to  the  CHMP  in  an  accelerated  fashion,  with  a  probable reduction of the initial delay from 1 year to 6 months. 2.1.2 Pharmacogenomic data The  CHMP  has  been  made  aware  of  a  public  presentation,  entitled  'Pivotal  Trials  in  PGx', which included  preliminary pharmacogenetic  biomarker  data  about  Xigris  by  a  Lilly  expert,  at  a  large international DIA- and FDA-supported pharmacogenomics meeting in Mexico in May 2008. During that presentation  Xigris  data  was  used  to  illustrate  the  challenges  of  developing  a  clinical  biomarker, highlighting  biomarker  sensitivity  and  specificity.  The  presentation  made  reference  to  preliminary, unconfirmed genetic data, where protein C and serpine1 polymorphisms subdivided Xigris treated patients in the PROWESS trial  into 3 subgroups with apparent differential efficacy. The MAH has been exploring the role of genetic markers including the rs2069912 SNP of protein C (also implicated in higher sepsis mortality in East Asian patients [Russell et al., Hum Genet 2008]) and the rs7242 SNP of serpine1 in the response to Xigris. A combination of these SNPs is linked to an increased risk of coagulation dysfunction after  developing  sepsis  (Mooder  et  al.,  and  Sirius  Genomics,  2008). The MAH had not informed the CHMP of these important pharmacogenetic data related to Xigris because it was not felt by the MAH to be  sufficiently  developed  for  formal  regulatory  review,  and  because  no  study  report  or  published manuscript was available, these data has not been submitted to the CHMP. The MAH's primary interest in regards  to  development  of  a  potential  biomarker  to  guide  therapy  with  Xigris  has  focused  on  the multipurpose  biomarker,  protein  C,  which  is  being  prospectively  researched  in  the  RESPOND  Ph  II exploratory study. In addition the new placebo-controlled PROWESS-SHOCK study will investigate as a secondary  objective  if  a  differential  treatment  effect  is  evident  in  patients  with  severe  protein  C deficiency.

The MAH has also investigated the potential utility of other proteins measured as part of the PROWESS study to act as biomarkers. This data was published earlier this year (Shorr et al. 2008) and was included in  the  publication  review  of  the  current  ALR.  It  concluded  that  based  on  systematic  analyses  of  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

11 variables measured, protein C was the only variable consistently associated with both Xigris treatment effect and survival.

The MAH also clarified how genetic information was collected: A company approached the MAH to analyse the remaining genetic samples from PROWESS to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)  in  coagulation  and  inflammation  genes  for  association  with  response  to  Xigris.  Three  (3) independent datasets (Saint Paul's Hospital (SPH), Vasopressin and Septic Shock Trial (VASST study) and PROWESS APACHE II ≥ 25 score cohort) are available to analyse the association between response to Xigris and these SNPs.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The Protein C SNP (rs2069912) was associated with risk of death from sepsis in the Saint Paul's Hosptial (SPH) cohort. SNPs in SERPINE 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) were found to be associated with mortality outcome with Xigris Therapy in the PROWESS Cohort.  A combination genotype of the C allele of the protein C SNP rs2069912 T/C and the T allele of the PAI-1 (SERPINE1) rs7242 T/G has been defined as Improved Response Polymorphism (IRP)+/+. This combination was strongly associated with a positive effect of Xigris treatment in patients who have severe sepsis and high APACHE II scores, based on retrospective analysis of three different datasets (SPH, PROWESS, VASST). When summary results from all three cohorts were combined (n=1381 patients), IRP+/+ patients made up 37.6% of the population and had a 19.7% absolute risk reduction in 28-day mortality in response to Xigris (23.9% vs 43.6% in placebo), which corresponds to an odds ratio of 0.40 (CI=0.26-0.61; p&lt;0.0001). On the other hand, IRP+/- and IRP-/- patients showed no statistically significant benefit from Xigris. Of note, the meta analysis results must be interpreted with caution for several reasons including only summary statistic data is available, the cohorts are comprised of disparate patients groups, are of different sizes, the individual genetic marker results are not consistent between the cohorts, and a robust hypothesis generation followed by confirmation study has not been completed. In addition, more non-bleeding SAEs occurred in the Xigris-treated patients than in placebo patients in the small (10%) IRP-/- genotype (OR=9.7; CI=1.1-460; p=0.02) and, surprisingly, less SAEs occurred in the Xigris-treated patients than in placebo patients in the large (40%) IRP+/+ genotype. This pattern of effect by genotype across all of these observations and cohorts suggested that this protein C/PAI-1 combination genotype may be able to identify a population with a clearly positive B/R to Xigris treatment. These data were discussed at a meeting with the FDA's Interdisplinary Pharmacogenomics Review Group (IPRG) in July  2007. Their  recommendation  was  to  'cast  a  wider  net'  by  employing  a  genome-wide association study (GWAS) of response to Xigris. The MAH has adopted this advice and a GWAS of the PROWESS DNA samples is underway. The MAH was asked by the CHMP to perform a meta-analysis of the association data linking the IRP and response to Xigris in terms of 28 days mortality and other available endpoints such as 1-year mortality, serious adverse events, and severe bleeding events, among (i) the whole severe sepsis population; (ii) the  multiple  organ  dysfunction  (MOD)  severe  sepsis  population  (i.e.,  the  EU  approved  indication) across the three datasets analysed (SPH, VASST and PROWESS) as well as across all other available datasets in controlled groups of patients treated with Xigris .

Based on available data that have been reviewed and analysed to date, the MAH asserts that interesting genetic  markers  have  been  identified  in  PROWESS,  but  these  markers  have  not  been  sufficiently replicated or confirmed to conclude that any genetic marker is ready for clinical use. Any such marker would  need  to  be  confirmed  in  additional  cohorts  and  replicated  in  a  prospective  trial.  Although  the specific IRP marker (combination of PROC rs2069912 and PAI-1 rs7242 SNPs) that is the subject of this question was initially believed to be promising, the MAH does not believe upon further evaluation that this would be the best genetic hypothesis to carry forward into replication studies. To that end, the MAH has developed a comprehensive plan to generate and investigate the clinical utility of the hypothesized genetic markers.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  MAH  is  now  working  to  develop  potential  markers  (protein  or  genetic)  that  would  identify patients with severe sepsis most likely to benefit from Xigris treatment. As well as the possibility of using  genomic  markers,  the  RESPOND  study  is  rapidly  approaching  completion  of  enrolment  and analysis  of  these  data  should  help  in  understanding  the  potential  role  of  protein  C  levels  in  patient identification and treatment. The MAH does not believe that the currently identified genetic markers are ready for clinical testing or for clinical use.

The  CHMP  noted  that  the  long-term  biomarkers  and  pharmacogenomic  research  activities  might generate  the  desired  information  and  enable  for  a  clinical  use  of  Xigris  on  more  solid  grounds. However, robust data are expected only to become available within 3 to 4 years.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The CHMP agrees that a multi-marker GWAS will provide a better analysis of the genomic associations underlying the response to Xigris in the PROWESS study and also agrees on the timetable proposed by the MAH. 2.1.3 Risk of bleedings The CHMP noted that following approval of Xigris in 2002, early surveys, clinical studies and postmarketing investigation suggested that the risk of bleeding during clinical use might be greater than was  noted  in  the  original  phase-3  trial  (PROWESS).  Increased  bleeding  with  Xigris  has  been  a consistent finding in all sepsis trials conducted to date. In both studies PROWESS (n = 1,690) and in a second  randomized  controlled  trial  in  adults  ADDRESS  (n  =  2,640),  serious  bleeding  was  greater during  Xigris  infusion  than  placebo  (2.4  vs.  1.0  and  2.4  vs.  1.2%,  respectively,  p  =  0.02  for  both comparisons). The MAH mentioned that given that activated protein C has anticoagulant activity, it is not unexpected that Xigris use has been associated with increased rates of bleeding. However, the following points should be considered: · The absolute increase in the rate of bleeding during infusion in PROWESS (1.4%) is small relative to the mortality reduction seen in PROWESS (absolute risk reduction in patients with multiple organ dysfunction [MOD] = 7.4%), such that 5 lives would be saved for each additional serious bleeding event (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Benefit/risk of drotrecogin alfa (activated) inPRoWEss.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The rate of serious bleeding events has remained relatively consistent across a number of clinical trials. In placebo-controlled studies, the increase in serious bleeding events did not translate into an increase in the overall rate of serious adverse events. The increase in serious bleeding events during the  infusion  in  PROWESS and ADDRESS is primarily driven by events not classified as central nervous system, life-threatening, or fatal bleeds (Figure 2).

6%

- Medicinal product no longer authorised · The  incidence  of  serious  bleeding  events  during  the  infusion  period  was  higher  in  ENHANCE patients  (all  treated  with  Xigris)  compared  to  Xigris  patients  in  PROWESS  (3.6%  versus  2.4%; Figure 2 above). That increase may have resulted from the enrolment of patients with a higher risk of bleeding. This was illustrated by a higher rate of serious bleeding events not only during the infusion period, but also during the post infusion period when no direct additional bleeding risk would be anticipated due to the short half life of the drug. In PROWESS, the rates of post-infusion serious bleeding events were similar in Xigris and placebo patients. In ENHANCE, the primary baseline predictors  of  bleeding  during  the  infusion  were  hepatic  dysfunction,  surgery,  and  haematologic dysfunction, and there were a higher proportion of such patients enrolled in ENHANCE compared with  patients  enrolled  in  PROWESS.  Of  note,  the  incidence  of  haemorrhage-related  deaths  and study-drug related deaths in ENHANCE was the same or lower than that observed in PROWESS.
- There is a background rate of clinically relevant bleeding in the untreated severe sepsis population, or even in the critically ill population from general intensive care units. For instance, the rates of central nervous system bleeding were 0.4 % in the latter group (Oppenheim-Eden et al., 1999) and 0.4% in the  placebo  arm  of  the  KyberSept  study  which  had  similar  inclusion  and  exclusion  criteria  to PROWESS (Warren et al., 2001).
- In addition to the rate of serious bleeding events, it is also important to consider the overall rate of serious adverse events as well as the types of events. As noted in the literature review of the current annual licence reassessment document, Dhainaut (2008) reported the results of a clinical evaluation committee  (CEC)  review  of  the  safety  of  Xigris  therapy  from  the  INDEPTH  database,  which primarily  included  the  PROWESS  and  ENHANCE  patient  populations  together  with  placebo patients from 3 other Phase 2 studies in severe sepsis, all with similar entry criteria. They conclude that although serious bleeding events occurred more often, non-bleeding serious adverse events (for

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

example,  arterial  thrombotic  events  and  arrhythmias)  occurred  less  frequently  with  Xigris.  This decrease was found to be statistically significant in this large propensity-adjusted database. Overall, the incidence of serious adverse events was not increased with Xigris (Figure 3).

<!-- image -->

- In  clinical  trials,  54%  of  the  serious  bleeding  events  reported  during  the  infusion  period  were classified  as  central  nervous  system,  fatal,  or  life-threatening  bleeds;  in  spontaneous  health  care provider reports, 44% were so classified (Reporting Rate, 31 events/10,000patients). Thus, there do not appear to be more of these more clinically relevant bleeds occurring in clinical practice compared to clinical trials.
- Medicinal product no longer authorised · In the post-marketing period, since 2001, the MAH has closely evaluated safety in Lilly-sponsored clinical  trials  and  in  safety  reports  from  health  care  professionals  and  consumers  through  routine pharmacovigilance and surveillance activities. The Company Core Safety Information (CCSI) and product  labels  have  been  regularly  updated.  In  addition,  in  a  Follow-up-Measure  from  the  third annual license  reassessment,  the  MAH  proactively  communicated  recent  significant  SPC  changes (for  example, the  paediatric  information  included  from  Study  EVBP) to the  most  frequent Xigris users and paediatric intensivists as a measure to prevent potential off-label use of Xigris. This activity was part of an EU Risk Management Plan submitted to CHMP in April 2006. · Nine  PSURS  have  been  submitted  since  marketing  approval,  every  6  months  for  3  years  and annually, thereafter. The safety data from these 9 PSURs do not raise new concerns (e.g., compared to the results of clinical trials). The  CHMP has requested special monitoring or review of certain adverse events in each PSUR. Following these reviews, a causal association with Xigris was not established and specific and required monitoring has not been necessary. Five special topics continue to  be  evaluated:  serious  bleeding,  including  central  nervous  system  bleeding,  thrombocytopenia, adverse events in paediatric patients (especially bleeding), convulsions, and overdose.
- Thrombocytopenia is a known complication of severe sepsis and clinical trial data do not suggest a causal  association  between  Xigris  and  thrombocytopenia.  The  rate  of  thrombocytopenia  event reporting has been stable over the last two reporting periods and the overall rate of reporting has decreased over time.
- Spontaneous reporting rates for convulsion do not raise concerns about a causal association to Xigris; these rates are low (1/10000) and have remained consistent over time.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- Although  spontaneous  adverse  event  reporting  in  a  population  cannot  reliably  estimate  the population's use of a drug, in the last PSUR only 3 paediatric (&lt;18 years of age) cases were reported. Two of these cases were from the EU and 1 of the 2 was a retrospective case from Italy from 2003. This  does  represent  a  decrease  from  earlier  PSURs  before  the  introduction  of  the  Warning  and Precautions in the SPC that Xigris is not recommended in children and indicates alignment with the SPC.
- Cumulative evaluation of overdose with Xigris has concluded that 70% of cases are not associated with an adverse event. In the remaining cases, the events do not differ from all patients receiving Xigris.  Thus,  Xigris  overdose  did  not  produce  unique  or  increased  rates  of  reporting  of  adverse events. There did not appear to be a dose relationship to bleeding events.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In  summary,  the  post-marketing  data  confirm  that  Xigris  is  associated  with  serious  bleeding  events including CNS bleeds, but that there is no suggestion that reporting rates are increasing over time or that bleeding  in  clinical  practice  is  more  severe  than  in  clinical  trials.  No  new  safety  concerns/signals associated with Xigris use have been identified through routine pharmacovigilance surveillance and after comprehensive evaluations of special topics. The MAH also discussed published Xigris registry data. In general, these registries have demonstrated that  patients  receiving  Xigris  in  clinical  practice  have  greater  disease  severity  and  higher  mortality compared  to  patients  treated  in  clinical  trials,  and  also  greater  disease  severity  compared  to  clinical practice patients who do not receive Xigris. Bleeding events were only reported in some of the registries, and comparisons with clinical trial results are not always easy as some used different definition for serious bleeding events. In the largest UK study (Rowan et al. 2008), the rate of serious bleeding during the infusion was higher than PROWESS, but similar to that seen in ENHANCE. In the other UK study (Ridley at al. 2008), serious bleeding events were similar to PROWESS. In the GiViTI registry, the rate of serious bleeding events was higher than in PROWESS  and  ENHANCE;  however,  as  acknowledged  in  the  manuscript,  this  is  probably  due  to differences in the criteria used to define serious bleeding events in terms of blood transfusion between the 2 studies (administration of more than 2 units of packed red cells in GiViTI versus administration of 3 units on two consecutive days in PROWESS and ENHANCE). The  CHMP  noted  that  the  rates  of  serious  bleeding  events  during  infusion  in  PROWESS  and ADDRESS  were  identical  to  one  another  (2.4%  for  patients  treated  with  Xigris  in  both  studies). Serious bleeding events in the non-comparative study ENHANCE were slightly higher at 3.6%. Post-authorisation  observational  studies  and  registers  have  in  some  cases  reported  higher  rates  of bleeding, but the case definitions for serious bleeding events were not comparable to those used in the placebo-comparative clinical trials, making direct comparisons somewhat unreliable. Some CHMP members noted that the increased risk of bleeding with the use of Xigris is undoubted. In addition, more or less vulnerable patient groups will suffer more intensely from bleeding than others. Despite  the  presentation  of  the  MAH  with  further  statistical  evaluations  it  might  be  noticed  that evaluation of bleeding risk outside clinical trials remains conflicting. 2.1.4 Italian GiViTI study (FUM 060)

The  Italian  Medicines  agency  has  provided  the  CHMP  with  the  final  report  of  the  GiViTI  group (Gruppo Italiano per la Valutazione degli Interventi in Terapia Intensiva) on the use of Xigris in Italian intensive care units between 2003 and 2007.

The  final  GiViTI  report  has  been  prepared  by  Guido  Bertolini  &amp;  Carlotta  Rossi  (Laboratorio  di Epidemiologia  Clinica,  Istituto  di  Ricerche  Farmacologiche  'Mario  Negri'  Ranica)  and  is  dated October 10, 2007. It covers the period from July 2003 to September 2007 and reviews 1083 cases of Xigris treatment (1001 of which could be analyzed) in 161 ICUs in Italy.  Previously, in March 2007, Bertolini et al. had published the results of a similar analysis on 709 cases of Xigris treatment (668 analysed)  collected  between July  2003  and  March  2006  in  134  ICUs.  This  article  in  the  journal

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Intensive Care Medicine 1 was accompanied by a harsh editorial by Eichacker &amp; Natanson. 2 The article and the editorial  have  been  taken into  account  by  the  CHMP  during  their  assessment  of the  5-year renewal of the marketing authorisation of Xigris completed in early 2008.

The CHMP noted that the proportion of patients recruited in this study (50-60% of all patients treated with  Xigris  in  Italy)  is  quite  high  and  probably  higher  than  in  most  similar  pharmaco-surveillance studies. Even though the selection of patients for Xigris treatment is uncontrolled, the Registry should be  considered  a  precious  source  of  information,  especially  because  a  comparison  is  made  with  a control group, through a logistic regression analysis (Bertolini et al., 2007).

Overall, 82 patients out of 1083 (7.6%) were excluded from the analysis because still in ICU or under query. The remaining 1001 patients were analysed. Data relative to 344 patients were obtained with the first CRF while those of the remaining 657 were obtained with the modified CRF (&gt;January 2005). Overall mortality in the ICU was 45.4%. Mortality was much higher (p&lt;0.0001) in elective surgical patients (66.7%) than in either emergency surgical patients (37.2%) or non-surgical patients (46.6%). The reasons for this large difference cannot be inferred from the current dataset.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In 253 patients (23.4%) the infusion of Xigris was definitely stopped before the 96-h course was over. The main reasons for stopping treatment were death (48%) and bleeding (30%). Thus, about 7% of patients stopped treatment due to bleeding. There was no apparent change over time in the number of patients stopping treatment and in the proportion of patients who did so because of bleeding. Overall, bleeding occurred in 103/1001 patients (10.3%), of whom 30% bled in the gastrointestinal tract, 20% in the skin and soft tissues, and 16% in the thorax. Intracranial haemorrhage occurred in 7/1001 patients,  i.e.  0.7%.  Again,  these  numbers  did  not  appear  to  change  over  time  from  2003  to 2007.  Furthermore,  only  44%  of  all  bleedings  were  assessed  as  probably  associated  with  Xigris administration, and 50%, as possibly associated. Mortality was not associated with bleeding, even if the p value was close to the 5% conventional cutoff for significance (53.4% with bleeding vs. 44.4% without bleeding, p=0.08). The authors did not analyse the relationship of bleeding with post-surgical status. Off-label use of the drug was quite frequent in the GiViTI study: it was present in 15.6% of patients before the introduction of timing restriction by the EMEA on January 2005 and in 27.3% after that. After 2005, 39.1% of patients were treated within 24 h of their first sepsis-related organ failure, 39.2% were treated between 24 and 48 h, and 20.8% were treated 'off-label' beyond 48 h. On a strict stance, patients who started treatment between 24 and 48 h after the onset of organ failure (39.2%) could be considered 'borderline' off-label use according to the EU SPC. In addition to these data, a further 29 patients recruited with the modified CRF (4.4%) were considered possibly  off-label  since  the  drug  was  started  on  the  same  day  a  surgical  procedure  was  performed, whereas according to the SPC it should not be administered within 12 h from surgery. The overall offlabel use in the second part of this observational study may thus be close to 30%. The authors of the study concluded that this study, along with data from available RCTs, indicates that the risk-to-benefit profile of Xigris is questionable. Particularly, treatment with Xigris can be harmful for some subsets of patients that match the current indications.

The CHMP concluded that data regarding 50-60% of all Italian patients treated with Xigris in real life are  a  rare  example  of  an  efficient  post-marketing  monitoring  and  should  be  considered  a  precious source of information. Therefore, it is worrying that, using a control group of eligible patients who did not receive Xigris, no significant effect of Xigris could be demonstrated through logistic regression

1 Bertolini G et al. Use of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in Italian intensive care units: the results of a nationwide survey. Intensive Care Med . 2007 Mar; 33(3):426-434.

2 Eichacker PQ, Natanson C. Increasing evidence that the risks of rhAPC may outweigh its benefits. Intensive Care Med . 2007 Mar; 33(3):396-399.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

analysis in this group of patients at high risk of death, i.e. higher than in the clinical studies performed so far with Xigris.

The MAH was therefore asked to re-discuss the benefit-risk balance of Xigris in patients at very high risk of death (~40-50%) treated according to the current clinical practice in Europe and to collect all available data, especially from registries in the UK, Canada,, Poland and Belgium., describing the type of patient population currently receiving Xigris and to compare that population with those included in the main clinical trials.

In its analysis, the MAH has used data from their own sponsored studies PROWESS, ENHANCE, and XPRESS, as well as data from the 8 major observational studies published in international journals, and one study  submitted  for  publication  (PROGRESS registry),  with  enrolments  ranging  from  97  to  1292 patients who received Xigris.

|                                   | Lilly clinical studies   | Observational studies   |
|-----------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|
| Mean number of organ dysfunctions | 2.4 to 2.7               | 2.9 to 3.4              |
| %patients with ≥ 4 dysfunctions   | 18 to25%                 | 38 to78%                |
| %patients with CVdysfunction      | 71 to83%                 | 84 to96%                |
| %patients with metabolic acidosis | 30 to35%                 | 47 to77%                |

In the largest of the published registries (UK-1; Rowan et al. 2008), which enrolled almost 1300 patients treated with Xigris in UK, crude hospital mortality was reported as 45%. Of 8 relative risks estimated from  individually  matched  (0.75  to  0.85)  and  propensity-matched  (0.82  to  0.90)  controls,  7  were consistent with the results of PROWESS. Restricting the analysis to patients receiving Xigris during the first  24  hours  resulted  in  larger  treatment  effects  (relative  risks  0.62  to  0.81).  Further  analysis demonstrated statistically significant benefit in the high risk subgroups.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A comparison of the baseline characteristics of patients enrolled in the observational studies and the Lilly clinical studies indicated that patients treated in clinical practice are more severely ill than clinical study patients: Lilly clinical studies Mean number of organ dysfunctions % patients with ≥ 4 dysfunctions 18 to 25 % % patients with CV dysfunction 71 to 83 % % patients with metabolic acidosis 30 to 35 % These observational studies have all demonstrated that patients treated with Xigris in ICUs across EU and US have more organ dysfunction and higher mortality compared to patients treated in the Lilly clinical studies. In the GiViTI registry, the only disease severity measure presented in the baseline characteristics table was the presence or absence of shock, which was reported as being less in the Xigris treated group than in controls. The overall mortality was less in the Xigris treated group compared with the non-treated group (46% versus 55%). Although the adjusted effect of Xigris administration on mortality was not significant for the overall population, the MAH was of the opinion that this registry was not statistically powered to detect  a  significant  treatment  effect.  Furthermore,  in  the  presence  of  significant  interactions  involving treatment (Xigris-by-surgical status as identified in the article), the choice of the statistical model can have a large impact on the estimate of overall treatment effect and on the significance of the test of this effect, particularly when there is a wide disparity in sample sizes for the subgroups involved in the interaction term  (from  152  elective  surgery  patients  to  1063  nonsurgical  patients,  for  instance).  The  MAH  also concluded that it is difficult to quantify the magnitude of the Xigris effect on mortality from the GiViTI registry.  Further  analyses  from  GiViTI  focused  on  the  subgroups  of  scheduled  surgical  patients, unscheduled surgical patients, and nonsurgical patients. Although they report increased mortality in the smallest of these subgroups with scheduled surgery (11% of the Xigris treated cohort), the other 2 groups (89% of the Xigris cohort) demonstrated results consistent with PROWESS.

Data related to the use of Xigris in the PROGRESS registry (submitted for publication), which included 882 patients who received Xigris, have been analysed using various different logistic regression models, and, all models showed results consistent with PROWESS.

Similarly, logistic regression analysis of data from an observational study in Poland (Poland; Kubler et al. 2006)  has  demonstrated  a  significant  mortality  reduction  with  Xigris  treatment.  In  addition,  studies  in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Belgium  (Belgium-1;  Vincent  et  al.  2008)  and  the  United  Kingdom  (UK-2;  Ridley  et  al.  2008)  have demonstrated mortality in patients receiving Xigris lower than predicted for non-treated patients when adjusted for disease severity. Another observational study from Belgium (Belgium-2; Decruyenaere et al. 2009) and also a study from the United States (US-1; Wheeler et al. 2008) have demonstrated similar mortality  to  comparable  treated  patients  from  PROWESS.  The  US-1  study  also  highlighted  the importance of early treatment. A study from Canada (Kanji et al. 2007) noted a higher disease severity and  a  hospital  mortality  of  45%  in  patients  receiving  Xigris;  however,  adjusted  analyses  were  not performed. The authors concluded 'In light of more plausible reasons for the high mortality rate (i.e., patients with greater severity of illness) this study provides no reason to believe that the risks associated with Xigris therapy outweigh the benefits although efforts aimed at earlier disease recognition, earlier assessment of treatment eligibility, and greater awareness of relative contraindications may still make the benefit/risk ratio more appealing.'

A statistically significant treatment-by-surgical status interaction was observed (p=0.054). However, the direction was opposite to the observations of the GiViTI study. In the clinical trials, for emergency postoperative  patients,  higher  28-day  all-cause  mortality  was  observed  for  Xigris  patients  compared  with placebo patients. However, the number of patients was small and the effect seemed to have been driven by a  low  mortality  in  the  placebo  group  rather  than  an  increased  mortality  in  the  Xigris  group.  An examination of the baseline characteristics of patients with emergency surgery showed that there were 16 more patients 65 years or older in the Xigris group than in the placebo group [Xigris: 103, placebo: 87]. Age 65 or older was associated with a greater than 2-fold increase in mortality in the placebo group (age &lt;65 years: 20.9%, age ≥ 65: 42.4%). Thus, this analysis is not consistent with the data presented in the GiViTI manuscript where there was a suggestion of lack of benefit in the elective surgery subgroup, rather than the emergency surgery subgroup.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In these observational studies in which the mortality rate of patients receiving Xigris was compared to mortality in a control group (adjusted for covariates) or to an expected mortality, lower mortality was observed  in  the  Xigris  treated  cohorts.  Thus,  these  observational  studies  do  not  undermine  the  use  of Xigris  in  high  risk  patients,  but  reinforce  the  findings  from  PROWESS  in  which  significant  mortality benefit was demonstrated in patients with 2 or more and 3 or more organ dysfunctions. The CHMP noted that several observational studies of Xigris treated patients in ICUs across EU and US have been published. In almost all cases, patients treated in clinical practice appear more severely ill than clinical study patients. In clinical practice, patients treated with Xigris and their adjusted controls have a mean of 3 organ dysfunctions and an ICU/hospital mortality rate of 40 to 55%, compared with about 3035% in the MAH-sponsored clinical trials. There is no clear evidence that this difference in mortality rates between clinical trials and current ICU practice is a real concern. First, the beneficial effect of Xigris in the  pivotal  study  PROWESS  was  concentrated  in  the  higher  risk  population  with  mortality  rates approaching  those  of  the  current  clinical  population.  Second,  the  MAH  has  shown  in  its  comparative analysis that the observational studies do not demonstrate a lack of efficacy of Xigris (although they are not designed to show a proof of efficacy). One may add that the observational studies do not raise serious safety  concerns,  as  reflected  in  the  conclusions  of  all  PSURs  so  far,  except  under  some  special circumstances such as the scheduled surgical patients in the GiViTI study. The CHMP also concluded that in the GiViTI study, a higher risk of death was observed in patients treated with Xigris after elective (scheduled) surgery compared with patients treated after emergency surgery  or  in  medical  patients.  The  MAH  was  therefore  asked  to  analyse  their  whole  database  to explain  the  meaning  of  that  observation  and  possibly  propose  new  contra-indications  to  the  use  of Xigris. According to the MAH, the available clinical trial data are not consistent with the data presented in the GiViTI article. There was a suggestion of lack of benefit in the elective surgery subgroup in the GiViTI article;  however,  a  similar  finding  was  not  seen  in  the  available  clinical  trial  data.  The  individual components of the  APACHE II score, which include information on elective  and  emergency  surgery, were only collected in the Phase 2 study (F1K-MCEVAA) and PROWESS.

The MAH has provided 28-day mortality outcomes by surgical status for the 2 largest placebo-controlled studies, PROWESS and ADDRESS.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In PROWESS, the overall mortality results were similar to those discussed for the ISS population (above) as PROWESS made up the vast majority of this population. Subgroups stratified by age generally resulted in subgroups with higher mortality in the older age groups, but did not greatly alter the pattern of results seen in the overall population. Stratification by site of infection resulted in many small subgroups where interpretation of mortality results is not possible. However, in 2 of the largest subgroups, lung and intraabdominal, again the pattern of results were not greatly different from the pattern of results seen in the overall population.

In ADDRESS, information on elective and emergency surgery status is not available. Overall mortality in surgical patients with single organ dysfunction treated with Xigris has been previously noted to be higher than  placebo  patients,  resulting  in  the  SPC  warning  above.  Thus,  the  analysis  provided  only  includes patients with multiple organ dysfunction. Although having multiple organ dysfunction, such patients have been assessed as not meeting the indication for Xigris in that country, and mortality was low at just over 20%. Given the relatively small subgroup size and low event rate in this population, it is difficult to draw conclusions from this data in the overall and also stratified subpopulations. However, there do not appear to be any clear safety issues identified by such analyses.

Considering the possible life threatening ADRs (e.g. cranial haemorrhage) treatment with a medicinal product not proven to be effective in this age-group is not acceptable by the CHMP.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Based on these discussions, the MAH did not believe that a change to the SPC concerning scheduled or emergency surgery is warranted at the present time. The CHMP concluded that this observational prospective Italian study (GiViTI) showed an association of Xigris with a significant increase in mortality in elective surgical patients, and with no significant effect in unscheduled surgical and in non-surgical patients. These results (obtained under 'real life' conditions) question the outcome of the Prowess trial. However regarding patients undergoing elective surgery,  the  CHMP  agreed  with  the  MAH's  conclusion  that,  at  the  current  time,  it  does  not  appear justified to change the label based on a small subgroup [70 Xigris and 82 untreated patients] from a single registry,  particularly  where  the  other  available  data  do  not  support  this  conclusion  and  when  all confounders have not been excluded. 2.1.5 Safe use in the Paediatric population The  CHMP  had  noted  that  the  paediatric  study  (RESOLVE-study)  was  stopped  prematurely  for futility. In this respect, the overall, 28-day mortality, serious bleeding events, including fatal central nervous system bleeding events, serious adverse events, and major amputations were similar in Xigris compared with placebo. However, study-drug-related serious adverse events and study-drug-related serious bleeding events (as determined by the investigator) were statistically significantly higher in the Xigris group compared with the placebo group. The majority of these events occurred during Study Days 0 through 6, as 10 patients (4.2%) in the Xigris group had a study-drug-related serious adverse event  during  this  time  period,  compared  with  1  patient  (0.4%)  in  the  placebo  group,  resulting  in  a safety concern for the use of this product in children. Following this evaluation a warning in the SPC was agreed by the CHMP in April 2006 and after the appropriate communication to the paediatric intensive  care  physicians  the  use  of  Xigris  has  remarkably  declined.  However,  according  to  the assessment  of  subsequent  PSURs  the  safety  issue  'cerebral  haemorrhage  in  children'  remains  a concern for the paediatric population despite this warning statement in the product labelling.

The  MAH mentioned that in the  RESOLVE study, although there were  more  central  nervous  system bleeds in the Xigris group, there were more haemorrhagic deaths in the placebo group, and no overall increase  in  fatal  central  nervous  system  bleeding  events  or  serious  bleeding  events  overall.  Thus,  the safety  signal  from  RESOLVE  is  not  clear  cut.  The  MAH  agreed  that  Xigris  should  not  be  used  in children,  and,  since  the  introduction  of  a  warning  to  this  effect  in  2006,  together  with  proactive communication of this SPC change to paediatric intensivists, data reviewed in the PSUR indicates that paediatric use has declined. The MAH suggested that if CHMP insisted on a contraindication in children Xigris should be contraindicated in patients ≤ 3  years of age, as it  was this age group of patients who experienced all the central nervous system bleeds in RESOLVE.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

However the data from the Resolve Clinical study report (dated 20 October 2005) concerning bleeding events are as follows:

## Serious bleeding events (day 0-28) Table EVBP 12.31 page 333

| Age group   |   N |   Bleeding events | Bleeding events   |
|-------------|-----|-------------------|-------------------|
| 0-1 mo      |  14 |                 3 | (21.4%)           |
| 1-12 mo     |  62 |                 5 | (8.1%)            |
| 1-5 y       |  81 |                 4 | (4.9%)            |
| 5-10 y      |  39 |                 2 | (5.1%)            |
| 10-18 y     |  44 |                 2 | (4.5%)            |

| Age group   |   N |   CNS Bleeding events | CNS Bleeding events   |
|-------------|-----|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| 0-1 mo      |  14 |                     2 | (14.3 %)              |
| 1-12 mo     |  62 |                     3 | (4.8 %)               |
| 1-5 y       |  81 |                     4 | (4.9 %)               |
| 5-10 y      |  39 |                     0 | (0.0 %)               |
| 10-18 y     |  44 |                     2 | (4.5%)                |

<!-- image -->

In  their  response,  the  MAH  has  briefly  reviewed  the  results  from  the  main  clinical  trials  of  Xigris  in adults,  i.e.  PROWESS (F1K-MC-EVAD), ENHANCE (F1K-MC- EVBE/F/G), ADDRESS (F1K-MCEVCL/CM),  and  XPRESS  (F1K-MC-EVBR),  as  well  as  the  RESOLVE  (F1K-MC-EVBP)  study  in children. The results of all these studies have already been extensively discussed by the CHMP during the initial marketing authorisation and subsequent annual licence reassessments.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 5-10 y 39 2 (5.1%) 10-18 y 44 2 (4.5%) CNS bleeding events (day 0-28) Table EVBP 12.34 page 341 Age group N CNS Bleeding events 0-1 mo 14 2 (14.3 %) 1-12 mo 62 3 (4.8 %) 1-5 y 81 4 (4.9 %) 5-10 y 39 0 (0.0 %) 10-18 y 44 2 (4.5%) The above recalled data from the Clinical study report do not support the MAH's suggestion for a paediatric  subgroup  &lt;3  years  of  age  being  at  specifically  higher  risk  ('as  it  was  this  age  group  of patients who experienced all the central nervous system bleeds in RESOLVE'). The  CHMP  therefore  requested  a  contra-indication  in  the  concerned  age-group  which  means  all paediatric patients below the age of 18 years as defined by the RESOLVE inclusion criteria. 2.1.6 Lack of confirmation of benefit The  CHMP  noted  that  until  now,  proof  of  efficacy  and  confirmation  of  the  early  results  of  the PROWESS trial are in an unchanged open state despite high efforts of detailed investigations. Neither of  the  controlled  trials  that  followed  PROWESS  (i.e.,  ADDRESS  and  RESOLVE)  noted  any significant  benefit  with  Xigris,  regardless  of  underlying  severity  of  disease.  Across  all  trials  that compared  Xigris  to  placebo  (enrolling  approximately  5,000  patients),  only  two  subgroups  from PROWESS study demonstrated benefit (i.e., the two highest APACHE-II quartiles). Notably, the later ADDRESS  trial  also  enrolled  high-risk  patients  (i.e.,  APACHE-II  score ≥ 25)  and  those  with multifunctional organ failure, receiving either Xigris or placebo, but failed to reproduce the finding of efficacy. In fact, for APACHE-II score ≥ 25,  the  treatment  effect in  ADDRESS was on the side of harm, opposite to and significantly different from the effect of Xigris in the PROWESS trial.

Regarding  ADDRESS in particular,  which  was  the  subject  of  renewed  CHMP  discussions  during  the current  licence  reassessment,  the  MAH  agrees  that  ADDRESS  does  not  confirm  efficacy,  but  would disagree  that  it  can  be  used  to  undermine  the  efficacy  in  the  indicated  population.  One  of  the  main arguments is that randomisation was not stratified by disease severity subgroup (either MOD or APACHE II) in ADDRESS; thus, randomisation cannot be assumed to have produced populations of equal disease

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

severity or predicted outcomes. Analysis of the MOD subgroup indicated that they were a low risk group compared  to  PROWESS  (28-day  placebo  mortality  was  21.9  %  in  ADDRESS  versus  33.9%  in PROWESS),  and  the  mortality  in  this  subgroup  was  in  fact  similar  to  the  single  organ  dysfunction subgroup from PROWESS (21.2%).

The  MAH  provided  the  result  of  a  meta-analysis  of  the  two  randomised,  placebo-controlled  studies, PROWESS and ADDRESS. A first step  in  a  meta-analysis  is  the  test  for  heterogeneity  of  treatment effects.  The  relative  risk  reduction  in  28-day  mortality  in  the  MOD  subgroup  of  ADDRESS  was  not statistically  significantly  different from  the  MOD  subgroup in PROWESS (Breslow-Day interaction pvalue = 0.18). The non-significant Breslow Day p-value indicates that it is statistically valid to combine the  studies  in  the  analysis  (though  the  results  should  be  interpreted  with  caution  due  to  differences  in inclusion criteria in the studies). In the combined analysis there was a statistically significant reduction in mortality. Thus, based on this meta-analysis, the combined evidence in MOD patients indicates a benefit of Xigris.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH then discussed a possible explanation for the different results in PROWESS and ADDRESS. In PROWESS,  the  absolute  benefit  of  Xigris  was  larger  with  MOD  than  single  organ  dysfunction.  In ADDRESS, the majority (76%) of patients in the MOD subgroup had 2 organ dysfunctions, a subgroup in which  the  results  were  very  similar  in  both  studies.  The  main  driver  of  lower  benefit  in  the  MOD subgroup in ADDRESS compared to PROWESS was the unusually low placebo mortality of 12.5% in patients with 3 organ dysfunctions compared with 34.4% of patients in PROWESS, whereas the mortality for  Xigris  patients  with  3  organ  dysfunctions  in  ADDRESS  and  PROWESS  was  similar,  24.4%  and 26.2%, respectively. It is interesting to hypothesise how patients with 3 organ dysfunctions could have such a low mortality. One possibility is that they were in a phase of their organ dysfunction where their clinical  condition  was  actually  improving.  Thus,  one  possibility  for  updating  the  indication  statement could be to introduce the concept that treatment with Xigris is for patients with a clinical condition that is not improving. The  MAH also  discussed  the  meta-analyses  of  the  high  APACHE  II  group  ( ≥ 25)  in  PROWESS  and ADDRESS. These meta-analyses give different results, depending on whether a random effect analysis (Friedrich et al. 2006) or a fixed effect analysis (Williams et al. 2006) is used. A question that follows from the discussions related to the ADDRESS results, above, is: How well do MOD and APACHE II ≥ 25  define  the  indicated  population?  On  the  one  hand,  in  ADDRESS,  these patients were identified by the investigators as 'non-indicated' so one could argue that such patients were identified to be at low risk even within the current indication; however, it could also be argued that other criteria, in addition to MOD, could be beneficial to more clearly define a high risk patient. Thus, a new approach  could  be  to  look  at dynamic  changes  in  organ  dysfunction  rather  than  just  baseline characteristics, and to focus more on absolute risk reductions rather than relative risk reductions. Analysis of  SOFA  data  from  the  placebo  population  from  PROWESS  has  indicated  that  patients  who  fail  to improve their organ function during the first day experience high mortality rates. Thus, a target population could be the population in which organ dysfunction does not improve despite the initiation of best standard care, which would be a group with a much higher risk of death compared to patients with organ function that does improve. In ADDRESS, it was not possible to be certain if patients had low disease severity because they were early in their disease process (the target population) or had low disease severity because their clinical condition was actually improving.

Based on this reasoning, the MAH proposed an addition to the indication statement for further discussion: 'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations where a patient's  clinical  condition  is  not  improving  with  best  standard  care  and when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for further information see section 5.1)'.

During the Ad-Hoc expert group, the experts were asked, given the current knowledge on the safety and efficacy and its limitations as reflected in the product information, if Xigris is a medicinal product

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

for  which  physicians  can  easily  identify  a  patient  population  where  the  benefit  is  considered  to outweigh the risks.

There was no consensus from the experts on defining a specific patient population where the benefit is considered  to  outweigh  the  risks.  The  MAH  proposal  to  amend  the  Xigris  indication  was  also discussed and the experts were not in disfavour of slightly adjusting the indication as this represents clinical  practice  with  the  caveat  that  it  should  be  made  very  clear  that  best  standard  care  and  clear protocol are very important and evolving all the time. Others experts didn't think that the amendment of the indication was needed.

The CHMP concluded that there is no need at the present time to update section 4.1 'Therapeutic indication' of the SPC.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Also,  the  CHMP  was  of  the  opinion  that  at  present  the  ADDRESS  study  is  presented  in  a  way downplaying its  contradiction  of  the  PROWESS  results. The  CHMP  requested the MAH to amend section 5.1 of the SPC to mention that no benefit of drotrecogin alpha (activated) was observed in the subgroup 872 patients  at  low  risk  of  death  with  multiple  organ  dysfunction,  so  ADDRESS  did  not confirm the efficacy results of the PROWESS study. The CHMP also acknowledged the efforts of the MAH to modify the outcome of the clinical trials following  PROWESS  with  biostatistical  approaches.  However,  it  might  be  recapitulated  that  these trials focussed on varied target groups which does not allow retrospective comparison of subgroups. Subsequently  the  CHMP  feels  that  reliable  identification  of  a  patient  group  who  benefits  from treatment with Xigris remains open. This situation bears the risk of harm in non-target patients. To find an interim solution until additional proof of efficacy  has  been  established  the  CHMP recommended the inclusion of a general statement into the SPC in line with the wording regarding ADDRESS. Consequently SPC section 4.4 Special warnings should start with the following sentence: 'No further clinical study has confirmed the efficacy results of the single pivotal trial'. 2.2 Conclusion on clinical aspects The  CHMP  remains  of  the  opinion  that  the  most  reliable  evidence  available  concerning  the  riskbenefit of Xigris is to be found in the three placebo-controlled studies PROWESS, ADDRESS and RESOLVE. The 28-day mortality reduction shown in PROWESS - 6.1% overall, and 7.4% in adults with  two  or  more  organ  system  dysfunctions,  compensates  for  the  1.4%  increased  risk  of  serious bleeding  compared  to  placebo  (2.4%  vs.  1.0%).  The  increase  in  CNS  bleeding  events  seen  in PROWESS compared to placebo was low at 0.2% (0.2% vs. 0%). The rates of serious bleeding events during infusion in PROWESS and ADDRESS were identical to one another (2.4% for patients treated with Xigris in both studies). Serious bleeding events in the noncomparative study ENHANCE were slightly higher at 3.6%. Post-authorisation observational studies and registers have in some cases reported higher rates of bleeding, but the case definitions for serious bleeding events were not comparable to those used in the placebo-comparative clinical trials, making direct comparisons somewhat unreliable. At the current time, it does not appear justified to change the label related to elective surgery based on a small subgroup from a single registry, particularly where the other available data do not support this conclusion

The results of ADDRESS and RESOLVE do not confirm the results of PROWESS - the overall 28day mortality in patients treated with Xigris was not shown to be different from placebo. Therefore the CHMP recommended the amendment of section 4.4 of the SPC as follows:'No further clinical study has confirmed the efficacy results of the single pivotal trial'.

ADDRESS was conducted in a population of adults with less severe sepsis than in the adults treated in PROWESS. Most patients treated in ADDRESS had only one organ system failure (1709/2613) and this group weighted the outcome for the whole trial. For the 649 patients in ADDRESS with 2 organ system failures the 28-day mortality favoured the Xigris group and was 5.1%, which is similar to the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

reduction in mortality seen in patients with two or more organ system dysfunctions in PROWESS. Although  the  data  in  other  subgroups  was  not  consistent  with  PROWESS,  these  were  based  on relatively small numbers. Xigris is only indicated for the treatment of patients with sepsis associated with multiple organ failure. The CHMP was however of the opinion that at present the ADDRESS study  is  presented  in  a  way  downplaying  its  contradiction  of  the  PROWESS  results.  The  CHMP requested the MAH to amend section 5.1 of the SPC to mention that no benefit of drotrecogin alpha (activated)  was  observed  in  the  subgroup  872  patients  at  low  risk  of  death  with  multiple  organ dysfunction, so ADDRESS did not confirm the efficacy results of the PROWESS study.

RESOLVE was conducted in children and the primary end-point was complete resolution of organ failure. The natural history of sepsis in children is not necessarily comparable to sepsis in adults. There is no clear evidence that the off-label use of Xigris is high. In particular, the use of Xigris in children has probably  become  quite  rare.  However  the  CHMP  has  recommended  a  contra-indication  for  children below 18 years of age as a precautionary measure.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH committed in 2007 to perform the new-placebo controlled study (PROWESS-SHOCK) to assert the benefit/risk profile of Xigris. The CHMP has reiterated the importance of completing this study within the shortest possible timeframe. The CHMP has acknowledged the efforts of the MAH in attempt to reduce the duration of this study. The final report of the study should now be available in 2Q2011.  In  the  CHMP's  opinion,  this  timetable  is  acceptable.  However,  the  MAH  should  commit  to update the CHMP on the progress of recruitment and overall mortality in PROWESS-SHOCK every 6 months. The MAH has provided extensive analyses of the pharmacogenomic markers that were identified in 2007 and discussed with the FDA IPRG group without confrontation with the CHMP Rapporteurs. Although the  specific  'IRP'  marker  (combination  of  PROC  rs2069912  and  PAI-1  rs7242  SNPs)  suggested  was initially believed to be promising, the MAH does not believe upon further evaluation that this would be the  best  genetic  hypothesis  to  carry  forward  into  replication  studies.  Today,  the  MAH  asserts  that interesting  genetic  markers  have  been  identified  in  PROWESS,  but  these  markers  have  not  been sufficiently replicated or confirmed to conclude that any genetic marker is ready for clinical use. Any such marker would need to be confirmed in additional cohorts and replicated in a prospective trial. To that end, the  MAH  has  developed  a  comprehensive  plan  to  generate  and  investigate  the  clinical  utility  of  the hypothesized genetic markers. The CHMP is mostly in agreement with this reasoning and plan, which could  lead  to  a  clinically  useful  marker  within  3  to  4  years.  The  MAH  has  committed  to  follow  that strategy. 2.3 Change of the Product Information The CHMP and the MAH agreed to amend the Summary of Product Characteristics and package leaflet ass follows: Section 4.2: 'Paediatrics : Data from a placebo-controlled clinical trial which was stopped for futility after 477 patients 0 to 17 years-old had received the study treatment did not establish efficacy of Xigris in paediatric patients and showed a higher rate of central nervous system bleeding in the Xigris versus placebo group. Xigris is contraindicated in children below the age of 18 (see section 4.3 and 5.1) '.

## Section 4.3:

## ' Drotrecogin alfa (activated) is contraindicated in children below the age of 18 years (see section 5.1) '.

The PIL is updated accordingly.

## Section 4.4

' No further study has confirmed the efficacy results of the single pivotal trial '.

Section 5.1:

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

'A total of 2640 adult patients with severe sepsis who were at low risk of death (e.g. patients with APACHE II&lt;25 or with only one sepsis-induced organ failure) were enrolled in a randomised, doubleblind,  placebo-controlled  trial  (ADDRESS).  The  trial  was  stopped for  futility after  an  interim analysis.

No benefit of drotrecogin alfa (activated) was observed in the subgroup of  872 patients at low risk of death with multiple organ dysfunction, so ADDRESS did not confirm the efficacy results of the PROWESS study.

In  the  multiple  organ  dysfunction  subgroup  of  ADDRESS  the  28-day  placebo  mortality  was 21.9%, similar to the single organ dysfunction subgroup of PROWESS (21.2%), confirming the lack of efficacy in patients with severe sepsis who are at low risk of death'.

The following paragraph was moved from section 4.4 to section 5.1:

<!-- image -->

EMEA SOB 051: 'Further to uncertain conclusions of the XPRESS study investigating the possible interaction between Xigris and heparin, additional clarifications on the benefit/risk balance of Xigris are required. Therefore the MAH has committed to performing a placebo-controlled study in patients (who were either on low-dose prophylactic heparin or not receiving any thrombosis prophylaxis) with severe sepsis and documented organ failure (e.g. MOD or vasopressor dependent septic shock) when treated within a strictly defined time window, to assert the benefit/risk profile of Xigris'. The final study report will be provided to the CHMP by Q2 2011

Medicinal product no longer authorised 'Paediatric patients Xigris is contraindicated in children below the age of 18 years. (See also sections 4.2 and 4.3). Data from a placebo-controlled clinical trial (RESOLVE) did not establish efficacy of Xigris in paediatric  patients  suffering  from  severe  sepsis,  acute  infection,  systemic  inflammation  and respiratory and cardiovascular organ dysfunction. This trial was stopped for futility after 477 patients had received the study drug (out of 600 patients intended). A planned interim analysis (with 400 patients enrolled) showed a low likelihood of demonstrating a significant difference in the primary endpoint of 'Composite Time to Complete Organ Failure Resolution' (CTCOFR score of 9.8 versus 9.7 mean days over 14 days). There was also no difference in 28-day mortality (17.1% versus 17.3% in the Xigris and placebo groups, respectively). Investigators  attributed  2  deaths  in  the  Xigris  group  and  5  deaths  in  the  placebo  group  to bleeding  events.  There  was  a  higher  rate  of  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  bleeding  in  the drotrecogin alfa (activated) versus the placebo group. Over the infusion period (study days 0-6) the number of patients experiencing CNS bleeding was 5 versus 1 (2.1% versus 0.4%) for the overall  population  (drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  versus  placebo),  with  4  of  the  5  events  in  the drotrecogin alfa (activated) group occurring in patients ≤ 60 days old or ≤ 3.5 kg bodyweight. Fatal CNS bleeding events, serious bleeding events (over the infusion period and over the 28-day study period), serious adverse events, and major amputations were similar in the drotrecogin alfa (activated) and placebo groups'. The  MAH  has  also  taken  the  opportunity  to  correct  the  contact  detail  of  the  Slovenian  local representative. III. OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED OR ONGOING 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)  SPECIFIC OBLIGATION

## IV. BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT

The CHMP concluded that since the 5 th annual re-assessment, no further data has become available that  would  alter  the  B/R  of  Xigris.  The  CHMP  has  reiterated  the  importance  of  completing  the PROWESS-SCHOCK  study  within  the  shortest  possible  timeframe  as  this  study  will  assert  the benefit/risk profile of Xigris.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP however recommended as a precautionary measure and based on the absence of further data on efficacy and safety of Xigris in children, the contraindication of Xigris in children below 18 years of age.

The results of ADDRESS and RESOLVE do not confirm the results of PROWESS - the overall 28day mortality in patients treated with Xigris was not shown to be different from placebo. Therefore the CHMP recommended the amendment of section 4.4 of the SPC as follows:' No further clinical study has  confirmed  the  efficacy  results  of  the  single  pivotal  trial'.  The  CHMP  also  recommended  the amendment of section  5.1  of  the  SPC  related  to  the  ADRESS  trial  to  reflect  the  results  in  a  more factual way.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Finally, further to the assessment of the data provided in the context of this 6 th Annual Reassessment, the  CHMP considers that the risk/benefit balance of Xigris remains favorable. The product remains licensed  under  exceptional  circumstances  while  waiting  for  the  update  on  recruitment  status  in  the ongoing PROWESS-SHOCK study as well as for the results of that study which are now planned for Q2 2011. There is a need for further information on the pharmacogenetic data that were not part of the MAH submission but are considered important for the annual reassessment of the benefit/risk balance of Xigris. V. OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION The CHMP concluded by majority that, on the basis of the data submitted since the 5 th annual  reassessment, the benefit/risk profile for Xigris in the ' treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple  organ  failure  when  added  to  best  standard  care.  The  use  of  Xigris  should  be  considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure' remains positive. The majority of the CHMP recommended the updating of the Annexes I and IIIB of the Community Marketing  Authorisation  for  Xigris.  However  the  CHMP  concluded  that  there  was  still  a  Specific Obligation that remained to be fulfilled. The assessment of the pending commitments will form the basis of the next annual re-assessment. Therefore the Marketing Authorisation for Xigris will remain under exceptional circumstances. On 24 September 2009 the CHMP adopted an Opinion by a majority of 18 out of 22 votes on the 6th annual  re-assessment  of  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Xigris,  subject  to  the  additional  commitments undertaken. The Icelandic CHMP member agreed with the above mentioned recommendation of the CHMP. A revised Letter of Undertaking dated 22 September 2009 including the amended list of Follow-up Measures has been adopted accordingly by the CHMP.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## VI. REFERENCES

Afessa B, Gajic O, Keegan MT, Seferian EG, Hubmayr RD, Peters SG. 2007. Impact of introducing multiple  evidence-based  clinical  practice  protocols  in  a  medical  intensive  care  unit:  a  retrospective cohort study. BMC Emerg Med 7:10.

Bae  JS,  Yang  L,  Manithody  C,  Rezaie  AR.  2007.  The  ligand  occupancy  of  endothelial  protein  C receptor switches the protease-activated receptor 1-dependent signaling specificity of thrombin from a permeability-enhancing  to  a  barrier-protective  response  in  endothelial  cells.  Blood  110(12):39093916.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Barie PS. 2007. 'All in' for a huge pot: the PROWESS-SHOCK trial for refractory septic shock. Surg Infect (Larchmt) 8(5):491-494. [Belgium 1] Vincent JL, Laterre PF, Decruyenaere J, Spapen H, Raemaekers J, Damas F, Rogiers P, Sartral M, Haentjens T, Nelson D, Janes J. 2008. A registry of patients treated with drotrecogin alfa (activated) in Belgian intensive care units - an observational study. Acta Clin Belg 63(1):25-30. [Belgium 2] Decruyenaere J, De Backer D, Spapen H, Laterre PF, Raemaekers J,Rogiers P, Trine H, Sartral M, Haentjens T, Wagner T. 2009. 90-day follow-up of patients treated with drotrecogin alfa (activated) for severe sepsis: a Belgian open label study. Acta Clin Belg 64(1):16-22. Chapital AD, Yu M, Ho HC, Wang J, Koss W, Takanishi DM, Jr. 2008. Using transcutaneous oxygen pressure measurements as selection criteria for activated protein C use. J Trauma 65(1):30-33. Dellinger RP, Durbin G Jr. 2007. Separating practice guidelines from pharmaceutical marketing. Crit Care Med 35(11):2878-2880. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, Bion J, Parker MM, Jaeschke R, Reinhart K, Angus DC, BrunBuisson C, Beale R, Calandra T, Dhainaut JF, Gerlach H, Harvey M, Marini JJ, Marshall J, Ranieri M, Ramsay G, Sevransky J, Thompson BT, Townsend S, Vender JS, Zimmerman JL, Vincent JL. 2008. Surviving  Sepsis  Campaign:  international  guidelines  for  management  of  severe  sepsis  and  septic shock: 2008. Crit Care Med 36(1):296-327. Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Carlet JM, Bion J, Parker MM, Jaeschke R, Reinhart K, Angus DC, BrunBuisson C, Beale R, Calandra T, Dhainaut JF, Gerlach H, Harvey M, Marini JJ, Marshall J, Ranieri M, Ramsay G, Sevransky J, Thompson BT, Townsend S, Vender JS, Dellinger  RP,  Schorr  C.  2007.  Severe  sepsis  in  an  emergency  department:  prevalence,  rapid identification, and appropriate treatment. Crit Care Med 35(10):2461-2462.

Dhainaut JF,  INDEPTH Clinical Evaluation Committee. 2008. International integrated  database  for evaluation  of  severe  sepsis  (INDEPTH):  clinical  evaluation  committee  report  on  the  safety  of drotrecogin alfa (activated) therapy. Curr Med Res Opin 24(4):1187-1197.

Dhainaut JF, Payet S, Vallet B, Franca LR, Annane D, Bollaert PE, Le Tulzo YL, Runge I, Malledant Y, Guidet B, Le Kay K, Launois R; the PREMISS Study Group. 2007. Cost-effectiveness of activated protein C in real-life clinical practice. Crit Care 11(5):R99.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Gilbert  RE,  Marsden  PA.  2008.  Activated  protein  C  and  diabetic  nephropathy.  N  Engl  J  Med 358(15):1628-1630.

John J, Awab A, Norman D, Dernaika T, Kinasewitz GT. 2007. Activated protein C improves survival in severe sepsis patients with elevated troponin. Intensive Care Med 33(12):2122-2128.

Kalil  AC,  Sun  J.  2008.  Why  are  clinicians  not  embracing  the  results  from  pivotal  clinical  trials  in severe sepsis? A bayesian analysis. PloS ONE 3(5):e2291.

Kalil AC, Sun J. 2008. How many patients with severe sepsis are needed to confirm the efficacy of drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)?  A  Bayesian  design.  Intensive  Care  Med  2008  May  27  [epub  ahead  of print].

Rowan KM, Welch CA, North E, Harrison DA. 2008. Drotrecogin alfa (activated): real-life use and outcomes for the UK. Crit Care 12(2):R58.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Kanji S, Perreault MM, Chant C, Williamson D, Burry L. 2007. Evaluating the use of drotrecogin alfa (activated)  in  adult  severe  sepsis:  a  Canadian  multicenter  observational  study.  Intensive  Care  Med 33(3):517-523. [Poland]  Kubler  A,  Mayzner-Zawadzka  E,  Durek  G,  Gaszyriski  W,  Karpel  E,  MikaszewskaSokolewicz M, Majak P. 2006. Results of severe sepsis treatment program using recombinant human activated protein C in Poland. Med Sci Monit 12(3):CR107-112. Liu KD, Levitt J, Zhuo H, Kallett RH, Brady S, Steingrub J, Tidswell M, Siegel MD, Soto G, Peterson MW,  Chesnutt  MS,  Phillips  C,  Weinacker  A,  Thompson  BT,  Eisner  MD,  Matthay  MA.  2008. Randomized clinical trial of activated protein C for the treatment of acute lung injury. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2008 Jun 19 [Epub ahead of print]. Lust  M,  Vulcano  M,  Danese  S.  2008.  The  protein  C  pathway  in  inflammatory  bowel  disease:  the missing link between inflammation and coagulation. Trends Mol Med 14(6):237-244. Marti-Carvajal  AJ.  2008.  Human  recombinant  activated  protein  C  for  severe  sepsis.  Anesth  Analg 106(1):346. Marti-Carvajal A, Salanti G, Cardona AF. 2008. Human recombinant activated protein C for severe sepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1):CD004388. Perri A, Fumagalli R. 2008. Sepsis in transplanted patients: beyond antibiotic therapy. Transplant Proc 40(4):1207-1211. Ridley S, Lwin A, Wyncoll D, Lippett S, Watson D, Gunning K, Higgins D. 2008. Drotrecogin alfa (activated): diffusion from clinical trials to clinical practice. Eur J Anaesthesiol 25(3):211-216. Ridley  S,  Lwin  A,  Wyncoll  D,  Lippett  S,  Watson  D,  Gunning  K,  Higgins  D.  2008.  Reply.  Eur  J Anaesthesiol 20:1-2.

Shorr AF, Nelson DR, Wyncoll DL, Reinhart K, Brunkhorst F, Vail GM, Janes J. 2008. Protein C: a potential biomarker in severe sepsis and a possible tool for monitoring treatment with drotrecogin alfa (activated). Crit Care 12(2):R45.

[United Kingdom 1] Rowan K, Welch C, North E, Harrison D. 2008. Drotrecogin alfa(activated): reallife use and outcomes for the UK. Crit Care 12:R58.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

[United Kingdom 2] Ridley S, Lwin A, Wyncoll D, Lippett S, Watson D, Gunning K,Higgins D. 2008. Drotrecogin  alfa  (activated):  diffusion  from  clinical  trials  toclinical  practice.  Eur  J  Anaesthesiol 25:211-216.

[United States 1] Wheeler A, Steingrub J, Schmidt GA, Sanchez P, Jacobi J, Linde-Zwirble W, Bates B, Qualy R, Woodward B, Zeckel M. 2008. A retrospective observational study of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in adults with severe sepsis:comparison with a controlled clinical trial.

Vincent JL, Laterre PF, Decruyenaere J, Spapen H, Raemaekers J, Damas F, Rogiers P, Sartral M, Haentjens T, Nelson D, Janes J. 2008. A registry of patients treated with drotrecogin alfa (activated) in Belgian intensive care units-an observational study. Acta Clin Belg 63(1):25-30.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Wheeler A, Steingrub J,  Schmidt  GA,  Sanchez  P, Jacobi J,  Linde-Zwirble  W, Bates  B,  Qualy  RL, Woodward B, Zeckel M. 2008. A retrospective observational study of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in adults with severe sepsis: comparison with a controlled clinical trial. Crit Care Med 36(1):14-23. Zimmerman JL,  Vincent  JL.  2008.  Surviving  sepsis  campaign:  international  guidelines  for management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2008. Intensive Care Med 34(1):17-60.