---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:00:49
document_pages: 5
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-conclusion/raptiva-h-542-a20-28-sc-epar-scientific-conclusion_en.pdf
document_name: raptiva-h-542-a20-28-sc-epar-scientific-conclusion_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.2870311
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 21:24:00.852283
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 17 April 2009

EMEA/83006/2009

## Medicinal product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC CONCLUSIONS RAPTIVA International Nonproprietary Name: efalizumab Procedure No. EMEA/H/542/A20/28

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## SCIENTIFIC  CONCLUSIONS  AND  GROUNDS  FOR  THE  SUSPENSION  OF  RAPTIVA PRESENTED BY THE EMEA

Efalizumab (RAPTIVA) is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that binds specifically to the  CD11  a  subunit  of  lymphocyte  function-associated  antigen-1  (LFA-1),  a  leukocyte  cell  surface protein.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Raptiva was authorised in the EU on 20 September 2004. It is indicated for the 'treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis who have failed to respond to, or who have a contraindication to, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies including ciclosporin, methotrexate and PUVA.' Recently four (three confirmed and one suspected) cases of, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy  (PML)  in  psoriatic  patients  under  long-term  treatment  with  efalizumab  have been identified prompting a re-evaluation of the benefit-risk. Two confirmed cases were fatal and the one suspected case as well. Efalizumab was the first biological approved for the treatment of moderate to severe psoriasis in 2004 in  so-called  'high-need'  patients,  i.e.  those  who  have  failed  to  respond  to,  or  who  have  a contraindication to, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies. The indication was granted in this last line therapy on the grounds of a limited efficacy and lack of long term safety data. Further  to  the  initial  Marketing  Authorisation  safety  issues  have  arisen  leading  to  the  addition  of  a number of warnings into the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) such as aseptic meningitis, immune mediated haemolytic anaemia, antibody development with vaccinations, interstitial pneumonitis,  arthritis,  erythema  multiforme,  inflammatory  polyradiculoneuropathy  Miller  Fisher syndrome,  facial  palsy  and  Bells  palsy  and  severe  infections,  malignancies  during  long-term  use, including serious (fatal) events such as opportunistic infections and Guillain Barré syndrome (GBS). Recently, the MAH notified the EMEA about three confirmed cases of PML and one suggestive case of  PML,  received  for  patients  using  efalizumab  for  more  then  3  years,  as  well  as  3  cases  of encephalopathy and 5 cases of encephalitis. At  the  December  2008  CHMP  meeting,  the  Committee  agreed  to  convene  the  Scientific  Advisory Group on clinical neurosciences (SAG-CNS) with additional experts on the treatment of psoriasis to discuss the benefits and risks of efallizumab and its place in therapy. The SAG meeting was held in January 2009 and the group looked at all of the available data on the benefits and risks of Raptiva. The experts were concerned that the margin of benefits over risks for Raptiva had narrowed since the medicine's approval, but agreed that despite a modest efficacy and increased  risk  reported  to  date  efalizumab  still  represents  a  useful  treatment  option  albeit  with  a restricted role in the treatment of moderate and severe psoriasis and with limited evidence to document the actual response rate in non-responders to previous systemic treatments. In view of the above the European Commission initiated a procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004. The European Commission requested the Committee on 16 January 2009 to assess the above concerns and its impact on the benefit/risk balance for Raptiva, and to give its opinion on measures  necessary  to  ensure  the  safe  and  effective  use  of  Raptiva  and  on  whether  the  marketing authorisation for this product should be maintained, varied, suspended or withdrawn.

At  the  January  2009  CHMP  meeting,  it  was  considered  that  there  were  uncertainties  with  the benefit/risk  of  Raptiva  and  the  CHMP  requested  the  MAH  to  submit  further  data  on  the  abovementioned  safety  concerns.  The  overall  assessment  of  these  data  confirmed  the  previous  safety concerns of Raptiva without identifying any subgroups with a potentially more favourable benefit/risk balance.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  CHMP reviewed all  the  available  data  submitted  by  the  MAH  to  address  the  increased  safety concerns and its impact on the benefit-risk and came to the following conclusions.

## Efficacy

Medicinal product no longer authorised Based on the five phase III clinical trials submitted at the time of the Marketing authorisation and the additional  data  provided  since  then,  the  Committee  considers  that  the  efficacy  of  efalizumab  in psoriasis is modest. Also,  as  acknowledged  by  the  MAH,  it  is  not  possible  to  define  a  psoriasis  patient  population  that exclusively benefits of efalizumab and not to other therapies in psoriasis. Although severe psoriasis is a serious disease with a potentially negative impact on the patient's social life, it is not life threatening. Safety As discussed above the recent cases of PML are of concerns. Recently, four cases were reported by the MAH; of these reported cases, three were confirmed with two of them leading to the patients death. To address these safety issues, the MAH has proposed additional risk minimisation activities including restriction of continuous use to 2 years, excluding non-responders at 3 months, cautionary use in the elderly, intensive monitoring, contraindication of concurrent use of immunosuppressive and educational programs for physicians and patients. It is questionable whether these risk minimisations are useful. Several issues are already covered in the current  SPC  i.e.  Raptiva  is  not  recommended  in  combination  with  other  immunosuppressive  antipsoriasis  products  and  should  be  initiated  by  a  dermatologist.  Frequent  monitoring  for  infections  is already  recommended.  For  PML  it  is  questionable  whether  frequent  monitoring  aimed  at  early detection of PML will be effective and it is rare that the sequel of PML is reversed if diagnosed. These limit the value of frequent monitoring for PML. Exclusion of non-responders after 3 months is in fact common practice i.e. if no effect is observed treatment will not be continued. Restriction of use by maximizing  the  duration  of  treatment  up  to  2  years  is  based  on  the  four  individual  PML  cases. However this can not be considered as evidence to recommend the limitation of treatment to 2 years. Besides  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  the  treatment  is  interrupted  after  2  years  if  the  therapy  is  still efficacious and alternatives are not available and more importantly it does not address the other risks. Hence,  the  additional  risk  minimisation  measures,  as  proposed  by  the  MAH,  are  not  considered appropriate  to  ensure  the  safe  use  of  Raptiva  and  thus  do  not  change  the  current  benefit/risk substantially. Additional  options  suggested  were  the  restriction  of  the  indication  to  last  resort  patients  i.e.  nonresponders to TNF alpha blockers and patients for which TNF alpha blocker are contra-indicated. Data to support this approach is currently missing. Response rates in non-responders to TNF alpha are the same if not less as for the normal psoriasis population. In absence of supportive data, it is impossible to identify up front a psoriasis population who responds to efalizumab.

Moreover, there are no arguments that the risk in such refractory patients is different. On the contrary, non-responsiveness  to  TNF  alpha  blockers  suggests  that  the  immune-system  in  these  patients  is different  which  raises  the  question  whether  these  patients  are  not  more  vulnerable  for  developing 'immunological'  adverse  events.  In  addition,  these  patients  would  already  have  received  other immunosuppressive treatments before, which might have altered their immune systems. The point is that the immune system of these TNF alpha blocker resistant patients is different from the one in the unrestricted population.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Therefore, restricting the indication to this population is not considered as an option, as the benefit at best is the same as for the unrestricted population, but potentially with a higher risk. It is also noted that  Raptiva  is  not  free  from  cardiovascular  and  tuberculosis  risks  and  switching  to  efalizumab because  of  these  contra-indication  for  the  other  biologicals  would  lead  to  a  selection  of  an  at  risk population with efalizumab.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised Benefit/Risk Balance The efficacy of Raptiva in psoriasis is modest. The  new  safety  signals  that  have  emerged  (especially  PML)  together  with  the  known  risk  of opportunistic  infections  do  compromise  the  benefit/risk  ratio.  Since  the  grant  of  the  Marketing Authorisation,  the safety issues have arisen leading to the addition of a number of warnings into the SPC such as aseptic meningitis, immune mediated haemolytic anaemia, antibody development with vaccinations, interstitial pneumonitis, arthritis, erythema multiforme, inflammatory polyradiculoneuropathy  Miller  Fisher  syndrome,  facial  palsy  and  Bells  palsy  and  severe  infections, malignancies  during  long-term  use,  including  serious  (fatal)  events  such  as  opportunistic  infections and Guillain Barré syndrome (GBS). In addition the MAH recently notified the EMEA about 3 cases of encephalopathy and 5 cases of encephalitis. Furthermore, based on a comparative evaluation of serious adverse events, it appears that Raptiva has an unfavourable safety profile as compared to the other biologicals with respect to fatal reports, fatal infections neoplasm and neurological disorder. It  is  questioned  by  the  CHMP  whether  a  psoriasis  population  can  be  identified  that  exclusively benefits from efalizumab. As indicated by the experts there might be a small group of patients who could  benefit  from  Raptiva.  However  the  CHMP  considered  that  no  further  risk  minimisation measures would be effective for this group. Moreover it might be that this group of patients naturally would be at higher risk. Therefore  on  the  basis  of  the  above,  the  CHMP  concluded  that  the  benefit/risk  of  Raptiva  is considered negative. Overall Conclusion The  MAH  has  proposed  additional  risk  minimisation  measures  including  restriction  of  use  by restriction of the duration of treatment, promoting rotational treatment and frequent monitoring. It is questionable whether a restriction in duration of use prevents the occurrence of PML in users. Since  the  time  of  approval  several  additional  warnings  and  serious  adverse  reactions  have  been included in the product information and it is not considered appropriate to add further precautions. Hence, considering that moderate to severe psoriasis is not a life threatening disease, the efficacy of efalizumab is modest, the safety profile is of concern and includes fatal reports  of  PML, encephalopathy, encephalitis and the availability of alternative treatments, the CHMP recommends a suspension of the marketing authorisation of Raptiva (efalizumab) for the treatment of adult patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION PRESENTED BY THE EMEA

The Committee reviewed all available information on the benefits and risks of Raptiva including all studies that have been completed and post-marketing data.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The Committee considered that the efficacy of Raptiva in the treatment of psoriasis is modest. The Committee considered that although the mechanism of action of efalizumab distinguishes itself from the other biologicals this property as such is not sufficient to justify the use of Raptiva. The Committee is of the opinion that the safety profile of Raptiva is of concern considering the recent cases of PML. Furthermore since the time of approval several additional warnings and serious adverse reactions  have  been  included  in  the  product  information  and  further  risk  minimisation  is  not considered effective. The  Committee  concluded,  in  view  of  the  available  data,  that  the  risks  associated  with  the  use  of Raptiva  as treatment  of  adult  patients  with  moderate  to  severe  chronic  plaque  psoriasis  who  have failed to respond to, or who have a contraindication to, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies including  ciclosporin,  methotrexate  and  PUVA outweigh  the  benefits.  In  addition,  the  Committee considered that the current and proposed risk minimisation activities were not adequate to reduce the risks to an acceptable level or predict which patients may be at risk. The Committee considered that in the more limited indication as proposed by the MAH both data on efficacy and safety are lacking and therefore no conclusions can be drawn on the benefit-risk ratio in this patient population. The Committee, as a consequence, concluded that the benefit/risk balance of Raptiva is not positive under the approved conditions of use. The CHMP has therefore recommended the suspension of the Marketing Authorisation for Raptiva until the MAH is able to identify a patient population in which the clinical benefits outweigh its risks.