---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:18:37
document_pages: 26
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/angiox-h-c-562-ii-08-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: angiox-h-c-562-ii-08-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 20.5250415
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-21 17:49:20.050878
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 15 November 2007 Product Name: Angiox EMEA/H/C/562/II/08

SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

On 7 December 2006 the applicant submitted a type II variation to extend the indication to include treatment  of  patients  with  acute  coronary  syndromes  (unstable  angina/non-ST  segment  elevation myocardial infarction (UA/NSTEMI) . The change is requested on the basis of data from a large phase III study (ACUITY/TMC-BIV-08-02) evaluating the use of bivalirudin as a treatment for patients with ACS (UA/NSTEMI). There are consequential changes to sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.8 and 5.1 of the SPC as a result of this application. In addition, the Applicant has taken the opportunity to update the product information according to the latest QRD template.

## 2. Clinical aspects

Applicant's Rationale for the new indication Heart  disease  causes  more  deaths  and  disability  and  incurs  greater  economic  costs  than  any  other illness  in  the  western  world.  Despite  improved  efforts  in  the  prevention  of  heart  disease,  2.5-3.0 million persons are admitted to European and US hospitals every year with ACS. An  early  invasive  strategy  consisting  of  angiography  followed  by  either  percutaneous  coronary intervention (PCI), coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, or medical management, results in enhanced survival compared to conservative care, and is recommended by the European Society of Cardiology  (ESC)  Guidelines  [Betrand  et  al,  2002]  and  the  American  Heart  Association/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC). In the era of potent antiplatelet therapy and coronary stents, early invasive therapy of NSTE-ACS patients decreases mortality by 25% at a mean of 2 years of follow-up, compared with a more conservative approach. Aspirin (ASA), clopidogrel, a glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor (GPI), and an antithrombin agent [either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH)] are all recommended in the management of patients with ACS. Even with this intensive adjunct pharmacologic regimen rates of death and myocardial infarction (MI) are not negligible and haemorrhagic complications are frequent. The combination of potent adjunct therapy and invasive management inevitably increases the risk of bleeding. Historically bleeding has been regarded as a safety variable. More recently there is growing awareness of bleeding as a predictor of morbidity and mortality. Major bleeding is associated with increased incidence of other cardiac events (MI, repeat angioplasty), longer hospital stay, and higher resource utilisation. In large registries and meta-analyses of clinical trial  databases,  bleeding  has  been  established  as  a  predictor  of  mortality  in  ACS  and  a  step-wise increase in mortality is associated with increasing bleeding severity. In-hospital major bleeding has a 4-fold  higher  risk  of  1-year  mortality.  Even  the  need  for  transfusion,  examined  in  isolation,  is  an independent predictor of 1-year mortality. An  effective  treatment  of  ACS  should  prevent  further  chest  pain  and  MI  with  minimal  bleeding consequence  and  allow  the  patient  to  progress  to  management  through  angiography  and  definitive treatment via revascularisation with PCI or CABG or continued medical management. A primary endpoint that encompasses both the ischaemic and bleeding periprocedural complications would be considered an appropriate reflection of the global morbidity and mortality burden associated with the respective adjunctive antithrombotic regimens. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Clinical Data

The efficacy of bivalirudin for the proposed additional indication is supported by data from a single pivotal  study  (ACUITY  Acute  Catheterisation  Urgent  Intervention  Triage  Strategy )  and  two supportive studies (TIMI 7 &amp; TIMI 8 Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction -). A brief overview of these trials is shown in the table 1 below.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Comparison of study design features across the pivotal and supportive ACS trials

ACUITY (Acute Catheterisation Urgent Intervention Triage Strategy) Trial This  study  compared  bivalirudin  with  heparin  (UFH  or  enoxaparin)  in  patients  undergoing  early invasive management for ACS without ST-segment elevation. The study was conducted at 450 centres in North America, Europe, Australia and New Zealand. Initially, the MAH submitted 30-day data. This was subsequently complemented with 1-year data. Medicinal product no longer authorised

| Design features           | ACUITY trial                                                                                                                                                                            | TIMI 7 trial                                                                                                  | TIMI 8 trial                                               |
|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Total enrolled            | 13,819                                                                                                                                                                                  | 420                                                                                                           | 133                                                        |
| Blinding                  | Open                                                                                                                                                                                    | Double-blind                                                                                                  | Double-blind                                               |
| Randomisation             | Randomised                                                                                                                                                                              | Randomised                                                                                                    | Randomised                                                 |
| Bivalirudin dose          | 0.1 mg/kg bolus + 0.25 mg/kg/h infusion through angiography or as long as needed; for patients undergoing PCI an additional 0.5 mg/kg bolus + 1.75 mg/kg/h infusion for duration of PCI | Doses from 0.02 mg/kg/h infusion to 1.0 mg/kg/h infusion for 72 hours                                         | 0.1 mg/kg/bolus + 0.25 mg/kg/h infusion for up to 72 hours |
| GPI use with bivalirudin  | Planned in Arm B, Provisional in arm C (6.5%)                                                                                                                                           | NA                                                                                                            | NA                                                         |
| Comparator                | Heparin (UFH or enoxaparin) + Planned GPI                                                                                                                                               | None                                                                                                          | Heparin                                                    |
| Comparator dose           | 60 U/kg bolus and 12 U/kg/h infusion to target an ACT of 200 to 250 seconds for PCI Enoxaparin 1.0 mg/kg every 12 hours until angiography                                               | None                                                                                                          | 70 U/kg bolus + 15 U/kg/h for 12 to 72 hours authorised    |
| Concomitant medication    | Aspirin (required) Clopidogrel (recommended)                                                                                                                                            | Aspirin                                                                                                       | Aspirin                                                    |
| Primary evaluation period | Day 30 follow-up visit (30±5 days post-randomisation)                                                                                                                                   | 72 hours from initiation of infusion longer                                                                   | (First of) Discharge or within 14 days of randomisation    |
| Centres (Countries)       | 450 (17)                                                                                                                                                                                | 29 (2)                                                                                                        | 13 (1)                                                     |
| Adjudicated Endpoints     | Blinded adjudication of Death, MI, Unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia, Bleeding, Subacute thrombosis                                                                             | Death, MI, non-ischaemic clinical deterioration requiring angiography no                                      | MI and Major haemorrhage                                   |
| Clinical Endpoints        | Death, MI, Unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia, Major bleeding product                                                                                                            | Death, MI, Recurrent ischaemia, Non-ischaemic clinical deterioration requiring angiography, Major haemorrhage | Death, MI, haemorrhage                                     |

The main objective (Primary Randomisation) of this trial was to determine the optimal antithrombotic treatment  regimen  for  patients  with  moderate  or  high-risk  ACS  managed  by  early  angiography followed by medical  management,  PCI,  or  CABG . The second main objective (Secondary Randomisation) was to evaluate the clinical impact of the timing of GPI administration, either upfront or deferred until PCI is performed.

## Design

This was an open-label, multicentre, prospective, randomised and parallel group study. It examined the  role  of  bivalirudin  in  treating  patients  with  moderate  or  high-risk  ACS  (UA  and  NSTEMI) undergoing an early invasive strategy, and evaluating the clinical impact of a treatment strategy based

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

on  the  timing  of  GPI  initiation.  Patients  were  treated  with  ASA  (required)  and  a  thienopyridine (preferred), and were randomised into one of 3 treatment arms as follows:

- Arm A: heparin (UFH or enoxaparin) with GPI administration
- Arm B: bivalirudin with GPI administration
- Arm C: bivalirudin alone

The study design is depicted in Figure 1.

In the original study protocol, the sole comparator treatment in Arm A was enoxaparin. The choice of UFH or  enoxaparin  was  introduced  by  a  protocol  amendment  in  light  of  results  from  two  clinical studies  that  concluded  that  major  bleeding  was  higher  on  enoxaparin  than  UFH.  After  the  protocol amendment each site had to make a choice between enoxaparin and UFH that would be applied to all patients subsequently included in the study at that site. Based on their centre practice, each ACUITY investigator was required to declare in advance whether all patients randomised to Arm A at their site would receive enoxaparin or UFH. Therefore, the choice of enoxaparin or UFH was predetermined for all patients at a given site, and was not varied on a patient-by-patient basis. The exception to this rule was for  individual  patients  who  had  been  receiving  UFH  or  a  LMWH  before  randomisation;  these patients were to be maintained on the same type of heparin after randomisation to avoid any switching from one antithrombotic agent to the other. Randomisation was to be stratified centrally according to the use of thienopyridine before angiography or after angiographic triage. In a second stage of randomisation, using a 2×2 factorial design, patients assigned to GPI administration (Arms A and B) were randomised to begin GPI administration either upfront (prior to angiography) or at the time of PCI (GPI during PCI). This secondary randomisation is referred to as the ACUITY Timing Trial. Angiography was to be performed within 72 hours of randomisation, followed by triage to medical, PCI,  CABG.  Patients  were  followed  up  until  hospital  discharge  or  Day  7,  30,  and  at  1  year  after randomisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Figure 1: ACUITY study design

<!-- image -->

a Patients receiving upfront GPI continued to receive GPI during PCI. Number of patients (planned and analysed) A total  of  13,800  patients  were  to  be  included  in  the  study  into  3  randomised  groups.  The  number actually included was 13,819 (Arm A - 4603, Arm B - 4604 and Arm C - 4612). Three  datasets  were  used  in  analyses:  ITT  (Patient  randomised  treatment  assignment),  PP  (All randomised patients who received at least one dose of the study drug) and ATP - as treated patients (all patients who received at least one dose of randomised study drug post-randomisation, irrespective of randomised treatment assignment). In the ATP analysis, if the patient received more than one study drug during the study, the first study drug after randomisation was used in the analysis. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The number of patients included in the ITT population were 4603 in arm A, 4604 in arm B, and 4612 in  arm  C.  The  numbers  for  PP  population  were  4553,  4520  and  4555  respectively.  Following secondary randomisation, the following number of patients were included in Arms A and B of the ITT populations: 2294 (heparin with upfront GPI, Arm A1), 2309 (heparin with GPI during PCI arm, Arm A2), 2311 (bivalirudin with upfront GPI, Arm B1), and 2293 (bivalirudin with GPI during PCI, Arm B2).

## Inclusion criteria

Patients were required to present with chest pain symptoms that included at least 10 minutes of angina or anginal equivalent that the investigator believed had a high likelihood of being ischaemic in origin,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of  UA/NSTEMI,  and  to  meet  at  least  one  of  the  following  four UA/NSTEMI criteria:

i) All of the following four features: Age ≥ 65 years, ASA taken within the previous 7 days, two or more episodes of angina in the previous 24 hours and three or more of the following risk factors: hypertension, high cholesterol, family history, diabetes, current smoker, ii) ECG changes: new or presumably new ST-segment depression ≥ 0.1 mV ( ≥ 1 mm), or transient (&lt;30 minutes) ST-segment elevation ≥ 0.1  mV  ( ≥ 1 mm)  in  at  least  two  contiguous  leads,  iii)  Abnormal  cardiac  biomarker within 24 hours before enrolment, defined as elevated troponin I, T, or CPK-MB greater than the site's  ULN, iv)  History  of  CAD with documentation of one of the following: Prior angiography (coronary stenosis of &gt;50%), Prior PCI or CABG and prior definite, documented MI.

The primary endpoints were the following, measured at Day 30:

Dose and mode of administration Bivalirudin  was  administered  intravenously  (IV)  to  patients  in  treatment  arms  B  and  C  as  follows: after randomisation and prior to angiography, all patients were to receive an initial bolus dose of 0.10 mg/kg  of bivalirudin, followed by a 0.25 mg/kg/h  infusion continued through angiography. Subsequent  dosing  depended  on  whether  the  patient  was  triaged  to  medical  management,  PCI,  or CABG (on- or off-pump). Patients triaged to medical management or CABG were to be continued on this  dose  per  physician  discretion  or  up  to  1  hour  prior  to  CABG.  For  patients  triaged  to  PCI,  an additional bivalirudin bolus dose of 0.5 mg/kg was given followed by a 1.75 mg/kg/h infusion for the duration of the procedure. After PCI, a 0.25 mg/kg/h infusion could be administered for 4 to 12 hours in the absence of a GPI. Heparin (UFH or enoxaparin), was administered as follows: UFH: Prior  to  angiography,  an  initial  bolus  dose  of  60  U/kg  IV  randomisation,  followed  by  a  12 U/kg/h infusion continued through angiography. Enoxaparin: Prior  to  angiography,  a  subcutaneous  (SC)  dose  of  1.0  mg/kg  every  12  hours  until angiography.  For  patients  triaged  to  medical  management,  PCI,  staged  PCI,  or  CABG  (on-  or  offpump), subsequent dosing was based on the guidelines provided in the study protocol. In particular, iv 0.3  or  0.75  mg  enoxaparin  was  administered  in  patients  undergoing  PCI,  depending  on  the  timing between the PCI procedure and the last sc enoxaparin dose. This pre-PCI iv enoxaparin administration is not approved in the EU. However, according to the MAH, there is also a recognised need in the EU for  additional  anti-thrombotic  therapy  for  patients  receiving  enoxaparin  ahead  of  their  intervention. The  latest  ESC  guidance  for  ACS  recommend  an  additional  0.3 mg/kg  IV  dose  of  enoxaparin  for patients  who  received  their  last  dose  &gt;  6  -  8  hours  before  their  PCI.  Moreover,  emerging  clinical practice  was  a  consideration  in  the  design  of  the  ACUITY  trial  and  the  supplemental  IV  bolus  of enoxaparin in ACUITY was, in part, driven by the dosing recommendations used in the SYNERGY (Superior  Yield  of  the  New  Strategy  of  Enoxaparin,  Revascularization  and  Glycoprotein  IIb/IIIa Inhibitors) trial. Duration of treatment Patients  received  at  least  one  dose  of  randomised  study  treatment  prior  to  undergoing  angiography, and administration continued during angiography. Subsequent dosing duration depended on whether the patient was triaged to medical management, PCI, or CABG (on- or off-pump). Endpoints Medicinal product no longer authorised

1. Composite ischaemic endpoint: incidence of all-cause death, MI, or unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia.
2. Composite 'net clinical outcome': incidence of all-cause death, MI, unplanned revascularisation  for  ischaemia,  or  major  bleeding  (ACUITY  scale  -  see  later  under  safety section).
3. Major bleeding (ACUITY scale).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The secondary endpoints were:

1. The  composite  primary  endpoints  'in-hospital'  and  components  of  the  composite  endpoints (including the composite rate of death and nonfatal MI) 'in-hospital' and at the Day 30 visit.
2. Incidence of new-onset thrombocytopenia.
3. Incidence of adverse events other than components of the primary endpoints.
4. Rehospitalisation.
5. Duration of index hospitalisation (hospital where angiography was performed)

## Statistical considerations

The analyses started at level 1; if both tests of Arm B vs Arm A and Arm C vs Arm A were significant at the 1-sided significance level α =0.025, the comparisons between Arm B vs Arm A and Arm C vs Arm A were performed at level two at α =0.025 and the Hochberg procedure again applied. If one of the level 1 tests failed at α =0.025, further tests for the corresponding comparisons at levels 2 and 3 were not to be performed. If the test for the other level 1 comparison was significant at the 1-sided significance level of α =0.0125, then the subsequent tests for this comparison at levels 2 and 3 would also be performed at the level of α =0.0125. To proceed from level 2 to level 3, the same criteria for significance were applied. The tests at subsequent levels were to be performed regardless of the results of  the  superiority  tests.  To  establish  a  single  non-inferiority  test  of  bivalirudin  (Arm  B  or  Arm  C) against heparin (Arm A) on risk difference at a 1-sided significance level of α ,  the  100(1α )  % 1-

To minimise any bias introduced by the open label design all clinical components of the primary and secondary endpoints (deaths, MIs, unplanned revascularisations for ischaemia, major bleeding events, cases of coronary thrombosis and cardiac biomarker MIs) were clearly and objectively pre-defined and independently  and  centrally  adjudicated  using  original  source  documentation  for  each  patient  by  a Clinical Events Committee (CEC) blinded to the assignment of study treatments. Also, the adjudicated data were not shared with the study sites, and were maintained at the CEC. According to the Applicant the bias introduced due to the open label design is likely to be small especially as the study was very large  and  was  conducted  at  around  600  sites  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  Also  each  patient  was maintained  on  the  same  heparin  throughout  the  treatment  period.  Switching  between  UFH  and enoxaparin was not permitted unless the patient was triaged to CABG (in which perioperative UFH was to be used), or unless there was a definite clinical indication for using a different anticoagulant. Further  to  a  request  from  CHMP  pertaining  to  the  possibility  of  study  bias,  in  particular  for  the revascularisation  endpoint,  where  the  knowledge  of  which  treatment  a  patient  was  receiving  could have influenced the revascularisation endpoint, the Applicant clarified the precautions taken regarding the 'unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia'. This endpoint consisted of one of the following four individual  objective  components:  i)  Symptoms  or  signs  of  cardiac  ischaemia,  or  ii)  A  positive functional  study  ('stress  test'),  or  iii)  A  target  lesion  with  diameter  stenosis  &gt;70%  by  quantitative coronary angiography, or iv) Operator assessment of &gt;80% in the absence of core laboratory analyses. The CEC reviewed original source documentation from all patients with a suspected revascularisation event for final verification that a revascularisation did occur and it was driven by ischaemia. The  primary  analyses  of  efficacy  were  performed  for  the  ITT  population.  Analyses  for  the  PP population served as confirmatory and sensitivity analyses. These analyses included the statistical tests (of  three  levels)  in  sequential  order  given  in  table  11  below.  The  Hochberg  multiple  comparison method was used at each level. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

sided CI for the difference of the event rate (bivalirudin - heparin) was obtained. If the upper limit of the  CI  was  less  than  a  pre-specified  margin  (25%  of  the  observed  event  rate  in  Arm  A),  the  noninferiority of the bivalirudin treatment was to be declared. The superiority test was to be performed only if non-inferiority was established. If the upper limit of the same CI for the difference of the event rate (bivalirudin - heparin) was &lt; 0, the superiority of the bivalirudin treatment was to be declared.

## Results

## Baseline Data

| Endpoint                        |   Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%) | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%) C- no   |   Diff. A | 95% CI               |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------|----------------------|
| ACUITY-scale major bleeding a   |                                262 | 139 (3.0)                                   |   -0.0268 | (-0.0351,-0.0184)*   |
| Net clinical outcome endpoint b |                                538 | 466 (10.1)                                  |   -0.0158 | (-0.0286, -0.0031) + |
| Composite ischemic endpoint c   |                                334 | 360 (7.8)                                   |    0.0055 | (-0.0053, 0.0163) +  |

| Endpoint                        |   Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%) | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   |   Diff. B - A | 95% CI              |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|---------------------|
| Net clinical outcome endpoint a |                                538 | 541 (11.8)                            |        0.0006 | (-0.0125, 0.0138) + |
| Composite ischemic endpoint b   |                                334 | 356 (7.7)                             |        0.0048 | (-0.0060, 0.0155) + |
| ACUITY-scale major bleeding c   |                                262 | 243 (5.3)                             |       -0.0041 | (-0.0134, 0.0052) + |

A  total  of  13,819  subjects  were  randomised  to  treatment.  All  3  groups  were  balanced  in  terms  of diagnostic criteria. The median age was around 63 years, around 30 % were female and 88% were white. High risk patient characteristics of the ACUITY population that mandated angiography within 72 hours were balanced across the three treatment arms. The approximate figures are: 77% of patients had recurrent ischaemia, 70% had dynamic ECG changes or elevated cardiac biomarkers, 28% had diabetes and 99% of patients underwent angiography within 72 hours. The figures for the patient triage following angiographic assessment are as follow: medical management (33%), PCI (56%) and CABG (11%). EFFICACY RESULTS The results of the primary endpoints are summarised in tables 40 and 41 below. Table 40:    Clinical endpoints at the Day 30 visit: Arm C (bivalirudin alone) verses Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population a Protocol non-CABG major bleeding (defined in Section 9.5.2.5.1, p.77 ). b Composite endpoint of death, MI, unplanned revascularization, and major bleeding. c Composite endpoint of death, MI, unplanned revascularization. + indicates that noninferiority of bivalirudin alone to heparins + GPI has been shown based on the noninferiority margin of 25 % of the observed events rates in Arm A * indicates that superiority of bivalirudin alone to heparins +GPI has been shown. Bivalirudin alone (group C) was superior to the standard treatment (group A) in terms of ACUITYscale  major  bleeding  and  the  net  clinical  outcome  endpoint.  According  to  the  preset  25%  noninferiority  constraint,  it  was  also  non-inferior  to  the  standard  treatment  arm  for  the  composite ischaemic  endpoint,  as  the  upper  limit  of  the  95%  CI  for  the  difference  in  percentages  for  the composite endpoint (1.63%) was less than 1.825%. Table 41:    Clinical endpoints at the Day 30 visit: Arm B (bivalirudin + GPI) verses Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population Medicinal product no longer authorised

a Composite endpoint of death, MI, unplanned revascularization, and major bleeding.

b Composite endpoint of death, MI, unplanned revascularization.

c Protocol non-CABG major bleeding (defined in Section 9.5.2.5.1, p.77 ).

+ indicates that noninferiority of bivalirudin + GPI to heparins + GPI has been shown based on the noninferiority margin of 25 % of the observed events rates in Arm A

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The bivalirudin + GPI arm (group B) was non-inferior to the standard treatment arm (group A) for the net clinical outcome endpoint, the composite ischaemic endpoint and the major bleeding endpoint. To achieve non-inferiority for these three endpoints the upper limit of the 95% confidence intervals had to be less than 2.925%, 1.825%, 1.425%, respectively. The results for the PP population are very similar to the ITT population.

Regarding  secondary  endpoints,  the  individual  components  of  the  composite  ischaemic  endpoint  at Day 30 are summarised in the tables 44 and 45 below.

Table 44:    Components of the composite ischemic endpoint at the Day 30 visit: Arm C (bivalirudin alone) verses Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population

| Endpoint component          | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   |           |   Diff. C - A | 95% CI            |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------|---------------|-------------------|
| Death or MI                 | 272                                | (5.9)                                 | 302 (6.5) |        0.0064 | (-0.0035, 0.0163) |
| Death                       | 62                                 | (1.3) 74                              | (1.6)     |        0.0026 | (-0.0023, 0.0075) |
| MI                          | 227 (4.9)                          | 248                                   | (5.4)     |        0.0045 | (-0.0046, 0.0135) |
| Unplanned revascularization | 105                                | (2.3) 110                             | (2.4)     |        0.001  | (-0.0051, 0.0072) |

| Endpoint component          | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (B) N=4604, n (%) longer   |   Diff. B - A | 95% CI            |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|
| Death or MI                 | 272 (5.9)                          | 286 (6.2)                                    |        0.003  | (-0.0067, 0.0128) |
| Death                       | 62 (1.3)                           | 70 (1.5)                                     |        0.0017 | (-0.0031, 0.0066) |
| MI                          | 227 (4.9)                          | 229 (5.0)                                    |        0.0004 | (-0.0084, 0.0093) |
| Unplanned revascularization | 105 (2.3)                          | 123 (2.7)                                    |        0.0039 | (-0.0024, 0.0103) |

| Endpoint                     | Heparin + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   |   Diff.* C - A | 95% CI            |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------|-------------------|
| Composite ischaemic endpoint | 702 (15.3)                        | 736 (16.0)                            |         0.0071 | (-0.0077, 0.0219) |
| Death                        | 178 (3.9)                         | 170 (3.7)                             |        -0.0018 | (-0.0096, 0.0060) |
| MI                           | 312 (6.8)                         | 351 (7.6)                             |         0.0083 | (-0.0022, 0.0189) |
| Unplanned revascularisation  | 371 (8.1)                         | 389 (8.4)                             |         0.0037 | (-0.0075, 0.015)  |

Table 45:    Components of the composite ischemic endpoint at the Day 30 visit: Arm B (bivalirudin + GPI) verses Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population There  was  a  numerical  increase  in  Death,  MI  and  Unplanned  revascularisation  in  both  of  the bivalirudin  arms  with  respect  to  the  control  arm  (A).  The  number  of  deaths  was  even  higher  in bivalirudin alone arm (arm C), which is of clinical concern. Results of the composite ischaemic endpoint and its components at 1-year In the light of the concerns raised with the results of the composite ischaemic endpoint at Day 30, the CHMP requested an efficacy analysis of 1-year ischaemic data. The absolute differences between the treatment groups for the composite ischaemic endpoint and for the individual components thereof data shown in tables 2 and 3 below. Table 2: Composite ischaemic endpoint and its components at the 1 year follow-up visit; Arm C vs. Arm A Medicinal product no longer authorised

* Risk difference between Arm C - Arm A.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 3: Composite ischaemic endpoint and its components at the 1 year follow-up visit; Arm B vs. Arm A

| Endpoint                     | Heparin + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   |   Diff.* B- A | 95% CI            |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|
| Composite ischaemic endpoint | 702 (15.3)                        | 732 (15.9)                            |        0.0065 | (-0.0083, 0.0213) |
| Death                        | 178 (3.9)                         | 176 (3.8)                             |       -0.0004 | (-0.0083, 0.0074) |
| MI                           | 312 (6.8)                         | 321 (7.0)                             |        0.0019 | (-0.0084, 0.0123) |
| Unplanned revascularisation  | 371 (8.1)                         | 407 (8.8)                             |        0.0078 | (-0.0036, 0.0192) |

* Risk difference between Arm B - Arm A.

Statistically, the results were very similar in all three treatment groups. For both the bivalirudin alone arm  and  the  bivalirdin  +  GPI  groups  the  upper  limit  of  the  95%  CI  for  the  difference  from  the reference arm (heparin + GPI) was about 2%. For death the upper limit of the CIs were 0.6% for the comparison between group C and group A and 0.74% for the comparison between group B and group A.  For  the  MI  endpoint  the  figures  were  1.89%  and  1.23%  respectively  and  for  unplanned revascularisation 1.5% and 1.92%. All of these comparisons give very narrow confidence intervals and provide good evidence that treatment groups B and C are comparable on the three components of the composite ischaemic endpoint. Clinically, the worrying trend observed for the triple ischaemic endpoint at D-30 is not reproduced at 1 year. There is no evidence of increased mortality in the bivaluridin group (arms B and C). Statistically this is true for other components too. The  Kaplan  Meier  plots  below  show  that  the  numerical  differences  in  death  and  in  the  composite ischaemic endpoint observed at Day 30 were not associated with differences in long term outcomes as evaluated at 1 year (Figures 2 and 3 below). Fig 2: Time to death at the 1-year follow-up visit based on Kaplan Meier method: Arm B (bivalirudin + GPI)  and  Arm C  (bivalirudin)  versus  Arm A  (heparin + GPI)  -  ITT  population 0 15 20 25 Event rate (%) 10 5 Patients at risk Patients at risk Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Fig 3: Time to first occurrence of the composite ischaemic endpoint at the 1-year follow-up visit based on Kaplan-Meier method: (bivalirudin + GPI) and bivalirudin vs heparin + GPI - ITT population

<!-- image -->

Time to first occurrence = time to first component event (death, MI, unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia) of the composite ischaemic endpoint. Table 4 below shows the composite ischaemic results at 1 year according to the actual procedure undergone by the patient following angiographic assessment. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4: Composite ischaemic endpoint according to actual procedure at 1-year follow-up visit

| Endpoint                               | Heparin + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Heparin + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   |
|----------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Composite ischaemic endpoint (overall) | 702                               | (15.3)                            | 732                                   | (15.9)                                | 736                                   | (16.0)                                |
| PCI (n=5180)                           | 456/2531                          | (17.8)                            | 507/2609                              | (19.4)                                | 502/2619                              | (19.2)                                |
| Medical management                     | 134/1493                          | (9.0)                             | 134/1496                              | (9.0)                                 | 131/1502                              | (8.7)                                 |
| (n=2995)                               |                                   |                                   |                                       |                                       |                                       |                                       |
| CABG (n=1040)                          | 112/549                           | (20.4)                            | 91/499                                | (18.2)                                | 103/491                               | (21.0)                                |

| Endpoint                      | Upfront GPI (A1+B1) N=4605, n (%)   | Upfront GPI (A1+B1) N=4605, n (%)   | Deferred GPI (A2+B2) N=4602, n (%)   | Deferred GPI (A2+B2) N=4602, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 30-day outcomes               |                                     |                                     |                                      |                                      |                                       |                                       |
| Composite ischaemia Medicinal | 328                                 | (7.1)                               | 369                                  | (8.0)                                | 361                                   | (7.8)                                 |
| Major bleeding                | 281                                 | (6.1)                               | 224                                  | (4.9)                                | 140                                   | (3.0)                                 |
| Net clinical outcome          | 543                                 | (11.8)                              | 542                                  | (11.8)                               | 468                                   | (10.1)                                |
| 1-year outcomes               |                                     |                                     |                                      |                                      |                                       |                                       |
| Composite ischaemia           | 693                                 | (15.0)                              | 741                                  | (16.1)                               | 736                                   | (16.0)                                |
| Death                         | 173                                 | (3.8)                               | 181                                  | (3.9)                                | 170                                   | (3.7)                                 |

There are no significant differences observed between the groups. As expected, there were lower event rates observed in patients who were medically managed versus those who underwent PCI or CABG, due in part to less significant extent of disease as well as the lack of invasive therapy. Further to a request from CHMP, the Applicant provided an analysis of all MIs at 30 days and at 1 year indicating the categories of MI according to established definitions (i.e. enzyme/troponin defined, ECG confirmed, both or any criteria). There was no difference in the 3 treatment groups for Q-wave MI, both at 30 day and at 1-year. Inhospital enzyme data showed no difference in groups A, B and C for CKMB elevations of &gt;8ULN and for CKMB &lt;3ULN. There was a modest increase in those with CKMB between 3-8ULN, which has to be balanced against a clear bleeding advantage. Results of ACUITY Timing Trial (secondary randomisation) The purpose of the ACUITY Timing Trial was to evaluate the clinical impact of the timing of GPI administration, either upfront (prior to angiography) or deferred until PCI, and the results are shown in table 5 below. Table 5: ACUITY timing trial day 30 and 1 year results, including Arm C Medicinal product no longer authorised

There were no significant differences in efficacy outcomes based on the timing of GPI administration at Day 30 or at 1-year. There was a reduction in bleeding for bivalirudin monotherapy compared to either GPI timing strategy. There was no significant interaction (on formal interaction testing) between upstream or deferred GPI administration and bivalirudin monotherapy.

## Subgroup analyses and Post-hoc analyses

Subgroup  analyses  investigating  the  potential  influence  of  several  predefined  factors  on  the  main clinical endpoints compared bivalirudin alone (Arm C) versus heparins + GPI (Arm A) and bivalirudin

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

+ GPI (Arm B) versus heparins + GPI (Arm A) using risk ratios. There were no statistically significant differences  among  the  treatment  arms  for  incidences  of  death,  MI  (including  Q-wave  MIs,  non-Qwave  MIs,  or  large  MIs),  or  unplanned  revascularisation  at  the  Day  30.  Results  of  treatment comparisons on the three main clinical endpoint variables were consistent regardless of whether the patient  was  triaged  to  medical  management,  PCI,  or  CABG.  There  were  no  differences  in  efficacy outcomes when GPI was administered upfront or at the time of PCI.

The results  of  the  composite  ischaemic  endpoint  at  1  year  show  a  numerical  increase  in  ischaemic events in the bivalirudin alone arm in EU patients, in diabetics, in patients with creatinine clearance &lt;60,  in  patients  who  did  not  receive  thienopyridine  or  who  received  it  post-angiography  or  PCI patients, in CABG, in patients who were randomised to angiography between 3.0-19.7 hours and those randomised late ( ≥ 19.7 hrs). A similar pattern of increased ischaemic events for patients who received bivalirudin + GPI was observed in women, patients of other race, EU patients, diabetes mellitus, CrCl &lt;60, patients who did not receive thienopyridine, early and intermediate randomisation of angiography and use of GPI during PCI.

|                             | Patients receiving aspirin &clopidogrel as per protocol   | Patients receiving aspirin &clopidogrel as per protocol   | Patients receiving aspirin &clopidogrel as per protocol   | Patients receiving aspirin &clopidogrel as per protocol   | Patients receiving aspirin &clopidogrel as per protocol   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
|                             | Arm A Heparin + GPI (N=2842) %                            | Arm B bival +GPI (N=2924) %                               | B/A Risk ratio (CI)                                       | Arm C bival alone (N=2911) %                              | C/A Risk ratio (CI)                                       |
| 30 day                      |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |
| Composite ischaemia         | 7.4                                                       | 7.4                                                       | 1.00 (0.84, 1.21)                                         | 7.0                                                       | 0.95 (0.79, 1.15)                                         |
| Death                       | 1.4                                                       | 1.4                                                       | 1.00 (0.64, 1.54)                                         | 1.2                                                       | 0.90 (0.57, 1.41)                                         |
| MI                          | 4.8                                                       | 4.9                                                       | 1.01 (0.80, 1.27)                                         | 4.7                                                       | 0.98 (0.78, 1.24)                                         |
| Unplanned revasc. Medicinal | 2.6                                                       | 2.8                                                       | 1.09 (0.80, 1.49)                                         | 2.2                                                       | 0.84 (0.61, 1.18)                                         |
| 1-year                      |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |                                                           |
| Composite ischaemia         | 16.1                                                      | 16.8                                                      | 1.04 (0.93, 1.17)                                         | 15.8                                                      | 0.98 (0.87, 1.10)                                         |
| Death                       | 3.7                                                       | 3.9                                                       | 1.06 (0.81, 1.37)                                         | 3.3                                                       | 0.90 (0.69, 1.18)                                         |
| MI                          | 6.7                                                       | 7.3                                                       | 1.09 (0.90, 1.32)                                         | 6.8                                                       | 1.03 (0.85, 1.25)                                         |
| Unplanned revasc.           | 9.4                                                       | 10.0                                                      | 1.06 (0.91, 1.24)                                         | 8.9                                                       | 0.94 (0.80, 1.11)                                         |

As regards the results  of  death  at  1  year,  there  was  an  adverse  numerical  increase  in  patients  &lt;65, patients  of  other  race,  diabetics,  patients  with  CrCl  &lt;60,  those  not  receiving  thienopyridine,  CABG patients  and patients  randomised to angiography treated with bivalirudin alone. Similar trends were noted for patients receiving bivalirudin + GPI. Further  to  a  request  from  CHMP  to  better  characterise  a  target  group  where  the  benefit/risk  of bivalirudin treatment (monotherapy or combined with GPI) is clearly positive, the Applicant submitted 30-day and 1-year results for patients who received ASA and clopidogrel. Clopidogrel was strongly encouraged in ACUITY and dosing and timing was left to the discretion of local institutional practice. The protocol recommended 300 mg loading dose prior to angiogram or PCI, but at no time later than 2 hours after PCI, if PCI was performed. The majority of patients (88.3%) received clopidogrel during index hospitalization and 63.3% received clopidogrel prior to angiogram or PCI. The results of the composite  ischaemic  endpoint  at  30  days  and  1  year  in  patients  who  received  clopidogrel  prior  to angiogram or PCI are shown in table 6. Table 6: ACUITY trial; 30-day and 1-year risk ratios for the composite ischaemic endpoint and its components for patients that received ASA and clopidogrel as per protocol.* Composite ischaemia Death MI Unplanned revasc. Composite ischaemia Medicinal product no longer authorised

*clopidogrel pre-angiography or pre-PCI

The above results clearly show that the incidence of composite ischaemia, death, MI and unplanned revascularisation was similar in all three groups (A, B &amp; C) while showing reduction in bleeding in group C (see results under safety), demonstrating a favourable a risk:benefit in patients treated with bivalirudin alone or in combination who have received ASA and clopidogrel.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further to a request from CHMP, the MAH presented a post-hoc analysis on patients who received supplemental  IV  doses  of  enoxaparin.  In  terms  of  the  patients  affected,  a  total  of  1262  patients received  enoxaparin  as  randomized  treatment  pre-PCI  in  ACUITY.  Of  these,  20%  (258  patients) received a median 0.3 mg/kg additional IV bolus of enoxaparin.

Table 7: 30 day outcome comparison of supplemental vs no supplemental IV enoxaparin dose

|                                | Patients randomized to Arm A and receiving enoxaparin   | Patients randomized to Arm A and receiving enoxaparin   | Patients randomized to Arm A and receiving enoxaparin   |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                       | Supplemental enox dose (median 0.3 mg/kg IV) N=258      | No supplemental enox IV dose N=1004 authorised          | p-value a                                               |
| 30 day outcomes                |                                                         |                                                         |                                                         |
| Composite ischaemia            | 21 ( 8.1%)                                              | 98 (9.8%)                                               | 0.43                                                    |
| Death                          | 1 (0.4%)                                                | 15 (1.5%)                                               | 0.16                                                    |
| ACUITY-scale non-CABG bleeding | 17 ( 6.6%)                                              | 60 (6.0%)                                               | 0.71                                                    |
| 1-year outcomes                |                                                         |                                                         |                                                         |
| Composite ischaemia            | 43 (16.7%)                                              | 186 (18.5%)                                             | 0.49                                                    |
| Death                          | 10 (3.9%)                                               | 37 (3.7%)                                               | 0.88                                                    |

Category 30 day outcomes Composite ischaemia Death ACUITY-scale non-CABG major bleeding 1-year outcomes Composite ischaemia Death a Chi-Square test. Although  these  data  must  be  interpreted  with  caution,  there  would  appear  to  be  no  difference  in clinical  outcomes,  including  bleeding,  between  patients  who  received  the  additional  IV  dose  of enoxaparin and those who underwent PCI and did not. This provides reassurance that the results of the control group were not influenced by this recommended dosing practice. Points raised on trial design One of the initial points raised by CHMP was the open-label nature of the trial. The MAH argues that the complexities involved in the clinical management of patients with ACS did not allow a doubleblind approach to masking the identities of study treatments or the timing of GPI initiation. Therefore, a number of strategies were used to minimise bias. Death is the ultimate measure of objective clinical outcomes.  Every site-reported death in ACUITY was independently adjudicated; there was 100% concordance for death based on CEC data. To avoid potential  bias  in  the  reporting  of  MI,  definitions  of  MI  were  carefully  and  prospectively  defined. Measurements  used  to  quantify  MI  were  standardised  and  all  MI  events  were  independently adjudicated by a blinded CEC. Thus, for the hard clinical endpoints (death and MI) it is considered unlikely that the results are biased to such an extent to affect the conclusions drawn due to the study being open label. It remains possible that bias could have been introduced that affected the results for the  revascularisation  endpoint.  The  blinded  CEC  reviewed  original  source  documentation  from  all patients  with  a  suspected  revascularisation  event  for  final  verification  that  a  revascularisation  did occur and it was driven by ischaemia. It is also important to note that the revascularisation event rate was small  compared  to  the  more  objective  endpoint  event  rates  of  MI  and  death  and  therefore  the contribution of any potential bias arising from an assessment of unplanned revascularisation would be relatively minor. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 3.2.2. Safety

The  safety  information  for  the  proposed  indication  of  ACS  includes  data  from  more  than  14,000 patients enrolled in ACUITY, TIMI 7 and TIMI 8 (C93-309-P). Both TIMI 7 &amp; TIMI 8 trials were conducted in patients with ACS (UA/NSTEMI) before an early invasive strategy was considered the recommended treatment. The TIMI 8 study was terminated early for commercial reasons after 133 of the planned 5,320 patients had been randomised.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In total clinical trial experience with bivalirudin is based on approximately 25,100 patients studied in healthy volunteers, renally-impaired patients and in patients with various underlying cardiovascular/haematological conditions. The number of control patients was approximately 20,000.

## Safety in ACUITY Trial

The number of patients in the ATP (as-treated) population is shown in the table below.

Table 8: Numbers of patients evaluable for safety in the ACUITY trial - ATP population

|                                                     | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Enoxaparin/UFH N=4697                               | Bivalirudin N=9025    | Bivalirudin N=9025    | Bivalirudin N=9025   | Bivalirudin N=9025   | Bivalirudin N=9025             |                                |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Category                                            | + GPI a N=3603, n (%)                               | + GPI a N=3603, n (%)                               | Alone b N=1094, n (%)                               | Alone b N=1094, n (%)                               | Total N=4697, n (%)                                 | Total N=4697, n (%)                                 | + GPI a N=3849, n (%) | + GPI a N=3849, n (%) | Alone N=5176,        | n (%)                | Total N=9025, n (%) authorised | Total N=9025, n (%) authorised |
| Received any GPI                                    | 3603                                                | (100)                                               | 0                                                   | (0.0)                                               | 3603                                                | (76.7)                                              | 3849                  | (100)                 | 0                    | (0.0)                | 3849                           | (42.6)                         |
| Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c | Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c |                       |                       |                      |                      |                                |                                |
| PCI                                                 | 2536                                                | (70.4)                                              | 80                                                  | (7.3)                                               | 2616                                                | (55.7)                                              | 2838                  | (73.7)                | 2322                 | (44.9)               | 5160                           | (57.2)                         |
| CABG                                                | 303                                                 | (8.4)                                               | 263                                                 | (24.0)                                              | 566                                                 | (12.1)                                              | 273                   | (7.1)                 | 697                  | (13.5)               | 970                            | (10.7)                         |
| MM                                                  | 764                                                 | (21.2)                                              | 751                                                 | (68.6)                                              | 1515                                                | (32.3)                                              | 738                   | (19.2)                | 2157                 | (41.7)               | 2895                           | (32.1)                         |

| Study                            |   No. patients exposed | Bolus dose (mg/kg)   | IV infusion dose (mg/kg/h)   |   Median duration of infusion (h) |
|----------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| ACUITY (up to triage decision) a |                   9025 | 0.1                  | 0.25                         |                               4.1 |
| TIMI 7                           |                    160 | -                    | 0.02                         |                              72   |
|                                  |                     81 | -                    | 0.25                         |                              72   |
|                                  |                     88 | -                    | 0.5                          |                              72   |
|                                  |                     81 | -                    | 1.0                          |                              72   |
| TIMI 8                           |                     67 | 0.1                  | 0.25 b                       |                              72   |

Procedure (revascularisation/clinical procedure): c Percentages are calculated based on the number of ATP patients in the corresponding treatment group. a Numbers of patients who received one or more dose of GPI postrandomisation, irrespective of randomisation or reason for GPI administration. The majority of these patients underwent PCI. The bivalirudin + GPI group includes patients randomised to bivalirudin alone who received nonrandomised GPI to manage breakthrough ischaemia (see Summary of Clinical Efficacy ). b Number of patients who did not receive any GPI postrandomisation, irrespective of randomisation. c Following index angiography, all patients underwent angiographic triage to medical management, PCI, or CABG per local practice. Because a patient may have undergone more than one revascularisation procedure, or may have undergone a revascularisation procedure in addition to medical management, an algorithm was used to assign only one procedure to each patient in the database (hereafter, the procedure determined by the algorithm is referred to as actual procedure). More information is provided in ACUTY CSR Appendix 16.1.4 . MM: medical management. The dose of bivalirudin and the duration of administration are shown in table 9 below. Most patients in ACUITY received additional bivalirudin after the triage decision. Table 9: Overall exposure to bivalirudin, by study Medicinal product no longer authorised

a Number of patients who received bivalirudin as their first study drug postrandomisation. The doses shown are the median values for the average bolus and infusion doses administered up to the triage decision. Patients in the ACUITY trial may have received additional bolus and/or infusion doses of bivalirudin after the triage decision. The median overall duration of the bivalirudin infusion in the ACUITY trial was 6.4 hours.

b In the TIMI 8 trial, the bivalirudin dose could be adjusted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Bleeding

TIMI-defined as intracranial bleeding or bleeding associated with haemoglobin decrease of &gt;5 g/dl (or a haematocrit decrease of 15%).

The main safety endpoint was major bleeding measured as per the ACUITY scale, which comprised the following non-CABG bleeding events:

- Intracranial
- Retroperitoneal
- Intraocular
- Access site haemorrhage requiring radiological or surgical intervention
- ≥ 5 cm diameter haematoma at puncture site

| Bleeding component                                                  | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%) longer   | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%) longer   |   Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%) | Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   | p-value b   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------|
| ACUITY-scale major bleeding a                                       | 262                                       | (5.7)                                     |                                   139 | (3.0)                                 | <0.0001     |
| Intracranial                                                        | 3                                         | (0.1)                                     |                                     3 | (0.1)                                 | 0.9981      |
| Retroperitoneal                                                     | 24                                        | (0.5)                                     |                                     7 | (0.2)                                 | 0.0022      |
| Intraocular                                                         | 0                                         | (0.0)                                     |                                     0 | (0.0)                                 | nc          |
| Access site haemorrhage                                             | 24 no                                     | (0.5)                                     |                                    14 | (0.3)                                 | 0.1028      |
| Haematoma ≥ 5 cm at puncture site                                   | 102                                       | (2.2)                                     |                                    32 | (0.7)                                 | <0.0001     |
| Decrease in haemoglobin ≥ 4 g/dl without overt bleeding source      | 39                                        | (0.8)                                     |                                    33 | (0.7)                                 | 0.4726      |
| Decrease in haemoglobin ≥ 3 g/dl with overt bleeding source product | 102                                       | (2.2)                                     |                                    45 | (1.0)                                 | <0.0001     |
| Reoperation for bleeding                                            | 2                                         | (0.0)                                     |                                     4 | (0.1)                                 | 0.4154      |
| Any blood product transfusion                                       | 125                                       | (2.7)                                     |                                    75 | (1.6)                                 | 0.0003      |

· Decrease in haemoglobin concentration of ≥ 4 g/dl, without an overt bleeding source or &gt;3g/dl with an overt bleeding source. · Reoperation for bleeding · Use of any blood product transfusion The major bleeding results as per the ACUITY scale are shown in tables 10 and 11 below. Table 10: Incidence of ACUITY-scale major bleeding at the Day 30 visit: Arm C (bivalirudin alone) vs Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population a Protocol non-CABG major bleeding. Numbers of patients with individual bleeding components do not add to total, as patients may have experienced more than one bleeding event. b Chi-square test of difference between treatments. nc: not calculated The above results show a clear and statistically significant reduction in major bleeding in favour of the bivalirudin alone arm. This result is mostly driven by the significant reductions in haematoma, decrease in Hb&gt;3g/dl and the use of any blood product transfusion. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 11: Incidence of ACUITY-scale major bleeding at the Day 30 visit: Arm B (bivalirudin + GPI) versus Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population

| Bleeding component                                             |   Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%) | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   |   Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%) | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   | p-value b         |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------|
| ACUITY-scale major bleeding a                                  |                                262 | (5.7)                              |                                   243 | (5.3)                                 | 0.3831            |
| Intracranial                                                   |                                  3 | (0.1)                              |                                     3 | (0.1)                                 | 0.9998            |
| Retroperitoneal                                                |                                 24 | (0.5)                              |                                    26 | (0.6)                                 | 0.7773            |
| Intraocular                                                    |                                  0 | (0.0)                              |                                     2 | (0.0)                                 | 0.1573            |
| Access site haemorrhage                                        |                                 24 | (0.5)                              |                                    28 | (0.6)                                 | 0.5786            |
| Haematoma ≥ 5 cm at puncture site                              |                                102 | (2.2)                              |                                   101 | (2.2)                                 | 0.9422            |
| Decrease in haemoglobin ≥ 4 g/dl without overt bleeding source |                                 39 | (0.8)                              |                                    33 | (0.7)                                 | 0.4772 authorised |
| Decrease in haemoglobin ≥ 3 g/dl with overt bleeding source    |                                102 | (2.2)                              |                                    83 | (1.8)                                 | 0.1578            |
| Reoperation for bleeding                                       |                                  2 | (0.0)                              |                                     5 | (0.1)                                 | 0.2568            |
| Any blood product transfusion                                  |                                125 | (2.7)                              |                                   119 | (2.6)                                 | 0.6958            |

|                                | Arm A       | Arm B        | Arm C       |
|--------------------------------|-------------|--------------|-------------|
| ACUITY non-CABG minor bleeding | 993 (21.6%) | 1001 (21.7%) | 592 (12.8%) |

a Protocol non-CABG major bleeding. Numbers of patients with individual bleeding components do not add to total, as patients may have experienced more than one bleeding event. b Chi-square test of difference between treatments. There was no difference between the two groups. Of note, there were 2 cases of intraocular bleed in bivalirudin + GPI group but none in Heparin + GPI group. Results for minor bleeding events also significantly favoured the bivalirudin alone group and were as follows: ACUITY non-CABG minor bleeding As specified in the protocol and requested by CHMP, bleeding rates were also assessed using the TIMI criteria (Rao et al , 1988), which are independent of CABG bleeding. TIMI major bleeding was defined as any one of the following: · Intracranial · Decrease in haemoglobin concentration ≥ 5 g/dl TIMI minor bleeding was defined as any one of the following: · Haematuria or haematemesis · Decrease in haemoglobin concentration ≥ 4 g/dl without an overt source of bleeding · Decrease in haemoglobin concentration of ≥ 3 g/dl with an overt source of bleeding The major bleeding results as per the TIMI scale are shown in tables 12 and 13 below. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 12: Incidence of TIMI major and minor bleeding at the Day 30: Arm C (bivalirudin alone) versus Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population

| TIMI bleeding endpoint   | Heparins + (A) N=4603, n   | GPI (%) Bivalirudin alone (C) N=4612, n (%)   | Diff. C - A   | 95% CI               |
|--------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|---------------|----------------------|
| TIMI major bleeding      | 86 (1.9)                   | (0.9)                                         | - 0.0094      | (-0.0142, -0.0046) * |
| TIMI minor bleeding      | 295 (6.4)                  | (3.7)                                         | - 0.0272      | (-0.0362, -0.0183) * |

| TIMI bleeding endpoint   | Heparins + GPI (A) N=4603, n (%)   | Bivalirudin + GPI (B) N=4604, n (%)   | Diff. B - A   | 95% CI            |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|
| TIMI major bleeding      | 86 (1.9)                           | 76 (1.7)                              | - 0.0022      | (-0.0075, 0.0032) |
| TIMI minor bleeding      | 295 (6.4)                          | 281 (6.1)                             | - 0.0031      | (-0.0129, 0.0068) |

| Bleeding site                            | Bivalirudin + GPI (N=9025) %   | Heparin + GPI (N=4697) %   |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------|
| Puncture site haematoma > 5 cm Medicinal | 6.0                            | 7.4                        |
| Oozing blood at puncture site            | 5.7                            | 8.3                        |
| Ecchymosis                               | 4.8                            | 5.6                        |
| Epistaxis                                | 1.3                            | 1.4                        |
| Gingival Bleeding                        | 0.9                            | 0.6                        |
| Genitourinary                            | 0.7                            | 0.8                        |
| Gastrointestinal                         | 0.6                            | 0.9                        |
| Sheath puncture site                     | 0.5                            | 0.5                        |
| Retroperitoneal                          | 0.4                            | 0.5                        |
| Haemoptysis                              | 0.3                            | 0.3                        |
| Melena                                   | 0.3                            | 0.4                        |
| Ear, Nose or Throat                      | 0.1                            | 0.1                        |
| Cardio/pulmonary                         | <0.1                           | 0.1                        |
| Intracranial                             | <0.1                           | <0.1                       |
| Other                                    | 3.0                            | 4.3                        |

Numbers of patients with individual bleeding components do not add to total, as patients may have experienced more than one bleeding event. * indicates that the risk difference between heparins + GPI and bivalirudin alone is significantly different from zero. Table 13: Incidence of TIMI major and minor bleeding at the Day 30: Arm B (bivalirudin + GPI) vs Arm A (heparins + GPI) - ITT population Numbers of patients with individual bleeding components do not add to total, as patients may have experienced more than one bleeding event. According to the TIMI bleeding criteria, the absolute difference in major bleeding between the two GPI strategies and bivalirudin monotherapy narrowed to 1% or less (1.7%-1.9% vs 0.9%). Overall bleeding Overall bleeding frequency at Day 30 at different bleeding sites is presented below. Table 14: 30-day bleeding site frequency data (bivalirudin ± GPI vs heparin + GPI inhibitor); ITT population. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Major bleeding occurred most frequently at the sheath puncture site.  Other less frequently observed bleeding sites with greater than 0.1%  (uncommon)  bleeding  included  'other'  puncture  site, retroperitoneal, gastrointestinal, ear, nose or throat.

Post-hoc bleeding analyses

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further  to  a  request  from  CHMP,  the  Applicant  carried  out  a  number  of  additional  analyses  of  the bleeding data.

To ensure that ACUITY-scale bleeding outcomes were not overly influenced by haematomas ≥ 5cm, additional analyses were performed to examine outcomes when these haematomas were excluded.

Table 15: 30 day bleeding outcomes in ACUITY

|                                                           | Heparins + GPI (ASA + Thieno) N = 4603   | Bivalirudin + GPI (ASA + Thieno) N = 4604   | Bivalirudin (ASA + Thieno) N = 4612   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                                                           | ACUITY Scale                             | ACUITY Scale                                |                                       |
| ACUITY non-CABG major bleeding                            | 262 (5.7%)                               | 243 (5.3%)                                  | 139 (3.0%)                            |
| ACUITY non-CABG major bleeding excluding haematomas ≥ 5cm | 208 (4.5%)                               | 187 (4.1%)                                  | 124 (2.7%)                            |

|                                           | Femoral   | Radial   |   p-value |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------|----------|-----------|
| Composite ischaemia                       | 15.4%     | 15.0%    |      0.76 |
| Death                                     | 3.6%      | 4.0%     |      0.6  |
| MI                                        | 6.9%      | 7.4%     |      0.59 |
| Unplanned revascularisation for Ischaemia | 8.4%      | 6.9%     |      0.13 |

|                         | Heparin + GPI   | Bivalirudin + GPI   | Bivalirudin alone   |
|-------------------------|-----------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| Both Radial and Femoral | 7.3%            | 7.2%                | 4.2%                |
| Radial                  | 7.4%            | 9.7%                | 4.7%                |
| Femoral                 | 7.3%            | 7.1%                | 4.1%                |

As detailed in the table 15 above, a 40% reduction in ACUITY scale major bleeding was seen, comparing Arm A to Arm C, when large haematomas were excluded. Given that bleeding is more of a problem in interventions through the femoral route rather than the brachial  route,  the  Applicant  was  asked  to  carry  out  further  analyses  according  to  the  route  of angiography used. However, ACUITY was not designed or powered to provide such analyses. The ACUITY trial demonstrated comparable ischaemic outcomes for femoral versus radial access at 1 year (see table 16) and a comparable reduction in organ bleeding irrespective of the route of angiographic access (see table 17). Table 16: 1-year outcomes, by angiographic access site, in the ACUITY trial Table 17: 30 Day organ bleeds*, by arm, in the ACUITY trial *Organ bleeding defined as intracranial, intraocular, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, pulmonary, ear nose and throat, pericardial. The Cardiovascular Scientific Advisory Group (SAG CVS) concluded that the findings from ACUITY are applicable independent of access route and that no particular benefit or risk is associated with the product when a particular access route is used. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Another analysis performed on ACUITY evaluated bleeding in patients receiving consistent UFH or enoxaparin + GPI (n=2137) versus patients switched from either heparin based therapy to bivalirudin monotherapy at the time of randomisation (n=2078). In line with the overall trial, patients switched to bivalirudin had significantly fewer major bleeding events (2.8% vs 5.8%, RR 0.49 [0.36 -0.66], p &lt; 0.01), with similar incidence of composite ischaemia (6.9% vs 7.4%, RR 0.93 [0.75-1.16], p=0.52) to those  maintained  on  consistent  therapy.  These  results  also  persisted  in  the  cohort  of  patients  with elevated cardiac biomarkers or ECG changes at presentation as well as in patients undergoing PCI.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Discussion on bleeding events

No difference was observed in bleeding events at 30 days between bivalirudin + GPI vs Heparin + GPI. However, there was a significant difference in favour of bivalirudin alone when compared with heparin  +  GPI,  suggesting  a  significant  role  of  GPI  in  the  observed  bleeding  events.  The  bleeding advantage  seen  at  30  days  persists  at  1  year  with  or  without  use  of  TIMI  scale.  This  significant difference was also noted when using the TIMI scale, which approached 1%. This absolute reduction in bleeding is clinically meaningful. TIMI major bleeds have been shown to be highly predictive of 1 year mortality, with a hazard ratio of 3.60. Further evidence of the importance of avoiding TIMI-scale major bleeds is the high associated rate of blood transfusions

| System organ class                                   | Very Common ( ≥ 1/10)   | Common ( ≥ 1/100 to <1/10)   | Uncommon ( ≥ 1/1,000 to ≤ 1/100)                 | Rare ≥ 1/10,000 to ≤ 1/1,000         |
|------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Blood and the lymphatic system disorders             |                         |                              | INR increased, Thrombocytopenia, anaemia. longer |                                      |
| Immune system disorders                              |                         |                              | Hypersensitivity                                 |                                      |
| Nervous system disorders                             |                         |                              | Headache                                         |                                      |
| Cardiac disorders                                    |                         |                              |                                                  | Bradycardia                          |
| Vascular disorders                                   | Minor bleeding          | Major bleeding no            | Haematoma, hypotension                           | Haemorrhage, Vascular pseudoaneurysm |
| Gastrointestinal disorders                           |                         |                              | Nausea, vomiting                                 |                                      |
| Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders               | product                 |                              |                                                  | Rash, urticaria                      |
| Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders      |                         |                              | Back pain, chest pain, Groin pain                |                                      |
| General disorders and administration site conditions |                         |                              |                                                  | Injection site reactions             |

Regarding other events of special  interest,  the  overall  incidence  of thrombocytopaenia in  ACUITY trial  was  11%  and  was  comparable  in  the  overall  enoxaparin/UFH  and  bivalirudin  groups.  It  was reported in 10 bivalirudin-treated patients (0.1%).  The majority of these patients received concomitant ASA and clopidogrel,  and  6  out  of  the  10  patients  also  received  a  GPI.  There  were  no  reports  of mortality among these patients.

According to the MAH, by using bivalirudin, 9 TIMI major bleeds per 1000 patients treated could be avoided. In comparison, at 30 days there is the possibility of an excess of 5 MIs per 1000 patients treated and at 1 year there is the risk of 8 MIs per 1000 patients treated. Other Adverse Events (AEs) and deaths Approximately  23.3%  of  patients  receiving  bivalirudin  experienced  at  least  one  adverse  event  and 2.1% experienced an adverse drug reaction. Adverse event reactions are listed by system organ class in Table 18. Table 18. ACUITY trial; overall adverse drug reaction data The AE profile of bivalirudin in patients with ACS did not show any new safety signal. Few patients in  these  studies  experienced  allergic/immunologic/hypersensitivity  AEs,  and  the  frequencies  were generally  balanced  between  treatment  groups.  No  deaths  were  reported  due  to  these  events.  The incidence of AEs were similar across treatment groups in ACUITY as well as in other ACS studies. Of note, more bivalirudin than enoxaparin/UFH patients experienced adverse events related to gastrointestinal SOC (5.0% vs 4.3%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Regarding  deaths,  the  heparin  and  bivalirudin  groups  were  well  balanced  with  respect  to  the percentage  of  patients  who  died.  Most  frequently  reported  SAEs  with  an  outcome  of  death  were cardiac  arrest,  cardiogenic  shock,  and  myocardial  infarction.  In  the  ACUITY  trial,  69  (1.5%) enoxaparin/UFH and 136 (1.5%) bivalirudin patients in the ATP population experienced one or more

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

SAE with an outcome of death up to Day 30 visit. Mortality by a major bleeding event was reported in 5.6% of enoxaparin/UFH and 5.0% of bivalirudin patients up to Day 30 visit.

## Pharmacovigilance

## Risk Management Plan

The MAA submitted a risk management plan, which included a risk minimisation plan. The Summary table of the RMP can be found at the end of this report.

Exposure to bivalirudin in additional ACS patients resulting from approval of this indication will be at levels of drug lower than those previously evaluated and should offer no additional safety concerns and for durations of treatment which have previously been studied or observed. The ImproveR study, designed to evaluate the use of Angiox in routine European clinical practice, identified the misadministration practice of bolus only dosing. Single bolus doses potentially lead to sub-therapeutic  doses.  The  clinical  consequences  of  administering  a  sub-therapeutic  dose  of  a procedural anticoagulant are potentially serious. The MAH has been working with the National Agencies and the Pharmacovigilance Working Party to address the concerns raised. The risk minimisation activities proposed to curtail the use of bolus only dosing are the following: 1. A direct healthcare professional communication (circulated on 29 October 2007) 2. Investigations into physician attitudes and practices 3. Review of promotional and educational materials 4. Sales representative training 5. Changes to the SmPC for Angiox As a follow up measure, the MAH should propose tools to assess the effectiveness of these measures in the next RMP update. The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. Pharmacovigilance Plan This is entirely based on spontaneous reporting. With regards to serious bleeding reactions and serious immunological reactions received in the EU, the company should continue to actively follow up these for  further  information  as  this  will  aid  assessment  of  these  cases.  The  company  has  been  actively monitoring these issues in their PSURs for Angiox indicated for PCI and this should be continued. The CHMP considered that due to the likely increase in  use  following  the  extension  of  indication, there is an argument for drug utilisation studies, which would obviously need to be entirely hospitalbased. Therefore, as a follow up measure the company is requested to conduct a drug utilisation study and provide a protocol with timelines for completion of the study. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## Discussion

This request for a new indication for the treatment of adult patients with acute coronary syndromes (UA/NSTEMI) is supported by data from a single pivotal study (ACUITY) and two smaller supportive studies  (TIMI  7  &amp;  TIMI  8).  All  the  clinical  trials  were  carried  out  in  conformity  with  the  ethical requirements and principles of Good Clinical Practice in force at the time the studies were performed. Only ACUITY will be discussed.

ACUITY  was  an  open-label,  non-inferiority  trial  comparing  bivalirudin  with  heparin  (UFH  or enoxaparin)  in  medium  to  high  risk  ACS  patients  without  ST-segment  elevation  undergoing  early

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

invasive management and evaluating the clinical impact of a treatment strategy based on the timing of GPI initiation. The SAG CVS agreed that it was a pragmatic trial, reflecting current practice. Indeed, based on the ESC recommendation that GPIs should be used in high risk patients with ACS, the use of these  agents  in  the  ACUITY  trial  population  is  considered  appropriate  and  consistent  with  ESC guidelines and current suggested European clinical practice.

One of the initial points raised by CHMP was the open-label nature of the trial. The MAH argues that the complexities involved in the clinical management of patients with ACS did not allow a doubleblind approach to masking the identities of study treatments or the timing of GPI initiation. Therefore, a  number  of  strategies  were  used  to  minimise  bias  pertaining  to  the  reporting  of  the  different endpoints, especially MIs and revascularisation events (see page **), and the review by the blinded CEC of all pertinent source documentation. To avoid potential bias in the reporting of MI, definitions of MI were carefully and prospectively defined. Measurements used to quantify MI were standardised and all MI events were independently adjudicated by a blinded CEC. The SAG CVS and the CHMP agree that it is unlikely that the open-label nature of the trial had an undue influence on the results.

Further  to  the  additional  analyses  requested  by  CHMP,  it  was  apparent  that  the  results  of  the composite  ischaemic  endpoint  and  its  individual  components  were  most  favourable  to  bivalirudin, especially  for  bivalirudin  alone,  in  patients  who  had  received  ASA  and  clopidogrel.  Indeed,  the individual trends are reversed. Considering the acknowledged bleeding advantage is maintained in this patient population, the SAG recommended and the CHMP agreed to restrict the use of bivalirudin in ACS  patients  to  those  pretreated  with  ASA  and  clopidogrel.  In  addition,  it  was  agreed  to  further qualify  the  target  population  as  'high  risk'  (i.e.  scheduled  for  urgent  or  early  intervention)  as  this reflected the vast majority of patients included in the ACUITY trial.

Efficacy The ACUITY trial protocol established three primary endpoints. The CHMP considered that the 'net clinical outcome' endpoint, a composite of incidence of all-cause death, MI, unplanned revascularisation for ischaemia, or major bleeding, was difficult to evaluate and unacceptable, given the mix of efficacy outcomes with the well established safety measure of bleeds. The CHMP strongly believes that the primary endpoint should only include efficacy variables and safety variables should be  evaluated  separately  in  order  to  avoid  drawing  false  conclusions  on  efficacy.  This  concern  was shared by the SAG CVS and the results of this endpoint have not been considered in the evaluation of this  new  indication,  nor  have  they  been  reflected  in  the  SPC.  Similarly,  the  bleeding  results  are considered a safety outcome and are accordingly discussed in the safety section of this report. The  main  efficacy  discussion  centred  on  the  results  of  the  composite  ischaemic  endpoint  and  its individual  components.  Whilst  the  CHMP  agreed  that  the  results  of  the  two  bivalirudin  arms  were statistically  non-inferior  to  the  control  heparin  group,  the  data  at  30  days,  defined  as  the  primary outcome  measure,  showed  a  worrying  numerical  increase  in  mortality  and  MI  notably  in  the 'bivalirudin  alone'  group.  Moreover,  the  Committee  also  questioned  the  rather  wide  pre-specified relative non-inferiority margin of 25%. The MAH claimed that this margin was considered acceptable by clinicians. Moreover, the confidence intervals of the point estimates were reassuringly tight, with the 1-year results effectively within a relative non-inferiority margin of 15%. Subsequent to the first SAG CVS meeting, the MAH submitted the 1-year data. The results of the two bivalirudin arms were again  statistically  non-inferior,  and,  importantly,  reassuring  since  the  negative  mortality  trend  was reversed  in  favour  of  bivalirudin.  Regarding  the  remaining  modest  increase  in  MI,  the  additional analyses  carried  out  by  the  MAH  at  the  request  of  CHMP  showed  that  it  was  mainly  driven  by enzymatic MI, and this has to be balanced against the clear bleeding advantage - see later. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Regarding the pre-PCI IV administration of Enoxaparin, which is not approved in the EU although included in the ESC recommendations, the applicant has shown that there was no difference in clinical outcomes between patients who received the additional dose of enoxaparin and those who did not. This has been reflected in section 5.1 of the SPC.

Finally, regarding the results of the ACUITY Timing Trial (the so-called secondary randomisation), there were no significant differences in efficacy outcomes at Day 30 or at 1-year based on the timing

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

of  GPI  administration,  namely  upfront  (prior  to  angiography)  or  deferred  until  PCI.  There  was  a reduction in bleeding for bivalirudin monotherapy compared to either GPI timing strategy.

## Safety

The main safety discussion centred on the purported bleeding advantage observed in patients treated with  bivalirudin  alone.  The  results  of  the  primary  safety  endpoint  (non-CABG  major  bleeding measured by the ACUITY scale) appeared quite impressive in favour of bivalirudin alone. The CHMP questioned the validity on the non-validated ACUITY scale, particularly several of its components, such  as  'puncture  site  haematoma'  and  access-site  bleeding,  regarded  as  being  of  less  clinical importance when compared to the TIMI scale. The SAG CVS acknowledged the higher sensitivity of the ACUITY scale but felt that the bleeding advantage, even for these less critical bleeding events, was significant and should not be disregarded. Although the scale of the difference is smaller when considering  the  TIMI  scale,  it  was  still  believed  to  be  clinically  significant.  Moreover,  subsequent analyses performed at the request of CHMP showed that the haematoma event rate has no influence on the  bleeding benefit  shown for bivalirudin, showing that the ACUITY scale remains discriminatory even after large haematomas are excluded.

The  use  of  bivalirudin  is  associated  with  a  favourable  benefit/risk  profile. Despite  a  numerical difference in deaths at 30 days and of MI at 30 days and 1 year, these differences were not statistically significant;  in  fact,  mortality  favoured  bivalirudin  at  1  year.  In  contrast,  the  bleeding  differences observed  in  patients  treated  with  bivalirudin  were  statistically  and  clinically  significant  and  were maintained regardless of the bleeding scale employed.

The CHMP noted that the patent bleeding advantage of bivalirudin over heparin at 30-days and which persisted at 1 year, both in terms of major and minor bleeding, was only observed in the bivalirudin alone  arm  (regardless  of  bleeding  scale),  suggesting  that  the  significantly  higher  rates  of  bleeding observed in the  'heparin  +  GPI'  and  'bivalirudin  +  GPI'  arms  suggest  a  major  role  of  GPI  in  the bleeding events. The magnitude of the bleeding difference between the 'bivalirudin alone' and the 'heparin  +  GPI'  and  'bivalirudin  +  GPI'  groups  is  clearly  maintained  when  considering  the subpopulation of patients pre-treated with ASA and clopidogrel. Another point of debate was whether the route of angiography used should be reflected in the SPC, given that bleeding is more of a problem in interventions through the femoral route rather than the brachial route. Further to subsequent analyses carried out by the MAH, the SAG CVS concluded, and the CHMP agreed, that the ACUITY findings are applicable regardless of access route. Otherwise,  the  safety  profile  of  bivalirudin  in  patients  with  ACS  did  not  show  any  new  untoward signal. The incidence of adverse events was similar across treatment groups in ACUITY as well as in other  ACS  studies  Few  patients  experienced  allergic/immunologic/hypersensitivity  events,  and  the frequencies were generally balanced between treatment groups. Regarding other events of special  interest,  the  overall  incidence  of thrombocytopaenia in  ACUITY trial was comparable in the overall enoxaparin/UFH and bivalirudin groups. Finally, the MAH has taken the opportunity to update section 4.9 of the SPC ( Potential for Overdose ) in  order  to  reflect  the  experience  with  cases  of  overdose  of  up  to  10  times  the  recommended  dose reported in clinical trials. None of these cases were associated with bleeding or other adverse events. Evaluation of Benefit - risk balance Medicinal product no longer authorised

It may be concluded that bivalirudin is an acceptable substitute for heparin (either UFH or enoxaparin) when used with dual antiplatelet therapy - aspirin and clopidogrel.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Summary Table of the Risk Management Plan (version 4)



| Safety concern                             | Proposed pharmacovigilance activities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Proposed risk management activities (routine and additional)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Identified risk: Bleeding events Medicinal | (routine and additional) Expedited reporting of bleeding events. Active surveillance of major bleeding events including the use of follow-up questionnaires to ensure high quality and complete information. Inclusion of discussion of medically important bleeding and serious immunologic events in the PSUR. Routine pharmacovigilance activities. product | Routine measures only. Identified risks with respect to bleeding are considered well described in current labelling (see below), are responsive to aggressive surveillance and communication, and are unlikely to benefit from additional measures. Section 4.3: Angiox is contraindicated in patients with active bleeding or increased risk of bleeding because of haemostasis disorders and/or irreversible coagulation disorders Section 4.5: From the knowledge of their mechanism of action, combined use of anti-coagulant medicinal products (heparin, warfarin, thrombolytics or antiplatelet agents) can be expected to increase the risk of bleeding. In any case, when bivalirudin is combined with a platelet inhibitor or an anticoagulant drug, clinical and biological parameters of haemostasis should be regularly monitored. Section 4.8: Platelets, bleeding and clotting In ACUITY, bleeding data were collected separately from adverse events. Major bleeding was measured by the ACUITY and TIMI major bleeding scales as defined in the footnotes to Table 2. Minor haemorrhage was defined as any observed bleeding event that did not meet the criteria for a major haemorrhage. Minor bleeding occurred very commonly ( ≥ 1/10) and major bleeding occurred commonly ( ≥ 1/100 and <1/10). Both minor and major bleeds were significantly less frequent with bivalirudin alone than the heparin plus GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor and bivalirudin plus GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor groups (see Table 2). Similar reductions in bleeding were observed in patients who were switched to bivalirudin from heparin-based therapies (N = 2078). Major bleeding occurred most frequently at the sheath puncture site (see Table 3). Other less frequently observed bleeding sites with greater than 0.1% (uncommon) bleeding included 'other' puncture site, retroperitoneal, gastrointestinal, ear, nose or throat. Section 4.9: Cases of overdose of up to 10 times the recommended dose have been reported in clinical trials. Single bolus doses of bivalirudin up to 7.5mg/kg have also been reported. None of these cases were associated with bleeding or other adverse events. In cases of overdose, treatment with bivalirudin should be immediately discontinued and the patient monitored closely for signs of bleeding. In the event of major bleeding, treatment with bivalirudin should be immediately discontinued. There is no known antidote to bivalirudin, however, bivalirudin is haemo- dialysable. no longer authorised |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | The incidence of both ACUITY-scale and TIMI-scale bleeding events up to day 30 is presented in Table 9 for the overall (ITT) population and for patients that received aspirin and clopidogrel as per protocol.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Identified risk: Serious immunological events                                                   | Expedited reporting of serious immunological events. Active surveillance of serious immunological events including the use of follow-up questionnaires to ensure high quality and complete information. Inclusion of discussion of serious immunological events in the PSUR. Routine pharmacovigilance activities.                                                                                                                            | Routine measures only. Identified risks with respect to immunological reaction are considered well described in current labelling (see below) are responsive to aggressive surveillance and communication, and are unlikely to benefit from additional measures. Section 4.4 Hypersensitivity: Allergic type hypersensitivity reactions were reported uncommonly in clinical trials. Necessary preparations should be made to deal with this. Patients should be informed of the early signs of hypersensitivity reactions including hives, generalised urticaria, tightness of chest, wheezing, hypotension and anaphylaxis. In the case of shock, the current medical standards for shock treatment should be applied. Anaphylaxis, including anaphylactic shock with fatal outcome has been reported very rarely in post-marketing experience (see section 4.8). Treatment-emergent positive bivalirudin antibodies are rare and have not been associated with clinical evidence of allergic or anaphylactic reactions. Caution should be exercised in patients previously treated with lepirudin who had developed lepirudin antibodies. Section 4.8 longer authorised |
| Identified risk: Medication errors                                                              | Continue routine pharmacovigilance procedures for events describing medication errors. Implement additional pharmacovigilance measures for events describing bolus only dosing: Perform active follow up of adverse events where bolus only dosing is reported. Routine pharmacovigilance activities. Conduct a drug utilization study to obtain information on the use and dose patterns of Angiox in European clinical practice. product no | Update section 4.2 of Angiox® SmPC with additional wording regarding the importance of the use of the bolus and infusion dose (even for short PCI procedures). Section 4.2: The safety and efficacy of a bolus only dose of Angiox has not been evaluated and is not recommended even if a short PCI procedure is planned DHCP Communication: To provide a direct reminder to the interventional cardiology community of the importance of using the approved regimen for Angiox® (DHCP circulated 29th October 2007).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Potential risk: INR increase following co- administration of warfarin and bivalirudin Medicinal | Continue to closely monitor events describing these reactions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Potential risks with respect INR increase are considered adequately described in current labelling (see below) are responsive to surveillance and are unlikely to benefit from additional measures at this time. Sections 4.5 From the knowledge of their mechanism of action, combined use of anti-coagulant medicinal products (heparin, warfarin, thrombolytics or antiplatelet agents) can be expected to increase the risk of bleeding. In any case, when bivalirudin is combined with a platelet inhibitor or an anticoagulant drug, clinical and biological parameters of haemostasis should be regularly monitored. Section 5.1 In healthy volunteers and patients, bivalirudin exhibits dose- and concentration dependent anticoagulant activity as evidenced as prolongation of the ACT, aPTT, PT, INR and TT. Intravenous administration of bivalirudin                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                              | produces measurable anticoagulation within minutes.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Potential risk: Adverse reactions leading to cardiac arrest                                                   | Continue to closely monitor events describing these reactions. Regular review of MedDRA preferred term/TME 'cardiac arrest'.                                                 | Potential risks with respect to events leading to cardiac arrest are considered adequately described in current labelling (see below) are responsive to surveillance and are unlikely to benefit from additional measures at this time. Section 4.8: Tables 4 &6. Section 5.1 Tables 7, 8 and 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Potential risk: Thrombocytopenia with bivalirudin given concomitantly with inhibitors of platelet aggregation | Continue to closely monitor events describing these reactions.                                                                                                               | Potential risks with respect thrombocytopaenia with bivalirudin when given concomitantly with inhibitors of platelet aggregation are considered adequately described in current labelling (see below) are responsive to surveillance and are unlikely to benefit from additional measures at this time. Section 4.8: Thrombocytopenia was reported in 10 bivalirudin-treated patients participating in the ACUITY study (0.1%). The majority of these patients received concomitant acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel, and 6 out of the 10 patients also received a GPIIb/IIIa inhibitor. Mortality among these patients was nil. authorised |
| Important Missing Information                                                                                 | Ongoing AE report surveillance for pregnant and lactating patients. Ongoing AE report surveillance for indications and clinical circumstances of AEs in paediatric patients. | Relatively little exposure in these two key patient groups has occurred. Ongoing surveillance and report analysis is regarded as the most effective way to obtain AE data in these patients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

## Thrombocytopenia with bivalirudin given concomitantly with inhibitors of platelet aggregation Continue to closely monitor events describing these reactions. Important Missing Information Ongoing AE report surveillance for pregnant and lactating patients. Ongoing AE report surveillance for indications and clinical circumstances of AEs in paediatric patients. Medicinal product no longer authorised