---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:12:41
document_pages: 7
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/ariclaim-h-c-552-ii-0024-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: ariclaim-h-c-552-ii-0024-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 1.4703792
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-26 19:29:13.987081
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 22 November 2007

Product Name :

Ariclaim

Procedure No:

EMEA/H/C/000552/II/0024

SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

Ariclaim  (duloxetine)  hard  capsules  was  authorised  in  the  European  Union  for  women  for  the indication of 'Treatment of moderate to severe Stress Urinary Incontinence (SUI)' in August 2004.

The MAH submitted this variation to update the section 4.1 of the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) to add the indication \"Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathic Pain (DPNP) in adults '.

Duloxetine  is  classified  as  a  serotonin  norepinephrine  reuptake  inhibitor  (SNRI).  It  is  a  selective inhibitor of both serotonin (5-HT) and norepinephrine (NE) receptors. Both 5-HT and NE have been implicated in the mediation of endogenous pain inhibitory mechanisms via the descending inhibitory pain pathways in the brain and spinal cord.

The efficacy of duloxetine in patients with diabetic neuropathic pain (DPNP) was evaluated in two randomised,  placebo-controlled  acute  studies  (Study  HMAW-Acute  and  Study  HMAVa-Acute). Further safety data as well as long-term efficacy were provided in Study F1J-MC-HMBT (28-week, open-label, safety study) with the primary objective of gathering safety data in the treatment of painful symptoms associated with diabetic neuropathy, as well as Study F1J-MC-HMAW - Extension (52week extension phase of Study HMAW) giving further safety data on duloxetine in comparison with routine care.

Diabetes is the leading cause of neuropathy in the Western world, and neuropathy is the most common complication  and  greatest  source  of  morbidity  and  mortality  in  diabetes  patients.  The  primary  risk factor for diabetic neuropathy is hyperglycaemia. The duration of diabetes also increases the risk of neuropathy, but the association between duration and prevalence may depend in part upon patient age, which  itself  is  a  risk  factor.  Cigarette  smoking,  alcohol  consumption,  hypertension,  height,  and hypercholesterolemia are all considered independent risk factors for diabetic neuropathy. Neuropathic pain can be defined as pain initiated or caused by primary lesion or dysfunction in the nervous system. They result from the damage to the nervous system leading to peripheral or central neuropathic pain. Patients affected by DPNP may benefit from duloxetine therapy. 2. Non-Clinical aspects 2.1. Toxico-pharmacological aspects No  new  non-clinical  data  that  change  the  toxico-pharmacological  profile  of  duloxetine  have  been submitted. The  effect  of  duloxetine  in  the  treatment  of  DPNP  has  been  studied  in  animals.  The  effect  of duloxetine in the treatment of DPNP is linked to its capacity to dose-dependently increase extracellular levels of serotonin and noradrenaline in various brain areas of animals. Duloxetine normalised pain thresholds  in  several  preclinical  models  of  neuropathic  and  inflammatory  pain,  and  attenuated  pain behaviour in a model of persistent pain. The pain inhibitory action of duloxetine is believed to be a result of potentiation of descending inhibitory pain pathways within the central nervous system. An environmental risk assessment that has been conducted in accordance with Article 8 (ca) and (g) of Directive  2001/83/EC  as  amended  was  provided.  A  Phase  II  Ecotoxicity  Assessment  has  been conducted. There was no evidence that the therapeutic use of duloxetine hydrochloride in Europe and its  subsequent  discharge  to  sewage  treatment  plants  will  have  negative  consequences  for  the environment. 3. Clinical aspects Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  MAH  declared  that  the  two  clinical  studies  presented  in  this  submission  were  conducted  in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3.1 Clinical efficacy

A  total  of  475  and  334  patients  in  Study  HMAW-Acute  and  HMAVa-Acute,  respectively,  were randomly assigned to receive different dosage regimens of duloxetine or placebo.

The objectives of  both studies were similar; to compare the efficacy of duloxetine in different doses with placebo on the reduction of pain severity in the acute treatment of patients who met criteria for painful  diabetic  neuropathy  but  did  not  meet  DSM-IV 1 criteria  for  major  depression.  The study population included in the studies were male or female outpatients at least 18 years of age with pain due to bilateral peripheral neuropathy caused by Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes mellitus. The pain must have begun in the feet, with relatively symmetrical onset. Daily pain should have been present for at least  6  months.  The  diagnosis  must  have  been  confirmed  by  a  score  of  at  least  3  on  the  Michigan Neuropathy Screening Instrument.

Overall, results from secondary measures [Response Rates, The Brief Pain Inventory (BPI) - Severity and  Interference,  The  Clinical  Global  Impressions  of  Severity  (CGI-Severity),The  Patient's  Global Impressions of Improvement (PGI Improvement), The Sensory Portion of the Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ), Dynamic allodynia, The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II), the Beck Anxiety Inventory    (BAI),  and  the  HAMD17;  Health  Outcome  Measures:  The  36-item  Short-Form Health  Survey  (SF-36),  the  Euro-Qol  Questionnaire  -  5  Day  (EQ-5D)]  were  consistent  with  those from the primary endpoints, except for dynamic allodynia, most items of BPI-interference scale and BAI, BDIII scores. Quality of life measures showed a statistically significant improvement in the body pain and mental health domain, with only numerical differences in the remaining aspects such as the physical and social functioning.

All analyses were conducted on an intent-to-treat (ITT) basis, meaning that data were analysed by the treatment  groups  to  which  patients  were  randomly  assigned.  All  randomly  assigned  patients  were included  in  patient  baseline  characteristic  summaries,  while  all  randomly  assigned  patients  with  a baseline and at least one post-baseline value were included in the efficacy analyses. Study HMAW Acute Study HMAW-Acute  was a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, study comparing duloxetine 20 mg QD (once daily), 60 mg QD and 60 mg BID (twice daily) with placebo over 12 weeks of acute treatment in patients aged ≥ 18 years with DPNP. The study consisted of two periods; a 1- to 2-week screening phase during which patients were screened for eligibility and a 12-week period of double blind acute treatment. The protocol-specified that primary efficacy evaluation in this study was a comparison between the duloxetine  60  mg  BID  and  placebo  treatment  groups  after  12  weeks  of  treatment,  using  repeated measures analysis of the change from baseline in the primary efficacy analysis, the 24-hour average pain  scale.  Results  from  the  repeated  measures  analysis  were  consistent  with  those  from  the  mean change analysis. Results from the primary efficacy measure show that doses of duloxetine 60 mg QD and 60 mg BID were statistically significantly better than placebo in the reduction of the severity of pain, which was seen from the first week after starting treatment to the end of the acute phase. No differences were seen between 60 mg BID and 60 mg QD or between 20 mg QD and placebo. The responders rate using  a  more  strict  criteria  (50%  reduction  in  pain  severity)  were  52%,  49%,  41%  and  26%  for duloxetine  60  mg  BID,  60  mg  QD,  20  mg  QD  and  placebo,  respectively,  which  were  statistically significantly superior for the three dosage regimen of duloxetine compared with placebo. Medicinal product no longer authorised

1 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (1994).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Study HMAVa Acute

Study HMAVa-Acute was a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study comparing duloxetine 60 mg QD and 60 mg BID with placebo over 12 weeks of acute treatment in patients aged ≥ 18 years with DPNP.

The primary efficacy evaluation in this study was a comparison between the duloxetine 60 mg BID and placebo treatment groups after 12 weeks of treatment, using mean change analysis of the change from baseline in the primary efficacy analysis, the 24-hour average pain scale. Duloxetine 60 mg QD and duloxetine 60 mg BID were both statistically significantly better than placebo at reducing the 24hour average pain score in the mean change analysis in Study HMAVa-Acute. Again, an analysis of the  score  using  repeated  measures  showed  duloxetine  60  mg  QD  and  duloxetine  60  mg  BID  were statistically significantly better than placebo at reducing the score from one week after starting therapy to the end of the acute therapy phase. The rate of responders using the strict definition were 53%, 43% and 27% for duloxetine 60 mg BID, 60 mg QD and placebo groups, respectively.

Bioequivalence All strengthsare capsules which contain the same pellets of duloxetine in different amount, therefore these  capsules  are  proportional  and  no  problems  of  bioequivalence  between  these  capsules  are expected.  This  means  that  20  mg  plus  40  mg  is  equivalent  to  60  mg,  thus  corresponds  to  the recommending dose for the DPNP indication. Conclusions on efficacy In  the  two  pivotal  studies,  the  difference  for  duloxetine  60  mg  QD  and  60  mg  BID  compared with placebo  in  pain  reduction  varied  between  1.17  -  1.45,  on  a  0-10  Lickert  scale.  This  difference  is statistically significant (p&lt;0.001). The statistical significance demonstrated for the primary endpoint was based on an ITT analysis for change from baseline to endpoint using LOCF. The proposed dosage regimen is 60 mg once daily, which could be titrated up to 120 mg per day if an adequate  pain  relief,  is  not  achieved.  The  dosage  recommendation  was  supported  by  the  Study HMAVa  in  which  the  efficacy  of  duloxetine  60  mg  once  daily  and  60  mg  twice  daily  were consistently  superior  to  placebo.  The  proposal  to  up-titrate  to  a  maximum  of  120  mg/day  in  those patients with an insufficient response was not clearly supported by these results, since 60 mg BID was not statistically significantly superior to 60 mg QD in any study. However, it is recognised that studies were  not  powered  to  show  statistically  significant  differences  between  dosages.  Duloxetine  120 mg/day was numerically superior to the lower dose for the primary endpoint and also for most of the secondary  endpoints,  including  the  responders'  rate  (for  which  a  difference  of  up  to  10%  between dosages was seen). Therefore, it must be recognised that some patients might benefit from the highest dose. The rate of response was also statistically significantly superior for duloxetine 60 mg BID and 60 mg QD  compared  with  placebo  (around  50%  vs.  26%  for  duloxetine  60  mg  BID/QD  and  placebo, respectively, using the strict criteria), which was also clinically relevant. Medicinal product no longer authorised

About 30% of the patients reported no benefit of the active medicinal product.

Hitherto there  was  no  way  to  identify  responders  or  non-responders  but  to  use  the  product ex juvantibus . If a response has not been achieved within 60 days, this seems to indicate a persistent nonresponse. The SPC states that the response should be evaluated after 2 months of treatment and that additional response after this time is unlikely.

Overall,  results  from  secondary  measures  were  consistent  with  those  from  the  primary  endpoints, except for dynamic allodynia, and some items of BPI-interference scale. Consistency between studies and between the repeated measure analysis and the mean change analysis were also demonstrated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3.2 Clinical safety

The total duloxetine clinical trial safety database consisted of over 11,000 patients in all indications. The  primary  DPNP  safety  database  consists  of  two  studies  in  the  development  plan  which  were primarily designed to evaluate the safety of duloxetine over long-term administration. The extension phase  of  Study  HMAW  compared  duloxetine  60  mg  BID  with  routine  care  over  52  weeks  of treatment, while in Study HMBT, duloxetine 60 mg BID and 120 mg QD were administered openlabel over 28 weeks of treatment.

Patient exposure and demographics The  primary  DPNP  data  safety  database  comprised  a  total  of  1074  patients  who  were  exposed  to duloxetine  for  the  equivalent  to  471.7  patient  years.  Among  these  patients,  484  had ≥ 6  months  of exposure  to  duloxetine,  and  158  had ≥ 12  months  of  exposure  to  duloxetine.  The  demographic characteristics of the treatment groups and databases were generally consistent. Patients in the primary safety database were of both genders but predominantly Caucasian men aged between 20 and 88 years. The  higher  prevalence  of  males  in  these  studies  is  likely  related  to  the  fact  that  patients  with depression,  which  is  more  common  in  females,  were  excluded.  However,  enough  females  were included in the database to allow for an adequate safety assessment. Deaths In the entire clinical program involving over 11,000 individuals 29 deaths were reported. The reported deaths  are  what  might  be  expected  from  these  patient  populations  and  do  not  suggest  medicinal product toxicity. Cardiac-related deaths were the most frequent and appear to be related to underlying heart  disease  and  patients'  advancing  age.  There  was  no  evidence  of  deaths  related  to  QT prolongation. Adverse events Nausea was the most frequently reported adverse event, occurring at the beginning of treatment and decreasing over time. The most common AEs were nausea (23.6%), somnolence (15.5%), dizziness (13.4%), insomnia (10.2 %), constipation (11.3 %). Diarrhoea, fatigue, dry mouth, and hyperhydrosis occurred in 5-10% of the duloxetine patients. The safety profile of duloxetine in the claimed indication was similar, although numerically superior to  that  seen  in  other  indications,  with  the  only  exception  of  somnolence  for  which  a  statistically significant difference were noted (reported in up to 23.9% in DPNP vs. 13.4% in other duloxetinetreated patients indications). This  could  be  explained  because  population  enrolled  in  clinical development for DPNP were older, with higher concomitant medications and concurrent illnesses. Nausea  and  diarrhoea  tended  to  appear  early  in  duloxetine  treatment  and  subside  quickly,  whilst somnolence, dizziness, constipation and dry mouth decreased slightly over time and insomnia, fatigue and hyperhidrosis seemed to persist during treatment with duloxetine. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Most  adverse  events  were  reported  as  mild  or  moderate.  Severe  adverse  events  tended  to  be  more commonly  reported  in  females  and  in  patients  older  than  75  years  old.  However,  these  were  not considered  of  clinical  relevance,  and  the  data  provided  demonstrated  that  the  safety  profile  of duloxetine in patients older than 75 years old was consistent to that seen in younger patients.

In the long-term studies, the incidence of TEAEs in duloxetine-treated patients was relatively low and confirmed the safety profile obtained in the short-term studies.

A total of 214 (19.9%) patients discontinued due to adverse events in the primary safety database. This was slightly higher  than  that  seen  in  previous  indications  (9.5%  vs.  13.9%),  and  maybe  due  to  the higher  proportion  of  elderly  patients,  more  prone  to  suffer  adverse  events.  The  most  frequently reported  adverse  events  associated  with  discontinuation  for  all  duloxetine  treatment  groups  were nausea, dizziness, somnolence, and fatigue. A total of 135 (20.1%) patients discontinued due to AEs in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the long-term DPNP  dataset. The most frequently reported adverse events associated with discontinuation were consistent to that seen in the placebo-controlled studies.

When discontinuing duloxetine after more than 1 week of therapy, it is generally recommended that the dose be tapered over no less than 2 weeks before discontinuation in an effort to decrease the risk of discontinuation  symptoms.  As  a  general  recommendation,  the  dose  should  be  reduced  by  half  or administered on alternate days during this period. The precise regimen followed should however take into  account  the  individual  circumstances  of  the  patient,  such  as  duration  of  treatment,  dose  at discontinuation, etc.

As with other medicinal products with similar pharmacological action (antidepressants), isolated cases of suicidal ideation and suicidal behaviours have been reported during duloxetine therapy or early after treatment  discontinuation.  Adequate  warning  information  on  reported  casesof  suicidal  ideation  and behaviour  with  the  use  of  duloxetine  has  been  included  in  the  SPC.  The  SPC  also  requests  close supervision for patients who report any distressing thoughts or feelings at any time. With  the  exception  of  hepatic  enzymes,  small  and  clinically  insignificant  changes  in  laboratory analytes were seen across the databases, with very few instances of potentially clinically significant abnormal laboratory values. Small increases in mean values for aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALKPH) were seen, but these were not accompanied by clinical symptoms in the vast majority of patients, and there is little to suggest that duloxetine alone is likely to be the cause of significant hepatotoxicity. Duloxetine has been shown to be associated with a mild, transient elevation of ALT and AST. These elevations were not dose related and not associated with  adverse  events.  Rarely,  patients  taking  duloxetine  while  consuming  large  amounts  of  alcohol have been found to have significant elevations of ALT and AST, as well as elevated bilirubin. No patients have died as a result of liver failure or sustained permanent liver injury. The  safety  profile  in  various  demographic  groups  was  found  to  be  similar.  Although  there  were younger patients than older and more males than females, there were sufficient numbers in the smaller groups to allow for robust conclusions. Overall the safety profile was as expected for a medicinal product with this pharmacological profile. No unexpected, serious adverse events were detected in the DPNP programme. 4 Pharmacovigilance Risk Management Plan The MAH referred to the Risk Management Plan submitted to the EMEA/CHMP in October 2006. The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 5 Overall Conclusions and Benefit/Risk assessment Medicinal product no longer authorised

Ariclaim  contains  duloxetine  hydrochloride.  Duloxetine  is  a  combined  serotonin  and  noradrenaline reuptake  inhibitor.  Ariclaim  has  been  approved  in  the  European  Union  for  the  treatment  of  Severe Urinary Incontinence.

The  efficacy  of  duloxetine  in  the  new  DPNP  indication  has  been  examined  in  clinical  studies  of patients  with  DPNP  in  doses  up  to  60  mg  BID.  Strong  evidence  in  support  of  the  effectiveness  of duloxetine  in  both  oncedaily  (60  mg  QD)  and  twice-daily  (60  mg  BID)  dosing  regimens  has  been demonstrated  in  two  adequate  and  well-controlled  clinical  studies:  HMAVa  -  Acute  and  HMAW  Acute.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In both studies, duloxetine was statistically significantly superior to placebo in improvement of the a priori-declared primary outcome measure, the 24-hour average pain score. In addition, duloxetine was statistically significantly superior to placebo in demonstrating response and sustained response on the 24-hour average pain score, which is a clinical relevant measure of pain relief.

In  terms  of  safety,  the  absence  of  serious  idiosyncratic  toxicity  in  the  development  of  duloxetine. There was no evidence to suggest that deaths in the clinical study program were associated with use of duloxetine and no clear pattern in the incidence or nature of serious adverse events (SAEs) to suggest systemic drug toxicity. Systematic review of possible cardiovascular effects, including blood pressure changes and changes in QTc intervals, did not reveal any noteworthy impact or safety hazard. Nausea is  the  most  frequently  reported  adverse  event,  usually  occurring  at  the  beginning  of  treatment  and decreasing quickly over time. Small increases in mean values for the hepatic enzymes were seen, but these were not accompanied by clinical symptoms in the vast majority of patients, and there is little to suggest that duloxetine alone is likely to be the cause of significant hepatotoxicity. The issue of the hepatic  reactions  may  be  closely  monitored.  In  the  long-term  studies,  the  incidence  of  TEAEs  in duloxetine-treated patients was low and comparable to routine care; no event occurred significantly more often in duloxetine treated patients than in those patients treated with routine care. Therefore, there is no evidence of additional tolerability concerns with chronic duloxetine dosing.

Based  on  the  CHMP  review  of  safety  and  efficacy,  the  CHMP  considers  that  the  benefit-risk  for duloxetine dihydrochloride indicated in 'Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathic Pain (DPNP) in adults' , is favourable and recommended the variation to the marketing authorisation. Medicinal product no longer authorised