---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:16:06
document_pages: 11
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/avandamet-h-c-522-ii-17-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: avandamet-h-c-522-ii-17-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.5966597
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 06:37:09.587355
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London 15 November 2005 Product name: AVANDAMET Procedure No: EMEA/H/C/522/II/17

Medicinal product no longer authorise SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

AVANDAMET is currently approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients (T2DM), particularly  overweight  patients,  who  are  unable  to  achieve  sufficient  glycaemic  control  at  their maximally tolerated dose of oral metformin (MET) alone.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  (MAH)  applied  in  this  type  II  variation  for  an  extension  of indication to add a triple oral combination indication for AVANDAMET with a sulphonylurea (SU). The  proposed  triple  therapy  indication  is  based  on  data  from  three  clinical  studies  performed  in patients inadequately controlled on the dual combination of metformin and SU. This submission also includes data from a further two clinical studies which are relevant to AVANDAMET. It is noted that Avandia (rosiglitazone) is already approved as triple oral therapy in combination with metformin  and  a  sulphonylurea,  in  patients  (particularly  overweight  patients)  with  insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy. The MAH proposed to update several sections of the Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet to reflect the new safety information. The MAH also applied to update section 5.1 of the SPC to reflect 18-month interim data from a long term ongoing trial for rosiglitazone (RSG) to evaluate the long-term effects of RSG on cardiovascular endpoints and glycaemia. 2. Clinical efficacy 2.1. Clinical studies The  proposed  triple  therapy  indication  for  AVANDAMET  is  based  on  three  clinical  studies.  It concerns studies  134,  CV138055,  CV138055  OL  TCE . The studies investigated patients inadequately controlled on the dual combination of MET+SU. These patients went on to receive RSG as their third concomitant therapy.  Patients included in the triple combination studies generally had a long duration of diabetes and a high proportion were overweight or obese and were thus representative of patients who might be considered eligible for triple therapy. Of  the  three  clinical  trials,  study  134  was  conducted  by  GSK,  whereas  studies  CV138055  and CV138055OL  TCE  were  conducted  by  another  company.    Data  from  these  three  studies  were therefore  not  integrated  due  to  the  different  data  format  and  coding  dictionaries  utilised  by  both companies. A total of 1202 patients were included in three triple combination therapy studies.  This number does not include patients from study CV138055OL TCE, since these are already accounted for in the core double-blind  study  CV138055.  A  total  of  900  patients  were  treated  with  RSG,  comprising  of  561 patients from Study 134, 181 patients from study CV138055 and a further 158 patients treated in the OL (open label) extension who were previously treated with placebo. The three triple therapy studies are summarised in Table 1.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1 Triple Therapy Studies

| Study Number    | Duration   | RSG Total Daily Dose (Regimen)   | Treatment Groups 1   | Patient Numbers 2   |
|-----------------|------------|----------------------------------|----------------------|---------------------|
| 134             | 26 weeks   | 4mg (bd) 8mg (bd)                | RSG+MET+SU MET+SU    | 837 (826)           |
| CV138055        | 24 weeks   | 4mg (od) - 8mg (bd)              | RSG+MET+SU MET+SU    | 365 (365)           |
| CV138055 OL TCE | 20 weeks   | 4mg (od) - 8mg (bd)              | RSG+MET+SU           | 313 (313)           |

The MAH also included new data from the clinical studies 002 and 284. The new data on study 002 use AVANDAMET rather than MET and RSG separately and provide the first clinical trial data on the efficacy and safety of AVANDAMET. Study 284 gives additional efficacy and safety data on RSG. The  new  efficacy  data  of study  002 provide  the  first-ever  data  on  the  efficacy  of  AVANDAMET

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1. Studies 134 and CV138055 were double-blind, placebo-controlled, i.e. placebo was added-on to background SU+MET.  In the BMS studies CV138055 and CV138055OL TCE, MET+SU refers to the fixed-dose combination product Glucovance. 2. Indicates all randomised patients, and in brackets intent-to-treat (ITT) population (i.e., all randomised patients who had a baseline and at least one on-therapy efficacy assessment). 3. Abbreviations: RSG = rosiglitazone; MET = metformin; SU = sulphonylurea (including glibenclamide, gliclazide, glipizide and glimepiride); TCE = triple combination extension; OL= open-label; DB = double-blind; bd = twice daily, od = once daily Study  134 was  a  26-week  double  blind  (DB)  study  in  patients  with  T2DM.  Men  and  women diagnosed with T2DM and aged between 35 and 75 years were eligible. Fasting C-peptide had to be ≥ 1.0ng/mL.    Patients  were  taking  SU+MET  for  at  least  3  months  prior  to  screening.  Following titration  to  protocol-specified  doses  of  SU  (maximal  labelled  glibenclamide,  20mg/day)  and  MET (maximally effective doses of 2,000mg/day) combination therapy, patients entered a four-week singleblind placebo run-in/maintenance period. At the end of this period, patients inadequately controlled on combination  therapy  (FPG ≥ 140mg/dL  and ≤ 270mg/dL)  were  randomised  to  receive  placebo, 4mg/day  RSG,  or  8mg/day  RSG  for  26  weeks,  in  addition  to  SU+MET.  Doses  of  SU  and  MET remained at the protocol-specified doses. Study CV138055 was  a  24-week  double  blind  study  in  patients  with  T2DM.    Men  and  women diagnosed with T2DM and aged between 20 and 78 years with BMI ≥ 23 and ≤ 40kg/m 2 were eligible. Prior to study entry, patients were taking either MET+SU combination therapy, or monotherapy with SU, MET or a Thiazolidinedione, for at least 8 weeks, at doses specified in the protocol. The lead-in phase was either 2-weeks or 12-weeks of treatment with MET/glyburide 500/2.5 mg tablets depending on prior treatment history. Subjects were titrated, if needed as per protocol during the lead-in phase, to a maximum dose of MET/glyburide 2000/10 mg. Following the lead-in phase, patients who remained inadequately controlled (HbA1c &gt;7.0% and ≤ 10.0%), were randomised to 4mg/day RSG or matching placebo, in addition to continuing open-label MET/Glib at the same dose, for 24 weeks. During the double-blind RSG treatment phase, patients who had HbA1c ≥ 7.0 % or FPG ≥ 126mg/dL, had the RSG dose increased to 8mg/day. Study CV138055OL TCE was a 20-week OLE of Study CV138055. The study was designed to allow patient  rescue  from  the  DB  treatment  phase  for  lack  of  glycaemic  control  and  to  collect  additional safety  and  efficacy  information  on  triple  combination  therapy.  Patients  who  either  completed  the double-blind RSG treatment phase in Study CV138055, or who were discontinued from CV138055 due to lack of glycaemic control, were eligible. All patients maintained their lead-in MET HCl/Glib dose.  Patients  taking  4mg/day  RSG  triple  combination  therapy,  with  HbA1c ≥ 7.0%  or  FPG ≥ 126mg/dL, had their RSG dose increased to 8mg/day. Of the above mentioned studies, study 134 was the pivotal study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

tablets  rather  than  concomitantly dosed MET and RSG, in a comparison to up-titrated MET monotherapy.  The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  investigate  whether  patients  inadequately  controlled  with moderate doses of MET mono-therapy (MET doses of 2,000mg/day) would gain superior glycaemia control  when  switched  to  AVANDAMET,  when  compared  to  a  high  dose  MET  mono-therapy. The 24-week double-blind,  randomised,  parallel  group,  dose  escalation  study  started  with  a  singleblind  run-in  on  MET  (2,000mg/day)  at  baseline,  which  was  followed  by  randomisation  to  either AVANDAMET (n=279) or high dose MET (n=272). The 279 patients receiving AVANDAMET were administered 4mg/2,000mg per day, while those 272 patients that were randomised to MET monotherapy  received  an  additional  500mg/day.  After  8  weeks,  all  subjects  were  up  titrated  to  either AVANDAMET 8mg/2,000mg or MET 3,000mg as far as tolerable to the study subjects.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Study 284 provides new efficacy data for the concomitant use of RSG with a suboptimal dose of MET of 1 gram per day in patients with diabetes type 2 with various backgrounds ranging from naïve to already using suboptimal dosed MET. The Study was a 24 week double blind, double dummy study, conducted to demonstrate that glycaemia control achieved by the addition of RSG (8mg/day) to the sub-maximal dose MET of l,000mg/day is at least non-inferior and better tolerated than up-titration to the maximally effective dose of MET of 2,000mg/day. At baseline, patients were randomised to receive either RSG concomitantly (n = 382), or MET monotherapy (n = 384) in addition to open label MET (1,000 mg/day). Those subjects randomised to receive RSG+MET received a daily dose 4 mg RSG + 1,000 mg MET, while those randomised to MET monotherapy received an additional 500 mg/day blinded MET so that their daily dose was 1,500 mg/day of MET. After eight weeks, the participating patients were up titrated to either a daily dose 8 mg RSG + 1,000 mg MET, or a daily dose 2,000 mg/day MET. Reference  is  also  made  to  18  month  glycaemic  efficacy  data  from  a  sub-study  of study 231 (RECORD) ,  which is a CHMP commitment study for Avandia to evaluate the long-term effects of RSG on cardiovascular endpoints and glycaemia. Study 231 gives additional efficacy data on RSG. This study is mentioned again here due to its use of AVANDAMET. The  MAH  provided  a  statement  to  that  'A  total  of  6  studies  were  relevant  to  GSK's  Avandamet variation EMEA/H/C/522/ll/17.  All of the study reports contained statements relating to GCP.  Trials which commenced before the introduction of Directive 2001/20/EC and which included sites outside the  community  were  conducted  in  accordance  with  GCP  requirements  as  set  out  in  Annex  1  of Directive 2001/83/EC.  Trials which included sites outside the community and were initiated after the introduction  of  Directive  were  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  ethical  standards  described  in 2001/20/EC.' 2.2. Methods Mean change from baseline in HbA1c was the primary efficacy variable. 2.3. Results 2.3.1. Triple Therapy (studies 134, CV138055, CV138055 OL TCE) Six month efficacy results for HbA1c changes from baseline in trial 134 are given in Table 2.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2  Study 134: Change in HbA1c at Week 26 Compared to Baseline and Placebo (ITT population with LOCF).

|                                  | Treatment Group 1   | Treatment Group 1   | Treatment Group 1   |
|----------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|
| HbA1c (%)                        | PBO                 | RSG 2mg bd          | RSG 4mg bd          |
| N                                | 272                 | 275                 | 277                 |
| Baseline (mean ± SD)             | 8.7 ± 1.28          | 8.6 ± 1.14          | 8.7 ± 1.17          |
| Week 26 (mean ± SD)              | 8.9 ± 1.49          | 8.2 ± 1.31          | 7.8 ± 1.24          |
| Change from Baseline (mean ± SD) | 0.2 ± 1.04          | -0.4 ± 1.05         | -0.9 ± 1.15         |
| 95% CI                           | 0.1, 0.3            | -0.6, -0.3          | -1.1, -0.8          |
| p-value *                        | 0.0054              | <0.0001             | <0.0001             |
| Comparison with PBO mean)        | ⎯                   | -0.6                | -1.1                |
| (adjusted                        |                     |                     |                     |
| 95% CI **                        |                     | -0.8, -0.4          | -1.3, -0.9          |
| p-value †                        |                     | <0.0001             | <0.0001             |

There  is  small  but  statistically  and  clinically  significant  efficacy  on  HbA1  when  RSG  is  added  to failing MET + SU in a T2DM population dominated by overweight and insulin-resistant patients.

Medicinal product no longer authorise 1  All patients received MET+SU in addition to study medication N = Those patients who had both a baseline and a week 26 value (using LOCF). Reference range &lt;6.5%. * 1. From paired t-test. ** 2. From Dunnett's procedure using standard error from estimate statements within GLM model. † 3. From comparisons of LS means within GLM model; significance level: 0.0270. SAS output is presented in Section 14, Table 14.8.1A. Data Source:  Table 13 CSR. Dual oral therapy of AVANDAMET as a combination of Metformin with rosiglitazone and triple oral therapy  as  a  combination  of  Metformin  +  Sulphonylurea  with  rosiglitazone,  appears  to  have  a clinically small but statistically significant effect in obtaining glycaemic control in diabetics Type 2, in particular adipose patients, as was measured on the parameter HbA1c. The results are accepted by the CHMP to demonstrate that the add on of RSG to schemas consisting of Metformin  (MET)  and/or  sulphonylurea  derivates  (SU)  achieved  small  but  statistically  significant clinical improvements such as of the parameter HbAlc. 2.3.2. Studies 002, 284 and 231 Study 002: At the end of the 24-week treatment period, the mean HbAlc decrease from baseline was 0.17% in the high dose MET mono-therapy group (from 7.5 ± 1.0 to 7.4 ± 1.0) and 0.39% (from 7.4 ± 1.0 to 7.1 ± 1.0) in the AVANDAMET group, which is a small benefit and a small difference with the control arm of the study (p=0.001). It is noted that one patient of the AVANDAMET group did not produce  data  at  Week  24  and  was  excluded  so  that  the  AVANDAMET  group  was  sized  n=278  at endpoint evaluation. The reported cause of withdrawal was unrelated to study medication. Study 284: The MAH's data show that the proportion of patients that attained the treatment goal that was set at HbA1c ≤ 7.0% in the group receiving 8mg RSG and 1,000 mg MET was 57.8% (n=186) versus  48.2%  (n=151)  in  the  MET  group  at  the  end  of  the  24  week  treatment  period  of  the  trial. Statistical analysis of data was not provided. Study 231: A prospectively defined data analysis of glycaemia control at 18 months of treatment has been carried out. It shows that the achieved target of HbAlc &lt; 7% was 31% in the groups receiving a combination of RSG with MET, compared to 39% in the groups receiving MET+SU. According to the MAH these data are clinically significant, and are the first to show that the combination therapy with RSG achieves similar glycaemia control as the combination of MET+SU. However, statistical analysis of data was not provided. 2.4. Conclusion on efficacy

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. Clinical safety

Safety  data  on  Study  231  (RECORD)  have  not  been  reported,  as  safety  data  had  not  been prospectively defined at the present 18 months evaluation point.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Data from the other five studies the Marketing Authorisation Holder has put forward are in line with earlier reporting, and continue to show few serious adverse events (SAEs). In  both  study  134  and  study  CV138055,  the  incidence  of  SAEs  was  low  in  the  RSG  combination groups and compared favourably with placebo (PBO) control. A similar incidence was reported in the OLE, study CV138055 OL TCE. For study 002, the proportion of subjects with adverse events leading to withdrawal was lower in the AVANDAMET group  than  the  MET  group  (4%  vs.  8%).  The  events  most  commonly  leading  to withdrawal were gastrointestinal disorders and the overall incidence of gastrointestinal events leading to withdrawal was higher in the MET group than the AVANDAMET group (5% vs. 3%). For  study  284  the  incidence  of  AEs  leading  to  withdrawal  was  35  subjects  (9.1%)  in  the  MET escalation group versus 24 subjects (6.3%) in the RSG+MET group. Deaths were very uncommon in the RSG triple combination therapy. In total 2 deaths were reported, one in a group treated with 4 mg RSG and one in the group treated PBO. The investigators considered both cases unrelated to study medication. 3.1. Oedema In study 134, a 10%  incidence of oedema  was  observed in the group treated with  4mg RSG+MET+SU, which increased to 14% in the higher dosed 8mg RSG+MET+SU treatment group. A lower incidence of oedema of 8% was reported in Study CV138055 in the group treated with 8mg RSG+MET+SU.  That  lower  incidence  may  reflect  titration  of  RSG  from  4mg  to  8mg,  instead  of initiating therapy at a dose of 8mg, as was the case in Study 134. The recommendation of up-titration treatment strategy from the 4mg to 8mg dose of RSG had already been implemented on the SPC. 3.2. Congestive Heart Failure The  CHMP  highlights  that  rosiglitazone  treatment  in  clinical  trials  and  as  guided  by  the  current approved SPC, excludes treatment of patients with cardiac failure or a history of cardiac failure. The incidence of congestive heart failure was low in the reported studies. In the earlier reported study 134  there  were  9  cases  (PBO+MET+SU  [n=1,  0.4%],  4mg  RSG+MET+SU  [n=5,  1.8%]  and  8mg RSG+MET+SU [n=3, 1.1%]). Cases with cardiac failure have already been reported to have had preexisting cardiovascular disease. The study CV138055 and CV1380550L TCE showed no SAEs on congestive heart failure. New data on study 002 also showed no SAEs on congestive heart failure. New data on study 284 show five patients with cardiovascular SAEs of which one was considered of suspected relationship with study medication by the investigator. However, the SAE was specified as angina pectoris and not congestive heart failure. The incidence of congestive heart failure in study 231 (RECORD) is not reported, as safety data had not been prospectively defined at the 18 months evaluation point. 3.3. Anaemia (Dilution Anaemia Related to Fluid Retention) It  had  been  reported  that  there  was  one  case  of  anaemia  SAE  observed  in  study  134  that  was associated with RSG treatment. 3.4 Hypoglycaemia and Hypoglycaemic Symptoms

The issue of hypoglycaemia is reported to be relevant in the evaluation of triple therapy that includes SU. In study 134 one patient in the 4mg RSG+MET+SU group reported a SAE of hypoglycaemia and

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

two  patients  in  the  8mg  RSG+MET+SU  group  withdrew  from  the  study  due  to  an  AE  of hypoglycaemia, with reported FPG &lt;50 mg/dL.

In the triple combination trials of Study CV138055 and the OL TCE extension, multiple daily glucose assessments  and  proactive  solicitation  of  hypoglycaemia  symptoms  were  performed,  and  may  have accounted for the generally higher reporting of hypoglycaemia. A higher incidence of the feeling of hypoglycaemia was reported in the RSG+MET+SU group (52.5%), relative to the MET+SU group (24.5%).  Over  90%  of  these  events  were  not  medically  defined  hypoglycaemia  and  required  no medical  intervention.  The  hypoglycaemia  pattern  is  similar  to  that  in  Study  134,  with  no  SAEs reported and the majority of medically defined hypoglycaemia AEs being mild or moderate in severity that resulted in 2 patient withdrawals.

-

The following wording for the posology for triple oral therapy was initially proposed by the MAH (section 4.2 of the SPC):

Medicinal product no longer authorise 3.5. Conclusion on safety Data from the clinical trials are in line with the safety profile of AVANDAMET and continue to show few serious  adverse  events  (SAEs).  Patients  receiving  AVANDAMET  in  triple  oral  therapy  with  a sulphonylurea  may  be  at  risk  for  dose-related  hypoglycaemia,  and  a  reduction  in  the  dose  of  the sulphonylurea may be necessary. 4. SPC and PL changes: Indication and Posology In  this  type  II  variation  the  MAH  applied  to  include  a  triple  oral  combination  indication  for AVANDAMET with a sulphonylurea. The following indication was proposed by the Marketing Authorisation Holder for section 4.1 of the SPC: 'AVANDAMET is indicated in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus: -in  patients  (particularly  overweight  patients),  who are  unable  to  achieve  sufficient  glycaemic control at their maximally tolerated dose of oral metformin alone. -in  triple  oral  therapy  in  combination  with  sulphonylurea  in  patients  (particularly  overweight patients) with insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy (see section 4.4.).' The CHMP considered the MAH proposed indication to be too widely scoped. The MAH proposal may imply  an  indication  setting  of  RSG  with  sulphonylurea  in  patients  that  was  not  supported  by clinical trial data by the MAH. In particular, the CHMP noted that no studies were submitted which show  the  efficacy  of  the  addition  of  a  sulphonylurea  to  the  combination  of  metformin  and rosiglitazone.  Therefore,  the  triple  therapy  indication  of  AVANDAMET  should  be  restricted  to  the addition of rosiglitazone to the combination of metformin and SU. The CHMP therefore recommend a more concise formulation of the indication in section 4.1 of the SPC. The following wording was proposed by the CHMP for section 4.1 of the SPC: 'AVANDAMET  is  indicated  in  the  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes  mellitus,  particularly  overweight patients: -who  are  unable  to  achieve  sufficient  glycaemic  control  at  their  maximally  tolerated  dose  of metformin in  combination  with  sulphonylurea  in  patients  (particularly  overweight  patients)  who  are unable to achieve sufficient glycaemic control despite receiving metformin and sulphonylurea (triple oral therapy). (See section 4.4.)' In  addition,  the  MAH  requested  a  wide  scope  for  section  4.2  of  the  SPC,  which  the  CHMP  also considers to be in need of a smaller scoped definition for the aforementioned reasons.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

'Triple Oral Therapy (rosiglitazone, metformin and sulphonylurea)

- -Patients on AVANDAMET: the addition of a sulphonylurea at it's recommended starting dose may be considered.
- -Patients on metformin and sulphonylurea: when appropriate AVANDAMET may be initiated at 4 mg/day rosiglitazone with the dose of metformin substituting that already being taken.

Medicinal product no longer authorise -Patients  established  on  triple  oral  therapy:  when  appropriate,  AVANDAMET  may  substitute rosiglitazone and metformin doses already being taken. Where appropriate, AVANDAMET may be used to substitute concomitant rosiglitazone and metformin in existing dual or triple oral therapy to simplify treatment.' The  CHMP  recommend  a  more  concise  formulation  in  line  with  the  recommended  indication  and proposed the following: 'Triple Oral Therapy (rosiglitazone, metformin and sulphonylurea) -Patients on AVANDAMET: the addition of a sulphonylurea at it's recommended starting dose may be considered. -Patients on metformin and sulphonylurea: when appropriate AVANDAMET may be initiated at 4 mg/day rosiglitazone with the dose of metformin substituting that already being taken. -Patients  established  on  triple  oral  therapy:  when  appropriate,  AVANDAMET  may  substitute rosiglitazone and metformin doses already being taken. Where appropriate, AVANDAMET may be used to substitute concomitant rosiglitazone and metformin in existing dual or triple oral therapy to simplify treatment.' The  restricted  wording  for  the  indication  and  posology  sections  was  addressed  in  the  Request  for supplementary information adopted at the July 2005 CHMP. For further discussion on the indication and posology see 'request for supplementary information'. 4.1. Request for supplementary information In  the  request  for  supplementary  information  (RSI)  adopted  at  the  July  CHMP,  the  MAH  was requested to address CHMP concern: 'The presented data do not support the use of the proposed general triple therapy rosiglitazone formulation,  but  rather  support  the  use  of  rosiglitazone  as  an  add-on  to  existing  therapy  of metformin and/or sulphonylurea derivates. Data presented in earlier applications and to date do not support the triple therapy indication that consists of adding sulphonylurea to existing dual therapy of metformin and rosiglitazone.' In  addition  the  MAH  was  requested  in  the  RSI  to  address  CHMP's  comment  with  regard  to  the MAH's proposed wording for the product information including the points discussed in 'Indication and Posology'. The MAH provided the following response to the RSI: Although the MAH have only prospectively studied triple combination therapy with RSG as the third agent initiated, they have some data in a limited number of patients from the RECORD interim study who were failing on dual combination therapy with MET+RSG and who had SU initiated as a third antidiabetic agent. There were 27 patients on MET+RSG who progressed to triple therapy. Data for HbA1c that corresponded with the longest exposure to triple therapy in the largest number of patients was  observed  between  10  and  18  weeks  after  initiating  triple  therapy  in  20  patients.  In  these 20  patients  who  originally  received  MET+RSG,  the  mean  HbA1c  (±  SD)  immediately  prior  to  the initiation  of  SU  as  part  of  a  triple  combination  was  8.60  ±  0.8  %.  Following  10  to  18  weeks  of treatment with triple combination the mean HbA1c reduced by -0.58 %, demonstrating the potential for  additional  efficacy  with  triple  therapy  where  a  SU  is  added  to  existing  MET+RGS  treatment. Consequently, although limited, there is some useful and reassuring efficacy data relevant to the use of AVANDAMET in a triple therapy setting where a sulphonylurea is added third.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Further reassurance regarding the relevance of order of dosing to efficacy is provided by the scientific literature,  which  shows  that  the  efficacy  outcomes  of  dual  therapy  are  independent  of  the  order  of dosing  of  the  individual  components  (Charpentier  2002,  Setter  2003).  In  a  crossover  study  (Tosi 2003), patients were initiated on either MET or SU monotherapy and after 6 months had the second antidiabetic agent added to make the dual combination of MET and SU. The achieved improvement in glycaemic  control  at  12  months  was  identical  irrespective  of  the  order  of  dosing  of  the  individual components.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Reassurance regarding safety is provided by the order of dosing in the triple therapy studies, which represented  a  '  worse  case'  scenario  with  respect  to  the  incidence  of  AE's  since  patients  were receiving  a  maximal  or  near  maximal  dose  of  SU  prior  to  the  initiation  of  RSG.  Clear  advice, particularly  within  section  4.4  has  been  proposed  within  the  AVANDAMET  SPC  to  ensure  the appropriate and safe management of the patient when introducing a SU in triple therapy. In addition, the MAH proposes the inclusion of a further cross reference to section 4.4, placed after the first triple therapy dosing advice statement in the AVANDAMET SPC. The MAH acknowledge that the only order of dosing of triple therapy that has been presented in the file is the addition of RSG to a patient failing on dual combination of MET + SU. However the MAH would  like  to  highlight  that  their  position  is  in  line  with  an  observation  made  for  Avandia  in  the context of the triple oral combination indication that another use of RSG within triple therapy would be  in  overweight  patients  failing  on  MET+RSG  who  then  had  a  low  dose  of  insulin  secretagogue added.  Theoretically,  this  is  an  appropriate  order  of  dosing  as  it  allows  the  prescriber  to  manage patients closely and so minimise the risk of hypoglycaemia. In conclusion, the MAH maintained that the proposal to add SU at a low dose to patients failing to maintain glycaemic control on AVANDAMET alone is supportable with respect to both efficacy and safety. Furthermore the MAH note that the current approved product information advice for the use of Avandia  in  triple  therapy  would  permit  the  addition  of  a  SU  to  concomitantly  administered rosiglitazone  and  metformin  (a  dosing  scenario  directly  relevant  to  the  addition  of  an  SU  to AVANDAMET). The possibility of dosing in this way with Avandia might logically be expected to translate  onto  the  AVANDAMET  SPC.  Excluding  an  indication  to  add  an  SU  to  AVANDAMET might  cause  confusion  to  the  prescriber  in  their  assessment  of  the  appropriate  use  of  Avandia  and AVANDAMET. CHMP comments and position: The CHMP commented on the MAH's interpretation of the currently approved Avandia triple therapy indication which reads: ' As triple oral therapy in combination with metformin and a sulphonylurea, in patients  (particularly  overweight  patients)  with  insufficient  glycaemic  control  despite  dual  oral therapy (see section 4.4).' One could argue that this indication could be explained in different ways. One may read it as 'RSG can be added if glycaemic control with metformin and an SU is insufficient', or one can read it as 'triple  therapy  can  be  initiated  if  dual  therapy  fails,  whatever  the  order  of  dosing  of  the  individual components'.  However  it  should  be  noted  that  all  studies  were  performed  with  RSG  as  third component added to MET and SU and efficacy was sufficiently demonstrated. Most  type  2  diabetic  patients,  certainly  the  diabetics  with  more  or  less  overweight  are  nowadays started  on  metformin  treatment.  This  approach  is  principally  based  on  the  UKPDS  study  where outcome of patients treated with metformin was better than other treatment modalities but also on the fact that in most type 2 patients an insulin resistance is the prominent pathology. If a patient after this first approach is insufficiently controlled the doctor has a choice between SU and a glitazone. If the patient  is  obese  with  an  expected  concomitant  insulin  resistance,  SU  is  not  the  first  option  and  his choice will be giving the patient a glitazone. After this treatment has been successful for a short or long treatment period there will be a time that diabetic control will become insufficient. This will be the case in these patients when pancreatic insulin reserve or production is exhausted. One can expect that  the  efficacy  of  SU  is  relatively  less  pronounced  in  these  obese  patients  with  higher  C-peptide

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

levels and it is better to treat these obese patients with insulin. So what is required is evidence that SU addition will be successful and certainly as good as insulin treatment. This has not been demonstrated. Limited data were presented from 27 patients who originally received MET+RSG and who had an SU added (RECORD interim study). A decrease in HbA1c was measured in 20 evaluable patients, but data on C-peptide or weight were not mentioned. These data are too limited to draw a conclusion. Solid data on the efficacy of adding a SU to MET+RSG are lacking.

Medicinal product no longer authorise Therefore the CHMP concluded only to approve the indication triple therapy for the use of RSG as an add-on to existing dual therapy of maximally tolerated dose of MET and a SU. The following wording was agreed by CHMP and MAH to be included in section 4.1 of the SPC: 'AVANDAMET is indicated in the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients, particularly overweight patients: - who are unable to achieve sufficient glycaemic control at their maximally tolerated dose of oral metformin alone. - in triple oral therapy with sulphonylurea in patients with insufficient glycaemic control despite dual oral therapy with their maximally tolerated dose of metformin and a sulphonylurea (see section 4.4)' In accordance with the CHMP proposed indication, section 4.2 of the SPC was amended, giving the following posology options for the triple therapy indication: 'Triple Oral Therapy (rosiglitazone, metformin and sulphonylurea) (See section 4.4) -Patients on AVANDAMET: the addition of a sulphonylurea at it's recommended starting dose may be considered. -Patients on metformin and sulphonylurea: when appropriate AVANDAMET may be initiated at 4 mg/day rosiglitazone with the dose of metformin substituting that already being taken. -Patients  established  on  triple  oral  therapy:  when  appropriate,  AVANDAMET  may  substitute rosiglitazone and metformin doses already being taken. Where appropriate, AVANDAMET may be used to substitute concomitant rosiglitazone and metformin in existing dual or triple oral therapy to simplify treatment.' The MAH accepted to implement CHMP proposed wording for section 4.2 of the SPC. 4.2. Other SPC and PL changes As a result of the new triple combination therapy indication for AVANDAMET the MAH proposed to update  several  sections  of  the  Summary  of  Product  Characteristics  to  reflect  the  new  safety information.  In  addition  to  the  updates  of  sections  4.1  and  4.2  of  the  SPC,  the  MAH  proposed amendments  for  sections  4.4,  4.8  of  the  SPC.  These  updates  as  proposed  by  the  MAH  have  been considered acceptable by the CHMP. The PL has been updated accordingly. The MAH also applied to update section 5.1 of the SPC to reflect 18-month interim data from a long term ongoing trial for RSG to evaluate the long-term effects of RSG on cardiovascular endpoints and glycaemia. The CHMP was in agreement to include the statement proposed by the MAH in section 5.1 of the SPC. In addition the MAH applied to include some minor linguistic changes in section 5.2 of the SPC. 4.3. User consultation of the Package Leaflet Consideration was given for the need of a user consultation test for the Package Leaflet. The MAH provided a justification  for  not  performing  such  test.  The  justification  of  the  MAH  was  considered acceptable for the CHMP.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 5. Overall conclusions on benefit - risk

Based on the review of the data on clinical safety and efficacy, the overall benefit/risk is considered positive  by  the  CHMP.  The  CHMP  considers  that  the  variation  application  for  AVANDAMET,  to extend the indication to triple therapy with a SU is approvable. However the triple therapy indication is restricted for use of RSG as an add-on to existing dual therapy of maximally tolerated dose of MET and a SU.

Medicinal product no longer authorise The  CHMP,  having  considered  the  data  submitted  in  the  application,  is  of  the  opinion  that  no additional risk minimisation activities are required beyond those included in the product information. 6. CONCLUSION On 13 October 2005 the CHMP considered this Type II variation to be acceptable and agreed on the amendments to be introduced in the Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet.