---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 22:21:50
document_pages: 10
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/busilvex-h-c-472-ii-04-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: busilvex-h-c-472-ii-04-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.7934867
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 04:42:13.011162
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 27 October 2005 Product Name: Busilvex Procedure no.: EMEA/H/C/472/II/0004

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Introduction

Busilvex contains the active substance busulfan in a concentrate for solution for infusion. Busulfan acts as an alkylating agent. On December 29, 2000, busulfan (intravenous use) was designated Orphan Medicinal Product in the indication 'Conditioning treatment prior to haematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation'.  A  marketing  authorisation  was  granted  in  the  EU  on  July  2003  for  the  indication 'Busilvex  followed  by  cyclophosphamide  (BuCy2)  is  indicated  as  conditioning  treatment  prior  to conventional  haematopoietic  progenitor  cell  transplantation  (HPCT)  in  adult  patients  when  the combination is considered the best available option'.

| Actual body weight (kg)   |   Busilvex dose (mg/kg) |
|---------------------------|-------------------------|
| < 9                       |                    1    |
| 9 to < 16                 |                    1.2  |
| 16 to 23                  |                    1.1  |
| > 23 to 34                |                    0.95 |
| > 34                      |                    0.8  |

Busulfan (Bu) is an alkylating agent with profound myeloablative properties that has been extensively used for decades in the treatment of chronic myeloid leukaemia. The MTD of Bu given alone over four  days  followed  by  HSCT  is  20mg/kg 2 .  Busulfan  has  a  broad  spectrum  of  activity  and  is  active against  a  variety  of  malignancies  including  acute  and  chronic  leukemias,  lymphomas,  multiple myeloma and solid tumours. Bu in high doses has been used alone or in combination as preparative regimen for HSCT. One of the problems with the optimal utilization of the oral form of Bu has been

At the time of positive opinion, the Marketing Authorisation Holder committed to perform a clinical study  in  the  paediatric  population.  As  a  result,  the  MAH  has  submitted  a  variation  application  for Busilvex  for  an  indication  in  the  paediatric  population  'Busilvex  followed  by  cyclophosphamide (BuCy4)  or  melphalan  (BuMel)  is  indicated as conditioning treatment prior to conventional haematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation in paediatric patients'. The proposed dose of Busilvex is as follows: followed  by  4  cycles  of  50  mg/kg  body  weight  (BW)  cyclophosphamide  (BuCy4)  or  by  one administration of 140 mg/m² melphalan (BuMel). Busilvex is administered as a two-hour infusion every 6 hours over 4 consecutive days for a total of 16 doses  prior  to  cyclophosphamide  or  melphalan  and  conventional  haematopoietic  progenitor  cell transplantation (HPCT). Clinical aspects Conditioning regimens used for HSCT must accomplish two goals, depending on the patient's disease and  the  source  of  progenitor  cells.  Since  the  majority  of  autologous  and  allogeneic  HSCT  are performed for the treatment of malignant disease, the regimen must provide tumour cytoreduction and, ideally,  disease  eradication.  In  the  case  of  allogeneic  HSCT,  the  regimen  must  be  sufficiently immunosuppressive to prevent graft rejection of the donor stem cells by residual host haematopoiesis. Early conditioning regimens were based on total body irradiation (TBI), where high doses of radiation were required to provide adequate myeloablation and immunosuppression. Alkylating agents are the major  class  of  drugs  used  in  conditioning  regimens  for  HSCT  because  they  have  many  desirable characteristics.  Many  of  these  agents  have  marrow  toxicity  as  the  main  dose-limiting  factor,  which allows  for  dose  escalation  when  HSCT  is  utilized.  Alkylating  agents  are  not  cycle  specific  and therefore  capable  of  killing  resting  tumour  cells,  they  do  not  exhibit  cross-resistance  and  have relatively steep log-linear dose-response curves. Although it is impossible to combine these agents at maximum tolerated  doses  (MTD),  between  50-70%  of  the  MTD  can  be  used  in  two  or  three  drug combinations 1 . Medicinal product no longer authorised

1 Bensinger WI, Spielberger R. Preparative regimens and modification of regimen-related toxicities. In Blume KG, Forman

S, Appelbaum F eds. Thomas´ Hematopoietic cell Transplantation. 3 rd ed. Blackwell Publishing. 2004 pg 158-177

2 Peters WP, Henner WD, Grochow LB. Clinical and pharmacologic effects of high dose single agent busulfan with autologous marrow support in the treatment of solid tumours. Cancer Res 1987; 47:6402-6

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the high pharmacokinetic variability between individuals that probably contributes to the significant differences observed in toxicity and clinical response in patients receiving the same dose in mg/kg or mg/m 2 .  It  has  been  demonstrated  a  relationship  between  low  Bu  steady-state  plasma  concentrations and graft rejection in children 3 .  There are also data suggesting a relationship between the sinusoidal obstruction  syndrome  of  the  liver  and  high  Bu  plasma  levels,  and  more  recently  a  correlation  of steady-state Bu concentration and relapse rates 4 .

Cyclophosphamide (Cy) is very immunosuppressive alkylator, its dose-limiting toxicity is hemorrhagic cystitis. As single agent the MTD is approximately 200 mg/kg. Cy has been extensively used in combination con busulfan or TBI in the conditioning regimens for HSCT.

Melphalan (Mel) is a bifunctional alkylating agent that incorporates nitrogen mustard and phenylalanine.  Dose-limiting  toxicities  are  gastrointestinal  and  hepatic.  Melphalan  240  mg/m 2 has been used alone in conditioning regimens for patients with hematologic malignancies receiving HSCT. Mel has also been extensively used in HSCT for solid tumours or other malignancies either alone or in combination with busulfan, carmustine or TBI. In 1983, a conditioning regimen termed By/Cy4 was designed by Santos et al., combining high dose oral busulfan (1 mg/kg every 6 hours, over 4 days -16mg/kg-) and cyclophosphamide (50mg/kg every 24 hours x 4 days -200 mg/kg-). This regimen was profoundly myeloablative and immunosuppressive and was very effective for the treatment of high risk acute leukemias and other malignancies either in the autologous or the allogeneic setting 5 . This combination was subsequently modified by decreasing the dose of Cyclophosphamide to 120mg/kg administered in two days -the Bu/Cy2 regimen- with an apparent decrease in toxicity without an increase in relapses, although not surprisingly Bu/Cy4 was more  effective  in  high  risk  leukemias.  In  children  receiving  allogeneic  transplantation,  the  Bu/Cy regimen is the most commonly used non-TBI-based pre-transplant conditioning treatment. Bu/Cy4 is preferred in  high  risk  leukemias  and  to  prevent  rejection  in  nonHLA  identical  siblings  or  unrelated donors. In this preparative regimen, the primary purpose of busulfan is to eradicate malignant cells (myeloablation)  and  for  cyclophosphamide  is  to  induce  immunosuppression  in  the  recipient  so  that rejection is prevented and engraftment of the donor haematopoietic system is permitted. Two  randomised  comparison  trials  between  Cy/TBI  and  Bu/Cy2  have  shown  no  significant differences  in  long-term  survival  in  patients  with  chronic  myeloid  leukaemia  in  the  chronic  phase receiving HLA-matched allogeneic transplants. A SWOG study compared Bu/Cy and Cy/TBI/Etoposide  in  122  patients  with  advanced  acute  leukaemia  or  CML  undergoing  allo-HSCT. There were no important differences in toxicity, survival or disease free survival in patients receiving either regimen. A regimen with busulfan (16 mg/kg) and melphalan (140 mg/m2) (Bu-Mel), followed by autologous or allogeneic HSCT demonstrated efficacy in patients with myeloid malignancies, multiple myeloma and  solid  tumours.  The  European  Bone  Marrow  Transplant  Group  has  reported  its  experience  over 6.000  HSCT  in  the  paediatric  age,  showing  that  the  Bu-Mel  conditioning  was  the  most  successful combination in the EBMT solid tumour registry data resulting in significantly better survival rates in neuroblastoma and Ewing´s tumours 6 In  patients  with  thalassemia,  busulfan  at  14  mg/kg  and  cyclophosphamide  at  120-200  mg/kg  was  a well-tolerated and effective regimen for allografting. A conditioning regimen including busulfan (12 mg/kg), melphalan (100 mg/m 2 ) and thiotepa (500 mg/m 2 ) following by autologous HSCT have shown good  results  in  a  variety  of  haematological  malignancies  and  solid  tumours.  Regimens  involving busulfan,  cyclophosphamide  and  thiotepa  or  melphalan,  or  etoposide  has  been  utilised  prior  to autografting and allografting. Medicinal product no longer authorised

3 Slattery JT, Sanders JE, Buckner CD et al. Graft rejection and toxicity following bone marrow transplantation in relation to busulfan pharmacokinetics. Bone Marrow Transplant 1995; 16:31-42

4 Grochow LB. Busulfan disposition. The role of therapeutic monitoring in bone marrow transplantation induction regimens. Semin Oncol 1993; 20:18-25 // Slattery JT, Clift RA, Buckner CD et al. Marrow transplantation for chronic myeloid leukaemia: the influence of plasma busulfan levels on the outcome of transplantation. Blood 1997; 89:3055-60

5 Santos GW, Tutschka PJ, Brookmeyer R, et al. Marrow transplantation for acute nonlymphocytic leukaemia after treatment with busulfan and cyclophosfamide. N Engl J Med 1983; 309:1347-53 6

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Since  the  authorization  of  the  intravenous  formulation  of  busulfan,  it  has  been  widely  used  in  the conditioning regimens replacing the use of the oral tablets.

## Rationale for intravenous high dose busulfan in children

Busulfan  is  an  alkylating  agent  with  myeloablative  properties  and  activity  against  non-dividing marrow cells and, possibly, non-dividing malignant cells. Currently, iv busulfan is licensed for adult use. The use of oral busulfan, administered at high doses ( i.e. 1 mg/kg x 16 doses, administered over 4 days) for the preparative treatment before HSCT in the paediatric population is current practice and there could also be a use 'off label' of the intravenous formulation in this patient group.

One of the problems with optimal utilisation of busulfan is the bioavailability of the oral form. The pharmacokinetic  variability  between  patients  is  high,  which  can  be  involved  in  the  significant differences observed in toxicities and clinical responses in patients receiving the same oral dose. The steady-state busulfan concentration has been correlated with graft rejection and disease relapse, as well as with the severity of conditioning regimen toxicities, especially veno-occlusive disease of the liver. Consequently, it should be expected from an I.V. form of busulfan to reduce these issues. It should be taken into account that the use of Busilvex in children would be particularly interesting because of the toxicity  associated  with  total  body  irradiation,  the  difficulties  related  to  oral  medications  and  the favourable outcome of transplantation in this group. The main benefits expected from an I.V. form in paediatric use are: -To provide a well-controlled dose to the patient through avoiding vomiting or poor compliance with  the  oral  form  and  to  offer  a  more  comfortable  way  of  administering  to  patients  having difficulties in swallowing numerous pills. -To facilitate the targeting of a defined range of AUC considered to ensure engraftment, reduce the risk of toxicity, and thereby improve the outcome of HSCT. -To reduce individual variability on blood exposure by administering a 100% bioavailable dose to every patient at every administration.  A lower variability would result in  a less frequent  underexposure, as the concentration obtained in children is lower than in adults with the same dose. -To reduce the high hepatic concentration of Bu resulting from hepatic first pass through the liver, which is suspected to be highly involved in risk of hepatic veno-occlusive disease (VOD). These properties should increase the assurance of a successful HSCT by providing a safer transplant and by reducing early morbidity and mortality. Development programme for the paediatric indication It  can  be  considered  that,  in  its  main  aspects,  the  clinical  programme  is  in  accordance  with  current recommendations  of  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  clinical  investigation  of  medicinal  products  in  the paediatric  population  (CPMP/ICH/2711/99)  and  the  Note  for  Guidance  on  evaluation  of  anticancer medicinal  products  in  man:  Addendum  on  paediatric  oncology.  In  the  above  documents  it  is  stated that'When a medicinal product is to be used in the paediatric population for the same indication as that studied and approved in adults, the disease process is similar in adult and paediatric patients, and the  outcome  of  therapy  is  likely  to  be  comparable,  extrapolation  from  adult  efficacy  data  may  be appropriate. In such cases, pharmacokinetic studies in all the age ranges of paediatric patients likely to receive the medicinal product, together with safety studies, may provide adequate information for use by allowing selection of paediatric doses that will produce blood levels similar to those observed in adults'. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  CPMP  provided  protocol  assistance  on  February  2001  concerning  the  clinical  development  of Busilvex, including its use in children. At that time, it was considered that an application based on a new (i.v.) formulation of an old drug previously used in oral administration, rather could depend upon a thorough pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic comparison and then with a mainly supportive role of the clinical results. Therefore, the development programme in children carried out by the Applicant is basically in accordance with the protocol assistance received.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacodynamics

Busulfan is a bifunctional alkylating  agent  used  in  bone  marrow  transplantation  (BMT) . The major issues of Bu pharmacodynamics are:

-  The  conditioning  regimen  firstly  must  promote  the  engraftment  of  the  haematopoietic  stem  cell transplant

-  Secondly,  it  must  generate  as  few  low-rated  regimen-related  toxicities  as  acceptable  for  HSCT. Higher  busulfan  exposure  than  1500  µM.min  has  been  correlated  with  an  increase  frequency  of hepatic complications, especially veno-occlusive disease (VOD).

| Study             | Phase   |   Number of patients | Age                              | Gender   | Patient diagnosis              | Study design             |
|-------------------|---------|----------------------|----------------------------------|----------|--------------------------------|--------------------------|
| OMCBUS 5          | II      |                   24 | 54% < 4y 46% > 4 y               | 50% male | Allogeneic HSCT                | Dose 1 through 16: I.V.  |
| F60002 IN 1 01 G0 | II      |                   55 | 4.0 (0.7-14.9) 7.2 (0.3-17.2) no | 53% male | Autologous and Allogeneic HSCT | Doses 1 through 16: I.V. |

Results

Twenty-four evaluable patients were enrolled (13 patients ≤ 4 years [0.4 - 4] and 11 patients &gt; 4 years [4  -  16.7]).  Although  the  number  of  patients  included  is  low  and  heterogeneous  regarding  age  and disease,  the  population  can  be  considered  representative  of  the  target  paediatric  population  for Busilvex.

Consequently,  a  targeted  range  of  Bu  concentrations  in  plasma  was  defined  for  an  optimal compromise  between  efficacy  and  toxicity.  A  usual  'therapeutic  window'  range  is  900-1500 µMol.min, although slight differences exist between authors. However, the high variability in oral Bu disposition  is  known  to  affect  the  safety  and  efficacy  outcomes  of  Bu-based  conditioning  regimen. Indeed,  therapeutic  drug  monitoring  and  dose  adjustment  are  usually  necessary  during  the  16  Bu administrations to shift plasma concentrations into the desired target area. The 'therapeutic window' 900 to 1500 µMol.min is validated in adult and patient populations. So, it can  be  considered  as  an  adequate  surrogate  during  the  studies,  which  can  be  confirmed  during  the efficacy and safety investigations. Pharmacokinetics Two  trials  were  conducted  with  Busilvex  in  paediatric  patients  to  characterise  its  pharmacokinetic profile. In the first trial (OMC-BUS 5), intravenous busulfan was used in combination with cyclophosphamide in paediatric patients as a conditioning regimen (BuCy4) for allogeneic HSCT for malignant and nonmalignant disease. The paediatric dosing of Busilvex was the equivalent of what is done with oral Bu. For children ≤ 4 years: 1.0 mg/kg IV Bu and for children &gt; 4 years: 0.8 mg/kg IV Bu in a 2 hour infusion every 6 hours for  4  consecutive  days.  Cyclophosphamide  was  subsequently  administered  (24  h  later),  once  daily over four days (50 mg/kg/day). The main objective of this study was to define an appropriate dosing schedule for Busilvex in children. The therapeutic window was defined at 900 - 1350 µMol.min. Bu dose adjustment was allowed in patients when Bu plasmatic AUCs stand outside the therapeutic window ± 5%. Up  to  24  paediatric  patients  of  either  sex  could  be  included  in  the  trial  (no  detailed  sample  size estimation performed). Medicinal product no longer authorised

The study essentially confirms the findings from the oral experience in this patient population and its good predictability, as the initial doses were adequate to reach the therapeutic levels in 66% of patients for both paediatric age subgroups.

The  pharmacokinetic  profile  has  also  been  characterised  more  accurately  across  the  paediatric  age subgroups,  so  that  dosing  can  be  recommended  in  a  more  individualised  schedule  on  the  basis  of actual body weight for the design of the subsequent studies.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Study F60002 IN 1 01 G0. This prospective phase II trial was carried out in paediatric patients with malignant and non-malignant disease elected for HSCT, receiving IV Bu administered as a standard 16-dose regimen at a fixed dose varying from 0.8 to 1.2 mg/kg in combination with either Mel (140 mg/m²) for autologous transplants or Cy (50 mg/kg/day over 4 days) for allogeneic transplants. No IV Bu dose adjustment was allowed during the full Bu treatment.

The primary objective of the study was the AUC targeting performance of the new fixed Bu dosing (no  dose  adjustment  was  allowed  during  the  treatment).  To  adjust  Bu  dosing,  5  subgroups  of  body weight were defined: 0 - 9 kg, 9 - 16 kg, 16 - 23 kg, 23 - 34 kg and &gt;34 kg and thus, resulting in a total of five different Bu dose levels.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Model curve-based and weight strata - based dosing strategy Results Sixty evaluable patients (12 per group of body weight) were planned and an intermediate report on 55 evaluable patients (27 autologous and 28 allogeneic) is presented (In the first and fourth strata, only 8 and 6 patients, respectively, were included). There were 20 (36%) and 35 (64%) patients ≤ 4 years and &gt; 4 years, respectively, with a median age of 6 years (0.3-17.2). Patient's weight ranged from 5 to 62.5 kg. The study population, although limited to 55 subjects, is representative of the paediatric age and of the paediatric  diseases  currently  conditioned  by  Bu-Mel  (solid  tumours)  or  BuCy  4  (haematological diseases) regimens followed by HSCT. In the [900 - 1350 µMol.min] ± 5% AUC range, the targeting performance was ≥ 75 % at doses 1, 9, and 13, and when using the usual [900 - 1500 µMol.min] AUC range, the targeting performance is about 90%. A  slight  increase  is  observed  on  AUCs  between  dose  1  and  dose  9,  which  was  attributed  to misevaluation of AUCinf at dose 1, and this increase is also seen between doses 9 and 13. Study F60002 IN101G0 confirms the appropriateness of the proposed new IV Bu dosing based on body  weight,  which  resulted  in  a  more  efficient  targeting  performance  than  previous  experiences without  invasive  TDM  and  dose  adjustment.  Its  results  are  consistent  with  the  findings  of  the preliminary study OMC BUS 5. Therefore, the proposed dosing schedule can be considered adequate. Clinical efficacy and safety results from the two studies will be useful to confirm these pharmacokinetic conclusions. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The two clinical trials using intravenous busulfan (IV Bu) in paediatric patients in the setting of HSCT have also investigated the efficacy and safety aspects.

The pivotal study for efficacy and safety (F00002 IN 101 G0) was performed in 55 paediatric patients, The chemotherapy regimen of intravenous busulfan and cyclophosphamide administered corresponds to  the  'intravenous  version'  of  BuMel  and  Bu/Cy4,  which  are  widely  used  with  oral  busulfan  for HSCT prior conditioning to autologous or allogeneic transplants. A fixed dose based on body weight varying from 0.8 to 1.2 mg/kg of IV Bu was administered over the complete treatment period without

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

any further dose adjustment. No investigation with Busilvex in other conditioning regimens has been provided.

The  protocol  considers  patients  suffering  from  solid  tumours  and  malignant  and  non-malignant haematological diseases that are usually candidates for HSCT. Although the indications for transplant are  the  usual  in  clinical  practice,  that  is  autologous  transplants  for  advanced  stage  solid  tumours, allogeneic transplants for leukemias and congenital haemoglobinopathies and haematological defects, there is a short number of patients in the study and a wide heterogeneity of diagnosis, stage of disease, source of stem cells (peripheral blood in autologous transplant, bone marrow in allogeneic transplants, related and unrelated donors) and GVH.  No randomisation or stratification has been considered in this study.

The open label design does not allow making a comparison of the efficacy and safety of Busilvex with either oral busulfan containing regimens or other conditioning strategies. The quality of clinical data that  this  type  of  studies  can  provide  is  of  limited  value  and  comparative  data  would  have  been preferred. However, this study is the main clinical evidence for the efficacy and safety of Busilvex in children,  as  a  III  controlled  study  has  not  been  performed.  Nevertheless,  it  is  agreed  that  Busilvex based  regimens  should  not  be  essentially  different  from  those  based  on  oral  busulfan,  and  thus,  a consistent  demonstration  of  pharmacokinetic  comparability  can  be  regarded  as  pivotal  for  this application.

The  selected  endpoints  are  appropriate  to  assess  the  short-term  efficacy  and  safety  of  Busilvex  in combination treatment with cyclophosphamide or melphalan in the claimed indication. Patients suffering from solid tumours and haematological diseases (malignant or not) were included in this phase II study. An important proportion is heavily pre-treated. Allogeneic and autologous HSCT is  considered  an  adequate  treatment  for  this  population,  although  there  exists  a  certain  degree  of disease-specific indication, as can be observed in the final population enrolled in each group. Overall, both groups (autologous and allogeneic) included standard patients for whom HSCT is either the best available option to consolidate remission/best response or the only treatment allowing to eradicate the underlying  disease.  Therefore  the  groups  are  considered  relevant  and  appropriate  for  the  outcome analysis, especially short-term efficacy. The number of patients by type of malignancy is insufficient as to perform a disease-guided approach analysis. The age of the included population is representative of HSCT paediatric patients, although the number of patients of each age group is limited. Kinetics of myeloablation was what is commonly expected from myeloablative conditioning regimens such as BuMel or BuCy 4. All patients showed profound pancytopenia after transplantation and all showed engraftment and this occurred at the expected time for neutrophils. [already answered in the response to questions]. The investigation of chimerism in allogeneic transplants revealed that 100% of patients achieved stable chimeras at some time after transplantation (93% complete chimeras). This high  rate  of  successful  engraftment,  even  with  unrelated  donors,  and  the  absence  of  rejection  are consistent with the rest of endpoints. Transplant related mortality was cero at day +100 post HSCT, both in autologous and allogeneic transplants; that is in accordance with the claimed high degree of safety of Busilvex in the pediatric population. For disease related endpoints, although the follow-up is short, the rate of disease recurrence is low and the results event free survival and overall survival are at least comparable to what is expected with oral Busulfan-based conditionings in this setting. The intake of concomitant medication, such as methotrexate, directed to prevent and treat graft versus host disease did not show an influence on engraftment and time to engraftment. Although, it is difficult to relate the outcome of this transplant study exclusively to busulfan therapy, this  result  can  be  considered  positive  and  an  indirect  measure  of  the  myelosuppresive  activity  of Busilvex. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In this study, the new dosing of IVBu has been associated with adequate efficacy results in autologous and  allogeneic  transplant  recipients  across  all  the  paediatric  age,  which  could  be  considered  as  a confirmation that this therapeutic regimen is adequate to reach the established 'therapeutic window' for Bu exposure.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There is additional evidence from the preliminary study OMC-BUS 5 in patients receiving allogeneic transplant. In this case, as the two protocols are not identical, they are described separately.

OMC-BUS 5 is a preliminary study in 24 paediatric patients aged from 2 weeks to &lt;18 years intended to receive an allogeneic transplant. An age-based dosing regimen was used to mimic oral Bu: children &lt; 4 years old received an initial dose of 1.0 mg/kg of IV Bu and those &gt; 4 years received an initial dose of 0.8 mg/kg, in combination with cyclophosphamide in a BuCy 4 regimen. Subsequently, IVBu doses were adjusted based on the pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters obtained with the initial dose.

The results are positive and consistent with those obtained in the pivotal study. However this series is very heterogeneous, with a short follow-up. The rate of mixed chimera (19%) as well as the TRM at day +100 (17%) are higher than the pivotal study, although the patients who died had been heavily pre-treated prior to enrolment in this study. Clinical safety The use of high-dose oral Bu in the HSCT setting is associated with well-recognized regimen related toxicities involving crucial organs such as lung, CNS (seizures) and liver (liver function abnormalities, VOD). Therefore, the key safety issue with the new IVBu dosing is: 1) whether the new dosing of IVBu influence the safety profile and /or contributes to additional toxicity; 2) whether the use of DMA in  this  formulation  contributes  to  additional  toxicity,  particularly  in  consideration  of  the  reported cardiac, neurologic and hepatic toxicities associated with the human use of DMA (Weiss A.J., 1962). The results for Busilvex in the paediatric population from studies F00002 IN 101 and OMC-BUS 5 show a similar safety profile to that described with busulfan in children and adults. The majority of patients presented elevations of liver enzymes during Busilvex treatment, but VOD incidence was comparable to that observed with oral busulfan. The  relationships  between  IV  Bu  AUC  and  the  worst  NCI/CTC  grade  achieved  during  the  study period for each of the seven major organs system (i.e.: CNS, cardiac, lungs, liver, renal, bladder and GIT including stomatitis) were explored. Given that there were limited severe toxicities (grades 3 and 4)  in  these  major  organ  systems,  no  significant  correlation  could  be  established.  However,  for stomatitis a high correlation with AUC was demonstrated for autologous transplant patients. [already answered in the response to questions] The  potential  effect  of  the  high  amount  of  DMA  in  the  intravenous  formulation  of  busulfan  on neurological, cardiovascular and hepatic safety profiles in children is discussed. In this respect, there does not seem to be an increased toxicity. Although the review of these data does not raise safety concerns about the use of IV Bu in children; for  further  reassurance,  the  safety  results  in  paediatric  patients  obtained  from  the  studies  should  be described separately for each paediatric subgroup regarding age or weight. It should be taken into account that the information provided is limited to 55 and 24 children of ages from 0 to 18 years old. So, post marketing data in paediatric population from those countries where the indication is accepted should also be provided. Discussion and Benefit- Risk assessment Medicinal product no longer authorised

Busilvex is currently authorised for adult use in the EU. Oral busulfan, administered at high doses is widely used as part of conditioning regimens before HSCT  in paediatric population. The pharmacokinetic  variability  of  oral  busulfan  has  been  correlated  with  graft  rejection  and  disease relapse,  as  well  as  with  the  severity  of  conditioning  regimen  toxicities,  especially  veno-occlusive disease of the liver.

The use of Busilvex in children would be particularly interesting because of the toxicity associated with  total  body  irradiation,  the  difficulties  related  to  oral  medications  (vomiting,  nasogastric  tube, treatment compliance) and the favourable outcome of transplantation in this group.

The  equivalence  of  oral  and  intravenous  busulfan  was  shown  in  adults  and  it  constituted  the  main evidence at the time of initial registration of Busilvex, supported by efficacy and safety data.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In the current use of busulfan in paediatric HSCT, the oral formulation is used at the same doses in adults and children older than 4 years. However, in children ≤ 4 years, the use of the same dose would provide a lower plasma concentration; therefore, higher doses are required. This is expectable, taking into account the characteristic differences in elimination rate of drugs across the paediatric age, with clearance often exceeding adult values.

Busilvex  in  combination  with  cyclophosphamide  or  melphalan  in  a  dose  schedule  that  aims  to reproduce the use of oral busulfan in the Bu/Cy 4 and BuMel based regimens has been investigated as conditioning  therapy  prior  to  HSCT  in  two  phase  II  uncontrolled,  open  label  studies  in  paediatric patients (0 to 18 years old) receiving autologous or allogeneic HSCT.

Busilvex at the proposed regimen was adequate to obtain the target plasmatic concentration, which is validated in adult and patient populations. The positive efficacy and safety clinical results supported the performance demonstrated on pharmacokinetics to efficiently target the \"therapeutic window\" for paediatric  patients  through  the  new  weight-based  dosing  regimen.  The  results  were  similar  to  those published with oral busulfan. The safety profile for Busilvex in the paediatric population was also similar to that described with the oral formulation. It consisted of well-described toxicities commonly encountered in previous studies with busulfan in children and adults. The  potential  effect  of  the  high  amount  of  DMA  in  the  intravenous  formulation  of  busulfan  on neurological, cardiovascular and hepatic safety profiles in children is discussed. In this respect, there does not seem to be an increased toxicity. The open label design does not allow making a comparison of the efficacy and safety of Busilvex with either oral busulfan containing regimens or other conditioning strategies. The quality of clinical data that  this  type  of  studies  can  provide  is  of  limited  value  and  comparative  data  would  have  been preferred. Nevertheless, it is agreed that Busilvex based regimens should not be essentially different from  those  based  on  oral  busulfan,  and  thus,  a  consistent  demonstration  of  pharmacokinetic comparability can be regarded as pivotal for this application. The approach of not performing a comparative trial of Busilvex with the oral formulation in children, can  be  considered  acceptable  as,  although  it  would  have  provided  useful  information,  there  are previous  comparative  data  on  the  equivalence  of  both  formulations  in  adults,  a  well  defined therapeutic concentration range in both populations and the possibility of dose adjustments during the clinical  studies.  It  should  also  be  reminded  that  the  procedure  of  HSCT,  including  conditioning treatment, in the paediatric population is similar to that in adults. In accordance with current recommendations, when a medicinal product is to be used in the paediatric population for the same indication as that studied and approved in adults, the disease process is similar in adult and paediatric patients, and the outcome of therapy is likely to be comparable, extrapolation from  adult  efficacy  data  may  be  appropriate.  In  such  cases,  pharmacokinetic  studies  in  all  the  age ranges of paediatric patients likely to receive the medicinal product, together with safety studies, may provide adequate information for use by allowing selection of paediatric doses that will produce blood levels similar to those observed in adults. In the dossier submitted, the number of patients is limited as to allow for a disease-specific analysis. The results observed in the different groups seem to be consistent with the global analysis and similar to those published with oral busulfan. Medicinal product no longer authorised

As the information about the use of Busilvex in non-malignant diseases is very limited, more data has been requested to characterise efficacy and safety and to assess the need for dose adjustments in this patient population.

Although it is agreed that Busulfan is not the usual conditioning regimen in Fanconi anemia, there is recent  data  on  its  use  in  this  condition  (Maschan  AA,  et  al.  Fludarabine,  low-dose  busulfan  and antithymocyte globulin as conditioning for Fanconi anemia patients receiving bone  marrow transplantation from HLA-compatible related donors. Bone Marrow Transplant 2004; 34: 305-7). In addition, busulfan is part of many of the reduced-intensity conditioning devised to treat non-malignant

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

diseases (Satwani P, et al. Reduced-intensity allogeneic stem cell transplantation in adults and children with malignant and non-malignant diseases: end of the beginning and future challenges. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2005; 11:403-422).

The safety profile did not show any unexpected or new toxicity not previously reported with Busulfan. A warning in the Summary of Product Characteristics of Busilvex in relation to its eventual use in Fanconi anemia patients was included until more data is acquired.

Due to the lack of data regarding efficacy and safety in these situations, it is highly recommended to gather as much information as possible involving groups as EBMT, if required. The last EBMT 2003 survey reports that out of 7091 allogeneic HSCT, 189  were performed in patients with hemoglobinopathies, meaning 2% of the overall number of allogeneic transplants (BMT 1-16; 2005). The F60001 IN 101 G0 enrolled 7 patients with hemoglobinopathies. Six patients have already been included in the interim report and one additional patient has been further included. This pathology represents 20 % of the studied population. As previously described in the Interim Report, all patients engrafted without any early or late graft rejection. Six out of seven patients are still alive with a median EFS of 28 months (range 18,2-38,2 months).

<!-- image -->

Based upon the above the MAH  commits to supply the following: 1. Long - term follow up of all patients enrolled in the F60001 IN 101 G0 protocol including all the hemoglobinopathy patients; 2. Information on the frequency of the use of Busulfan from the EBMT survey concerning patients with hemoglobinopathies and Fanconi anaemia treated by allo-HSCT; 3. Further information on hemoglobinopathy and Fanconi anaemia patients potentially included in specific trials conducted either by PFM or by Independent Investigators. In  the  light  of  the  above  discussion,  the  benefit  risk  ratio  for  the  indication  proposed  'Busilvex followed by cyclophosphamide (BuCy4) or melphalan (BuMel) is indicated as conditioning treatment prior to conventional haematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation in paediatric patients' is positive. Medicinal product no longer authorised