---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:07:42
document_pages: 15
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/keppra-h-c-277-ii-0063-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: keppra-h-c-277-ii-0063-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 7.7408135
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-14 14:43:42.232494
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 07 August 2006 Product name: Keppra Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/277/II/63

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

Epilepsy is one of the most common and challenging neurological disorders. It has been estimated that there  are  over  50  million  people  affected  worldwide.  However,  there  are  few  antiepileptic  drugs (AEDs) licensed for initial use as monotherapy in subjects with newly or recently diagnosed epilepsy. The first-line drugs for the treatment of partial and generalized tonic-clonic seizures are carbamazepine  (CBZ),  phenytoin  (PHT)  and  valproate  (VPA).  In  the  2001  International  League Against  Epilepsy  guidelines,  the  first  choice  of  treatment  for  partial  seizures  is  CBZ.  Established AEDs  may  not  always  be  an  ideal  first  choice  regarding,  in  particular,  their  propensity  to  cause neurotoxicity, idiosyncratic reactions and pharmacokinetic interactions.

Keppra  (levetiracetam  -  LEV)  is  currently  authorized  as  an  adjunctive  therapy  in  the  treatment  of partial  onset  seizures  with  or  without  secondary  generalisation  in  patients  with  epilepsy.  It  is  also authorized as adjunctive therapy in the treatment of myoclonic seizures in adults and adolescents from 12  years  of  age  with  Juvenile  Myoclonic  Epilepsy.  Based  on  the  results  of  a  well-conducted comparative monotherapy study in patients with newly or recently diagnosed epilepsy and suffering from partial or generalized tonic-clonic, the MAH applied to extend the current indication as follows:

'Keppra  is  indicated  as  monotherapy  in  the  treatment  of  partial  onset  seizures  with  or  without secondary generalisation in patients from 16 years of age with newly diagnosed epilepsy.'

In addition to section 4.1 of the SPC, the MAH proposed to update sections 4.2 and 4.8 to reflect the new data generated by the pivotal study and to introduce an improvement to the wording of section 4.5. The Package Leaflet (PL) was revised accordingly.

## 2. Quality aspects

Not applicable

## 3. Non-clinical aspects

Not applicable

## 4. Clinical aspects

## GCP

The Clinical trials were performed in accordance with GCP, as stated by the MAH. In addition, the MAH confirmed that the ethical requirements of the clinical trial directive 2001/20/EC were applied for clinical trials conducted outside the EU.

## Clinical efficacy

The clinical efficacy programme was based on a pivotal comparative monotherapy study (N01061).

Extended treatment was possible in 3 follow-up studies, all of which were ongoing at the time of the submission of this application:

- -Study  N01093,  a  double-blind  long-term  follow-up  study  to  N01061in  which  subjects  who benefited from their randomized treatment are able to continue to receive the same study drug, to evaluate the long-term safety of LEV and CBZ in monotherapy.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -Two open-label follow-up studies, N01091 (a Named Patient program) and N01127, intended to allow subjects from N01061 or N01093 to continue to receive LEV (and, although no subject did so, before N01061 unblinding, subjects previously exposed to CBZ who converted to LEV were also eligible).

One  additional  study  is  ongoing,  N01175,  a  phase  IIIb  therapeutic  confirmatory,  open-label, multicenter,  randomized,  community-based  trial  investigating  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  LEV compared to VPA and CBZ as monotherapy in subjects with newly diagnosed epilepsy.

Main study N01061: Phase III, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group, positivecontrolled, non-inferiority, monotherapy study

## METHODS

## Objectives

- Primary objective: to prove that monotherapy treatment with LEV 1000 to 3000 mg/day is noninferior to monotherapy with CBZ 400 to 1200 mg/day in achieving 6-month seizure freedom as primary end-point, in adults ( ≥ 16 years) with newly or recently diagnosed epilepsy, suffering from partial or generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
- Secondary  objective:  To  compare  the  safety  and  tolerability  of  both  drugs  in  the  same population.
- Exploratory objective: To compare the direct and indirect cost parameters between both drugs.

## Study Participants

## Inclusion criteria

Among the inclusion criteria were:

- Subjects  with  newly  or  recently  diagnosed  epilepsy  having  experienced  unprovoked  partial seizures (IA, IB, IC with clear focal origin), or generalized tonic-clonic seizures (without clear focal  origin),  that  were  classifiable  according  to  the  International  Classification  of  Epileptic Seizures. The discrimination between IC and IIE was not requested for inclusion.
- Subjects with at least 2 unprovoked seizures separated by a minimum of 48 hours in the year preceding  randomization,  of  which,  at  least  1  unprovoked  seizure  occurred  in  the  3  months preceding randomization.
- Male/female subjects ( ≥ 16 years). Inclusion was limited to subjects ≥ 18 years at one site in Poland.
- Minimum body weight of 40 kg.

## Exclusion criteria:

The  exclusion  criteria  included  known  allergic  reaction,  intolerance  to  CBZ  derivatives  and/or excipients, known skin rash or allergic reaction with any other drug, known alcohol or drug addiction or  abuse  within  the  last  two  years,  clinical  or  EEG  finding  suggestive  of  idiopathic  generalized epilepsy  (IGE)  at  randomization,  history  or  presence  of  known  pseudo-seizures,  and  previous  AED treatment except for acute and subacute seizure treatment with a maximum of 2 week duration.

## Treatments

The study drug was LEV 250 mg tablets at daily dose of 1000 to 3000 mg divided in two equal oral intakes.

The comparator was CBZ controlled release (CBZ CR) tablets at daily dose of 400 to 1200 mg divided in two equal oral intakes.

All  LEV,  CBZ  and  placebo  capsules  were  made  identical  in  shape,  size,  weight  and  colour  by  the over-encapsulation process to ensure the blinding of the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The study consisted of several periods, with a maximal duration of 121 weeks for an individual subject (see Figure 1):

- Screening period: 1 week.
- Up-titration period: 2 weeks: CBZ CR 200mg/day or LEV 500mg/day (250mg bid).
- Stabilization period: 1 week: CBZ CR 400mg/day or LEV 1000mg/day (Dose level 1).
- Evaluation period: 26 weeks.
- Maintenance period: 26 weeks.
- Conversion (2 to 6 weeks) to open label LEV or down-titration (3 to 7 weeks) or switch to a double-blind LEV/CBZ follow-up study.

If a seizure occurred during the evaluation period, a 2-week dose escalation period to the second target daily dose (CBZ CR 800mg/day or LEV 2000mg/day) was followed by a 1-week stabilization period, a  26-week  evaluation  period  and  a  26-week  maintenance  period.  The  same  was  true  if  a  seizure occurred during the evaluation period at the second dose level with an escalation to the third target daily dose (CBZ CR 1200mg/day or LEV 3000mg/day).

## At the end of the study the subject had three options:

- To continue in an open-label LEV treatment (named patient program N01091) after a doubleblind 2 to 6-week conversion period, or
- To  continue  with  double-blind  LEV/CBZ  treatment  (study  N01093)  until  database  lock  and unblinding of study N01061, or
- To discontinue the study drug after a 3 to 7-week down-titration period.

Figure 1. Overview of study N01061 design

<!-- image -->

EARLYDISCONTINUATION/DOWN-TITRATION

## Randomisation and sample size

A total  number  of  619  subjects  were  screened,  from  which  579  were  randomized,  291  in  the  CBZ group and 288 in the LEV group. The ITT population totalled then 576 subjects, 291 in the CBZ group and 285 in the LEV group. The randomization list was generated by the Central Randomization Centre

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

and Drug Supply Management Centre. A central randomization process was selected because of the high  number  of  centres  to  be  included  and  the  expected  small  number  of  subjects  per  centre.  The seizure type was considered as potentially influencing the 6-month seizure-freedom rate and was thus included as a stratification factor in the randomization, in order to guarantee the appropriate balance between treatment groups.

## Endpoints

## Primary efficacy variable

The  primary  efficacy  variable  was  the  proportion  of  the  per-protocol  (PP)  subjects  with  6-month seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose.

Subjects dropping out of the evaluation period (by definition without having achieved 6-month seizure freedom) were counted as non-seizure free.

For each subject, a 6-month period was defined as starting at the latest of the three following dates:

- -Visit 3 date
- -Escalation visit 1 date + 21 days
- -Escalation visit 2 date + 21 days

The end date of the 6-month seizure-freedom evaluation period was equal to the start date + 181 days, so that the number of evaluated days was 182.

## Secondary efficacy variables

- Proportion  of  subjects  from  the  intention-to-treat  (ITT)  population  with  6-month  seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose.
- Proportion of subjects from a subset of the per-protocol (SPP) population with 6-month seizure freedom at the last  evaluated  dose.  The  subset  (SPP)  excluded  subjects  who  dropped  out  for reasons not linked to efficacy before achieving 6-month seizure freedom.
- Proportion of subjects from the PP population with 1-year seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose.
- Time to first seizure at the last evaluated dose in the PP population.
- Time to withdrawal at the last evaluated dose in the PP population.

## Exploratory variables

- Direct cost parameters for concomitant medications, medical procedures, additional physician visits, emergency room visits and hospitalizations.
- Indirect cost parameters: number of school or working days lost.

## Statistical methods

The subject populations for analysis were the following:

- The ITT population was defined as all randomized subjects who took at least one dose of either trial medication.
- The PP population was defined as the subset of the intention-to-treat population, consisting of those  subjects  who  had  no  major  protocol  deviations  affecting  the  efficacy  variables.  This subset was defined during a pre-analysis data review meeting before the trial was unblinded.
- The SPP population was defined as the subset of the primary efficacy analysis PP. It excluded all subjects discontinuing the study before having reached 6 months of seizure-freedom for any reason not linked to efficacy.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- The primary efficacy variable was defined as the proportion of subjects from the PP population with 6-month seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose. The analysis was performed by the mean of a logistic regression model, including as factors, the treatment (CBZ vs LEV) and the seizure  type  category  as  last  assessed  (IA/IB/IC  with  clear  focal  origin  vs  IC/IIE  generalized tonic-clonic  seizures  without  clear  focal  origin).  The  parameters  estimated  from  this  model were  used  to  derive  an  adjusted  absolute  difference  (LEV  -  CBZ)  and  its  95  %  two-sided confidence interval. This confidence interval was thus compared to the non-inferiority limit set to -15 % in order to define if LEV could be considered as non-inferior to CBZ on the primary efficacy variable.

The treatment by seizure type and treatment by country interactions on the primary efficacy variable were assessed. A sensitivity analysis on the primary efficacy variable was also performed including aetiology as an additional factor in the logistic regression model.

- The proportion of subjects from the ITT and SPP populations with 6-month seizure freedom at the  last  evaluated  dose  and  the  proportion  of  subjects  from  the  PP  population  with  1-year seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose were all analyzed using the same logistic regression model as for the primary efficacy analysis.
- The time to first seizure and the time to withdrawal were both computed at the last evaluated dose  and  analyzed  by  the  Kaplan-Meier  survival  method  for  the  PP  population.  For  both variables, the median time to event and its 95 % two-sided confidence interval were presented for  each  treatment  arm  together  with  the  hazard  ratio  of  LEV/CBZ  and  its  95  %  two-sided confidence interval. No non-inferiority comparison was performed on these variables.
- Safety parameters were listed and analyzed descriptively by treatment group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## RESULTS

The participant flow is displayed in Figure 2 below.

<!-- image -->

## Recruitment

The first subject was enrolled on 20 June 2002 and the last subject was enrolled on 12 July 2005.

## Baseline data

Demographic characteristics for the LEV and CBZ groups are shown in Table I.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table I. Demographics of the study population in Study N01061

|                                              | Descriptive statistics   | CBZ N=291                     | LEV N=285                      | Overall N=576                               |
|----------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| Age (years)                                  | Mean (SD) Min - Max      | 39.04 (15.83) 15.9 - 82.5     | 39.79 (16.60) 15.1 - 81.3      | 39.41 (16.21) 15.1 - 82.5                   |
| Age class < 16 16 - < 65 ≥ 65                | n (%) n (%) n (%)        | 1 (0.3) 269 (92.4) 21 (7.2)   | 2 (0.7) 257 (90.2) 26 (9.1)    | 3 (0.5) 526 (91.3) 47 (8.2)                 |
| Gender Male Female                           | n (%) n (%)              | 171 (58.8) 120 (41.2)         | 146 (51.2) 139 (48.8)          | 317 (55.0) 259 (45.0)                       |
| Asian Islander Other Weight (kg) Height (cm) | n (%) n (%) Mean         | 4 (1.4) 9 (3.1) 73.62 (15.20) | 1 (0.4) 17 (6.0) 73.65 (16.75) | 5 (0.9) 26 (4.5) 73.63 (15.97) 39.0 - 134.0 |
|                                              | (SD) Min - Max           | 39.0 - 133.0                  | 42.0 - 134.0                   |                                             |
| BMI (kg/m²)                                  | Mean (SD) Min - Max      | 171.1 (9.7) 143 - 203         | 170.0 (9.7) 140 - 198          | 170.6 (9.7) 140 - 203                       |
|                                              | Mean (SD) Min - Max      | 25.11 (4.61) 14.6 - 47.7      | 25.45 (5.17) 14.8 - 45.3       | 25.27 (4.89) 14.6 - 47.7                    |

As the primary efficacy analysis was performed on the PP population, a summary of the history of epilepsy  and  of  the  etiologies  of  epilepsy  at  last  available  assessment  is  presented  for  the  PP population in Table II and III respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table II. History of Epilepsy - PP Population

|                                                                                     | Descriptive statistics        | CBZ N=235                                      | LEV N=237                                | Overall N=472                                  |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| History of withdrawal seizures                                                      | n (%)                         | 0                                              | 0                                        | 0                                              |
| History of convulsive status epilepticus                                            | n (%)                         | 0                                              | 0                                        | 0                                              |
| History of non-convulsive status epilepticus                                        | n (%)                         | 0                                              | 0                                        | 0                                              |
| N of seizures in the past year                                                      | n Median Q1 - Q3              | 232 3.0 2.0 - 10.0                             | 237 4.0 2.0 - 10.0                       | 469 3.0 2.0 - 10.0                             |
| N of seizures in the past year categories < 2 ≥ 2 - < 5 ≥ 5 - < 15 ≥ 15 Unknown     | n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) | 2 (0.9) 144 (61.3) 42 (17.9) 44 (18.7) 3 (1.3) | 0 138 (58.2) 52 (21.9) 47 (19.8) 0       | 2 (0.4) 282 (59.7) 94 (19.9) 91 (19.3) 3 (0.6) |
| N of seizures in the last 3 months                                                  | n Median Q1 - Q3              | 233 2.0 1.0 - 4.0                              | 237 2.0 1.0 - 4.0                        | 470 2.0 1.0 - 4.0                              |
| N of seizures in the last 3 months categories < 1 ≥ 1 - < 4 ≥ 4 - < 10 ≥ 10 Unknown | n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) n (%) | 3 (1.3) 163 (69.4) 35 (14.9) 32 (13.6) 2 (0.9) | 2 (0.8) 154 (65.0) 45 (19.0) 36 (15.2) 0 | 5 (1.1) 317 (67.2) 80 (16.9) 68 (14.4) 2 (0.4) |
| Epilepsy duration (years)                                                           | Median Q1 - Q3                | 0.73 0.33 - 2.36                               | 0.77 0.29 - 2.24                         | 0.75 0.31 - 2.30                               |
| Age at onset (years)                                                                | Median Q1 - Q3                | 32.28 20.62 49.13                              | 34.79 21.57 - 49.22                      | 33.48 21.22 - 49.17                            |
| Duration since last seizure (days)                                                  | Median Q1 - Q3                | 10.0 4.0 - 28.0                                | 9.0 3.0 - 23.0                           | 10.0 3.0 - 24.0                                |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table III. Etiology of Epilepsy at Last Available Assessment - PP Population

|                                                           | CBZ N=235 n (%)   | LEV N=237 n (%)   | Overall N=472 n (%)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|
| Unknown                                                   | 149 (63.4)        | 147 (62.0)        | 296 (62.7)            |
| Idiopathic (genetic origin, familial history of epilepsy) | 1 (0.4)           | 1 (0.4)           | 2 (0.4)               |
| Congenital malformation                                   | 10 (4.3)          | 7 (3.0)           | 17 (3.6)              |
| Asphyxia during birth                                     | 6 (2.6)           | 9 (3.8)           | 15 (3.2)              |
| Complication due to prematurity                           | 4 (1.7)           | 1 (0.4)           | 5 (1.1)               |
| Cranial trauma                                            | 36 (15.3)         | 27 (11.4)         | 63 (13.3)             |
| Cerebral neoplasm                                         | 1(0.4)            | 2 (0.8)           | 3 (0.6)               |
| Brain surgery                                             | 2 (0.9)           | 2 (0.8)           | 4 (0.8)               |
| Primary degenerative lesion                               | 2 (0.9)           | 0                 | 2 (0.4)               |
| Cerebrovascular accident                                  | 16 (6.8)          | 26 (11.0)         | 42 (8.9)              |
| Cerebral infection                                        | 2 (0.9)           | 11 (4.6)          | 13 (2.8)              |
| Other                                                     | 8 (3.4)           | 9 (3.8)           | 17 (3.6)              |

## Outcomes and estimation

## Primary efficacy variable:

One hundred seventy three (73.0%) of the PP subjects in the LEV arm were seizure-free for at least 6 months at the last evaluated dose, compared to 171 (72.8%) of the PP subjects in the CBZ arm. The adjusted  absolute  difference  between  LEV  and  CBZ  (95%  two-sided  CI)  obtained  from  a  logistic regression model (including a factor for the seizure type category as last assessed) equalled 0.2% (7.8%; 8.2%). The lower limit of the confidence interval (-7.8%) was thus above the non-inferiority limit set by protocol at -15%.  Results are summarized in Table IV.

Table IV. Six month seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose - PP population

| Statistics                                     | CBZ N=235          | LEV N=237   |
|------------------------------------------------|--------------------|-------------|
| n (%)                                          | 171 (72.8%)        | 173 (73.0%) |
| Adjusted Difference (LEV-CBZ) 95% two-sided CI | 0.2% (-7.8%; 8.2%) |             |

A sensitivity analysis on the primary efficacy variable and including aetiology was also performed. The adjusted absolute difference between LEV and CBZ (95% two-sided CI) obtained from a logistic regression  model  including  the  additional  aetiology  factor  as  last  assessed  equalled  0.1%  (-7.6%; 7.8%), a comparable outcome to the one obtained without including the aetiology factor. In addition, when evaluating the potential interactions between treatment and seizure type, or between treatment and country, no significant differences were observed.

The discrimination between IC (partial onset seizures with secondary generalisation) and IIE (primary generalised tonic-clonic seizures) was not requested for inclusion. At the request of the CHMP, the MAH provided a supplementary analysis of efficacy in patients with Type IC seizures. Seventy-three subjects (12.7%) of the ITT population were classified at their last available assessment in the 'IC/IIE without clear focal origin' category and it was therefore impossible to separate subjects with seizures IC from those with seizures IIE within this subset. Within the 503 (87.3%) ITT subjects classified at their  last  available  assessment in the category 'IA/IB/IC with clear focal origin', it was possible to

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

identify those reporting partial seizures Type IC). The efficacy results for this subset are presented in table V below.

Table  V.  Six-month  seizure  freedom  at  the  last  evaluated  dose  in  the  entire  population  and  in  the subset of subjects reporting some IC seizures -ITT and PP populations

| Population   | Statistics                                   | Entire Population   | Entire Population   | Subset of Subjects Reporting Some IC Seizures   | Subset of Subjects Reporting Some IC Seizures   |
|--------------|----------------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
|              |                                              | CBZ                 | LEV                 | CBZ                                             | LEV                                             |
| PP           | n seizure free / N (%)                       | 171 / 235 (72.8%)   | 173 / 237 (73.0%)   | 113 / 145 (77.9%)                               | 110 / 139 (79.1%)                               |
|              | Adjusted Difference (LEV-CBZ) 95% 2-sided CI | -                   | 0.2 (-7.8; 8.2)     | -                                               | 1.2 (-8.3; 0.8)                                 |
| ITT          | n seizure free / N (%)                       | 194 / 291 (66.7%)   | 190 / 285 (66.7%)   | 126 / 177 (71.2%)                               | 118 / 166 (71.1%)                               |
|              | Adjusted Difference (LEV-CBZ) 95% 2-sided CI | -                   | 0.1 (-7.4; 7.5)     | -                                               | -0.1 (- 9.7;9.5)                                |

## Secondary efficacy endpoints

- Proportion  of  subjects  from  the  intention-to-treat  (ITT)  population  with  6-month  seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose (see Table VI).

TableVI. Six month seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose - ITT

| Statistics                                     | CBZ N=291          | LEV N=285   |
|------------------------------------------------|--------------------|-------------|
| n (%)                                          | 194 (66.7%)        | 190 (66.7%) |
| Adjusted Difference (LEV-CBZ) 95% two-sided CI | 0.1% (-7.4%; 7.5%) |             |

When using the SPP population, the adjusted absolute difference between LEV and CBZ (95% twosided CI) equalled -2.1% (-8.1%; 3.9%).

- Proportion of subjects from the PP population with 1-year seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose (see Table VII).
- Time to first seizure and time to withdrawal at the last evaluated dose in the PP population.

Table VII. One year seizure freedom at the last evaluated dose - PP population

| Statistics                                     | CBZ                  | LEV         |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|
|                                                | N=224                | N=228       |
| n (%)                                          | 131 (58.5%)          | 129 (56.6%) |
| Adjusted Difference (LEV-CBZ) 95% two-sided CI | -1.8% (-10.8%; 7.2%) |             |

The Kaplan-Meier analysis on time to first seizure and time to withdrawal at the last evaluated dose both confirmed the similarity of efficacy observed in the two treatment groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Disposition of patients and reasons for discontinuations

More subjects discontinued the study because of adverse events in CBZ group (19.3 %) than in the LEV group (14.7 %), while more subjects discontinued the study because of lack of efficacy in the LEV group (17,5 %) than in the CBZ group (10.0 %), as shown in Table VIII.

Table VIII . Reasons for discontinuations in study N01061

|                       | CBZ (N = 291) n (%)   | LEV (N = 285) n (%)   |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Completed             | 156 (53.6%)           | 154 (54.0%)           |
| Discontinued          | 135 (46.4%)           | 131 (46.0%)           |
| Adverse event         | 56 (19.2%)            | 42 (14.7%)            |
| Lack of efficacy      | 29 (10.0%)            | 50 (17.5%)            |
| Lost to follow-up     | 8 (2.7%)              | 5 (1.8%)              |
| Protocol violation    | 17 (5.8%)             | 11 (3.9%)             |
| Withdrawal of consent | 17 (5.8%)             | 16 (5.6%)             |
| Other reason          | 8 (2.7%)              | 7 (2.5%)              |

The  subject  disposition  by  visit  from  randomization  visit  to  evaluation  visit  in  the  ITT  population showed that more patients on CBZ could remain on dose level 1 till the end of the study whilst more patients in the LEV group had to escalate to dose level 2 (28.8 % for LEV vs. 18.9 % for CBZ), and also to dose level 3 (15.8 % for LEV vs. 8.2 % for CBZ). At dose level 3, 31 patients in the LEV group discontinued due to lack of efficacy versus 13 for CBZ.

## DISCUSSION ON CLINICAL EFFICACY

The clinical efficacy programme was based on a pivotal non-inferiority active controlled monotherapy study. The design of the study and the primary endpoint are in accordance with the recommendations in the CHMP epilepsy guideline. The choice of CBZ as comparator and the choice of doses for LEV and CBZ are considered adequate.

The proportion of patients who were seizure-free for at least 6 months at their last evaluated dose was similar in the two groups in the primary analysis with an adjusted absolute difference between LEV and CBZ of 0.2% (-7.8%; 8.2%). The choice of -15 % as non-inferiority limit might be considered too high, but the observed lower limit of the confidence interval was well above -15 %. In addition, the MAHs'  supplementary  analysis  of  efficacy  in  patients  with  partial  onset  seizures  with  secondary generalisation has shown that the results are consistent with those observed in the entire population.

The  efficacy  data  show  that  control  of  seizures  was  achieved  at  dose  level  1  in  a  slightly  higher percentage  of  patients  in  the  CBZ  group  than  in  the  LEV  group.  However,  these  differences  were relatively small and the total proportion of patients with 6 months seizure freedom for all 3 dose levels was similar for LEV and CBZ. The CHMP considered that the posology used in the study for Keppra was adequate.

Based on the above elements, it can be concluded that the pivotal study comparing LEV (1000 to 3000 mg/day) to CBZ (400 to 1200 mg/day) has demonstrated the non-inferiority of LEV as compared to CBZ in reaching 6-month seizure freedom in monotherapy in newly or recently diagnosed subjects with epilepsy experiencing partial or generalized tonic-clonic seizures.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical safety

## PATIENT EXPOSURE

The safety data are primarily derived from subjects who participated in the pivotal study N01061. A total of 576 subjects were included in the ITT population, 291 in the CBZ group and 285 in the LEV group. A total of 426 subjects were exposed to the study drug for at least 6 months.

The mean duration of exposure to treatment with CBZ and LEV were 302 and 316 days, respectively. The mean actual dose was similar in the ITT and PP populations. The mean daily doses in the ITT population  were  434.1  mg  in  the  CBZ  group  and  1170.4  in  the  LEV  group.  These  means  are  only slightly higher than dose level 1 due to the fact that the majority of subjects remained at dose level 1.

## ADVERSE EVENTS

Overall, during the randomized treatment period (dose finding, evaluation and maintenance periods), 235 (80.8%) subjects in the CBZ group and 227 (79.6%) subjects in the LEV group experienced at least  one  treatment  emergent  adverse  event  (TEAE).  The  intensity  of  most  TEAEs  was  mild  or moderate.

The  most  common  TEAEs  ( ≥ 5%)  in  the  CBZ  group  were  headache  (25.4%),  fatigue  (14.1%), dizziness  (13.7%),  nausea  (10.7%),  nasopharyngitis  (9.6%),  somnolence  (9.3%),  influenza  (8.6%), back pain (6.9%), diarrhoea (6.5%), weight increased (6.5%) and rash (5.5%).

The  most  common  TEAEs  ( ≥ 5%)  in  the  LEV  group  were  headache  (20.7%),  fatigue  (16.5%), somnolence (11.2%), dizziness (10.9%), nasopharyngitis (9.1%), influenza (8.6%), diarrhoea (7.4%), nausea (7.0%), depression (6.3%), insomnia (6.0%) and vertigo (5.3%).

The  most  common  TEAEs  ( ≥ 5%  in  one  treatment  group)  with  different  incidences  (based  on  a difference of ≥ 3%) between both treatment groups are presented in Table IX.

Table  IX.  Most  common  ( ≥ 5  %  in  one  treatment  group)  TEAEs  with  different  ( ≥ 3  %)  incidences between both treatment groups - ITT.

| MedDRA Preferred term   | CBZ N=291 n (%)   | LEV N=285 n (%)   |
|-------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Back pain               | 20 (6.9)          | 8 (2.8)           |
| Depression              | 6 (2.1)           | 18 (6.3)          |
| Headache                | 74 (25.4)         | 59 (20.7)         |
| Insomnia                | 7 (2.4)           | 17 (6.0)          |
| Nausea                  | 31 (10.7)         | 20 (7.0)          |
| Weight increased        | 19 (6.5)          | 9 (3.2)           |

## SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS/DEATHS/OTHER SIGNIFICANT EVENTS

A total of 47 subjects, 29 (10.0%) subjects in the CBZ group and 18 (6.3%) subjects in the LEV group experienced  at  least  one  serious  adverse  event  (SAE)  during  the  randomized  treatment  period.  The numbers of SAEs by SOC were similar in both treatment groups; 8 SAEs were reported in the UCB SOC Psychiatric disorders, 4 in each treatment group; 1 SAE was reported in the UCB SOC Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders, in the CBZ group.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

There were a total of 5 deaths in the studies. Two deaths were reported during study N01061, both in the CBZ group, 1 as outcome of a lung neoplasm and 1 as outcome of a gun shot wound. One subject of  the  LEV  group  died  2.5  months  after  stopping  the  study  drug.  This  patient  had  at  study  entry multiple diseases which included diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, atherosclerosis,  obesity  and  several  strokes  /  brain  haemorrhages.  Considering  the  patient's  medical history, it appears likely that the status epilepticus was related to the patients cerebrovascular disease and that the causal relationship with the study drug is unlikely.

Three  pregnancies  occurred  during  the  study,  all  in  the  CBZ  group.  One  pregnancy  occurred  in  a subject taking oral contraceptives. Two ended by an induced abortion and 1 by a normal delivery.

## DISCONTINUATION DUE TO ADVERSE EVENTS

A total of 97 subjects, 56 (19.2%) in the CBZ group and 41 (14.4%) in the LEV group experienced at least  one  adverse  event  that  led  to  permanent  study  drug  discontinuation  (PTAE)  during  the randomized  treatment  period.  The  incidence  of  study  drug  discontinuations  was  higher  during  the dose-finding period than later in the study. PTAEs occurred during the dose finding period in 26/291 (8.9%) subjects in the CBZ group and in 27/285 (9.5%) of the subjects in the LEV group. A total of 44 subjects, 22 in each treatment group, permanently discontinued the study drug during the first 3 weeks of  exposure.  More  subjects  in  the  CBZ  group  than  in  the  LEV  group  discontinued  the  study  drug because of AEs classified in UCB SOCs Gastrointestinal disorder (9 subjects, 3.1% versus 3 subjects, 1.1%) and Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders (17 subjects, 5.8% versus 4 subjects, 1.4%). More subjects  in  the  LEV  group  than  in  the  CBZ  group  discontinued  the  study  drug  because  of  adverse events  classified  in  the  UCB  SOCs  Nervous  system  disorder  (12  subjects,  4.2%  versus  8  subjects, 2.7%) and Psychiatric disorders (16 subjects, 5.6% versus 11 subjects, 3.8%).

## OTHER SAFETY FINDINGS

Abnormal  laboratory  values  were  evenly  distributed  between  both  treatment  groups.  No  clinical meaningful changes from baseline were observed in blood pressure and pulse rate. Possibly clinically significant weight decreases were observed in 13 (4.7%) subjects in the CBZ group and in 23 (8.6%) subjects  in  the  LEV  group.  Possibly  clinically  significant  weight  increases  were  observed  in  37 (13.4%) subjects in the CBZ group versus 21 (7.8%) subjects in the LEV group. Similar numbers of occurrences  of  PCST  values  for  ECG  QTc  interval  were  reported  in  both  treatment  groups.  A complete review of the ECG recordings was performed by an external cardiologist for subjects from the LEV group presenting the most important changes. There was no evidence of any issues raising undue concern for findings of significant repolarization abnormalities.

## DISCUSSION ON CLINICAL SAFETY

The incidence of TEAEs was similar in the two groups with 80.8 % of the patients in the CBZ group and 79.6 % in the LEV group experiencing at least one TEAE. The spectrum of side effects differs between  LEV  and  CBZ,  with  a  more  frequent  occurrence  of  psychiatric  adverse  events  (including depression,  nervousness  and  insomnia)  in  the  LEV  group,  and  a  more  frequent  occurrence  of  skin reactions  and  some  gastrointestinal  events  (including  rash,  pruritus,  nausea,  vomiting)  in  the  CBZ group.  Further  to  CHMP  request,  the  MAH's  review  of  suicidal  ideation  as  an  adverse  event  in patients exposed to LEV in the monotherapy studies (N01061, N01093, N01091 and N01127) has not provided  evidence  that,  in  this  limited  population,  an  increased  incidence  of  depression,  sleep disturbances, or irritability is linked to increased suicide ideation in patients treated with levetiracetam.

Overall, the safety profile appears slightly more favourable in the LEV group with a lower percentage of patients discontinuing study drug in this group (14.4 % vs. 19.2 % for CBZ), a lower proportion of subjects experiencing at least one SAE during the randomised treatment period in the LEV group (6.3 % vs. 10.0 %) and a lower proportion of subjects reporting at least one AE classified as severe (10.9 %) subjects in the LEV group compared with the CBZ group (15.1%). It should be noted, however,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

that  a  lower  initial  dose  of  LEV  and  a  slower  rate  of  dose  titration  was  used  in  this  study  than  is currently recommended for LEV as adjunctive therapy.

## 5. Pharmacovigilance

## Risk management plan

The CHMP did not require the MAH to submit a risk management plan because the safety profile of Keppra was considered unlikely to be different in monotherapy.

## 6. Overall conclusions and benefit/risk assessment

The  data  provided  support  the  efficacy  of  LEV  used  in  monotherapy  for  the  treatment  of  partial seizures  with  or  without  secondary  generalisation  in  patients  from  16  years  of  age  with  newly diagnosed epilepsy. LEV was shown to be non-inferior to the active comparator CBZ as the proportion of patients who were seizure-free for at least 6 months at their last evaluated dose was similar in the two groups in the primary analysis.

The study also confirmed the safety profile of LEV observed in previous studies in subjects suffering from various epileptic syndromes. Overall, the incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events was similar in both groups, but the spectrum of side effects differed with a more frequent occurrence of psychiatric adverse events (including depression, nervousness and insomnia) in the LEV group, and a higher frequency of some gastrointestinal events and allergic skin reactions including rash and pruritus in the CBZ group.

In light of this favourable benefit/risk profile and the clarifications provided by the MAH, Keppra may be recommended as monotherapy for the treatment of patients with partial onset seizures with or without secondary generalisation in patients from 16 years of age with newly diagnosed epilepsy. The CHMP agreed on the amendments to be introduced in the Summary of Product Characteristics and Package Leaflet.