---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:36:46
document_pages: 25
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/mabcampath-h-c-353-ii-30-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: mabcampath-h-c-353-ii-30-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 15.2488322
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-26 09:33:35.538773
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION Invented name/Name : MabCampath International non-proprietary name/Common name: alemtuzumab Extension of the indication: treatment of patients with B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (B-CLL) for whom fludarabine combination chemotherapy is not appropriate edicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

Alemtuzumab is a recombinant DNA-derived humanized monoclonal antibody that is directed against the 21-28 kD cell surface glycoprotein, CD52. Alemtuzumab is produced in mammalian cell (Chinese hamster ovary) suspension culture in a medium containing neomycin. Neomycin is not detectable in the final product. Alemtuzumab is a sterile, clear, colourless, isotonic solution for injection.

Alemtuzumab  exerts  its  therapeutic  activity  by  initially  binding  to  the  CD52  antigen,  which subsequently leads to lysis of target cells by antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) or  complement-mediated  cytotoxicity.  Alemtuzumab  is  a  genetically  engineered  humanized  IgG1 kappa  monoclonal  antibody  specific  for  the  antigen  CD52,  a  21-28  kD  lymphocyte  cell  surface glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol-linked  glycoprotein  comprised  of  12  amino  acids.  The  CD52  gene product is abundantly expressed at approximately 5 × 10 5 molecules/cell, making it a good target for complement-mediated attack on lymphocytes. It is thought that the efficiency of anti-CD52 antibodies in lympholysis may be due in part to the small size of the CD52 molecule and its lateral mobility due to  its  GPI-anchorage.  The  functions  of  the  CD52  antigen  are  unknown,  though  it  is  not  present  on CD34+ haematopoietic  stem  cells.  Since  alemtuzumab  does  not  deplete  haematopoietic  stem  cells, immune system reconstitution follows therapy. MabCampath  (alemtuzumab)  was  granted  a  marketing  authorisation  at  the  6 th of  July  2001  for  the treatment of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) who have been treated with alkylating agents and who have failed to achieve a complete or partial response or achieved only a short remission (less than 6 months) following fludarabine phosphate therapy. The  Marketing  Authorisation  was  granted  \"under  exceptional  circumstances\"  because  it  would  be contrary to generally accepted principles of medicinal ethics to perform comparative Phase III trials in patients who have failed previous treatment therefore no alternative comparator exists. A comparison to best supportive care/placebo was not considered an option at the time of approval. The MAH agreed to provide,  as  requested  by  the  CHMP,  data  that  was  to  form  the  basis  of  a  re-assessment  of  the benefit/risk ratio of MabCampath. The study, CAM307 a phase III study entitled 'A Phase III study to evaluate  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  front-line  therapy  with  alemtuzumab  vs  chlorambucil  in  patients with progressive B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia'. Updates from the study have been submitted on a yearly basis as a part of the annual reassessment procedure. The study enrolled 297 patients by July 2004, when enrolment was stopped.  Database lock occurred August 2006 and the final clinical study report has now been submitted for evaluation in order to get approval for a first-line indication in B-CLL. 2. Clinical aspects Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) is a neoplastic disorder characterized by increased numbers of clonal leukaemic cells that appear as mature lymphocytes. In most cases, these cells express B-cell markers,  have  prolonged  cell  survival,  and  accumulate  in  the  blood,  bone  marrow,  and  lymphatic organs. As a result, patients with this disease commonly present with lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly and symptoms of fatigue, weight loss and malaise. As the disease progresses  bone  marrow  replacement  by  the  disease  process  leads  to  anaemia,  neutropaenia  and thrombocytopenia. edicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

Patients with CLL are generally immunosuppressed due to both the underlying disease and the toxicity of prior chemotherapies. As a result of this immuosuppression, infection is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in CLL. Up to 80% of patients with CLL will experience an infection, ranging from moderate to life threatening, during the course of their disease and infection accounts for up to 60% of the  deaths  of  these  patients.  The  stage  of  disease  (i.e.  Rai  or  Binet  stage)  and  intensity  of  previous therapy is clearly correlated with the incidence of infection and median survival in these patients. The survival of CLL patients greatly varies with the stage of their disease.

Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) ranges from periodic observation with treatment of  infectious,  hemorrhagic,  or  immunologic  complications  to  a  variety  of  therapeutic  options,

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

including steroids, alkylating agents (chlorambucil=CLB), purine analogues (fludarabine, cladribine or pentostatin),  combination  chemotherapy,  monoclonal  antibodies  (alemtuzumab  or  rituximab),  and transplant options. Because this disease is generally not curable, occurs in an elderly population, and often progresses slowly, it is most often treated in a conservative fashion. In asymptomatic patients, treatment may be deferred until the patient becomes symptomatic as the disease progresses.

A meta-analysis of randomised trials showed no survival benefit for immediate versus delayed therapy for  patients  with  early  stage  disease,  nor  for  the  use  of  combination  regimens  incorporating  an anthracycline compared with a single-agent alkylator for advanced stage disease. (J Natl Cancer Inst 91 (10): 861-8, 1999).  However, most randomised studies including one from the French Cooperative Group on CLL have showed higher or equivalent response rates for fludarabine as compared to CLB or CAP  (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone) and most showed  an improvement  in progression-free  survival,  though  none  showed  an  advantage  in  OS.    Therefore,  current  first-line therapy includes fludarabine although it must be recognised that purine analogues are more toxic than CLB in terms of granulocytopenic infections, herpes infections, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, and persistent  thrombocytopenia.  The  increased  risk  of  infection  may  persist  for  months  or  years  after treatment with a purine analogue. As stated previously, among large randomised prospective trials of untreated patients, almost all have demonstrated  statistically significant improvements  in  response  rates, event-free survival,  and progression-free survival, but no trial has shown statistically significant improvement in OS. Clinical studies CAM307 , A Phase III Study entitled, 'A Phase III Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Frontline  Therapy  with  alemtuzumab  (Campath ® ,  MabCampath ® )  vs  Chlorambucil  in  Patients  with Progressive B-Cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia', was initiated to confirm the clinical benefit of alemtuzumab in the  treatment  of  B-CLL  and  provide  substantial  evidence  in  support  of  the  use  of alemtuzumab as first-line  therapy.  The  first  patient  was  enrolled  in  December  2001,  and  enrolment was completed with a total of 297 patients in July 2004. The last study treatment was administered in May 2005. The primary objective was to demonstrate that MabCampath is superior to chlorambucil as front-line therapy  in  patients  with  progressive  B-CLL  as  measured  by  progression-free  survival  (PFS). Secondary  objectives  were  to  evaluate  complete  response  (CR)  and  overall  response  rates  (ORR), duration of response, time to alternative treatment, survival, safety, and time to treatment failure. CAM307 was conducted in Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia,  France,  Ireland,  Italy,  Lithuania,  the Netherlands,  Poland,  Serbia,  Slovakia,  United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States,  and  met  the  ethical requirements of Directive 2001/20/EC. In addition, two more sponsored studies are ongoing: CAM314 study  is  a  Phase  III,  prospective,  multicenter,  open-label,  randomized, controlled study to evaluate and compare the efficacy and safety of fludarabine plus alemtuzumab vs fludarabine alone as second-line therapy in patients with B-CLL.  An estimated 300 patients from investigational sites in the North America and Europe will be entered into the study.  Patients will be randomized on a 1:1 basis to one of the two treatment arms. CAM203 is a Phase II, open-label, prospective, multicenter study of subcutaneously (SC) administered  alemtuzumab  as  therapy  for  B-CLL  patients  who  have  been  previously  treated.    This ongoing  study  is  designed  to  assess  safety,  efficacy,  pharmacokinetics,  and  immunogenicity  in previously  treated  B-CLL  patients.    At  least  85  patients  will  be  enrolled  from  investigational  sites worldwide.  This study is also designed to explore the requirement for dose escalation (3, 10, 30 mg) at the beginning of therapy. edicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2.1. Clinical pharmacology

The pharmacokinetic characteristics of alemtuzumab have been described based on data derived from studies conducted in B-CLL patients.  Alemtuzumab pharmacokinetics were originally characterized in a study of 30 alemtuzumab-naïve patients with B-CLL who had failed previous therapy with purine analogues, in which alemtuzumab was administered as a 2-hour IV infusion, at the recommended dose and  schedule,  starting  at  3  mg  and  increasing  to  30 mg  three  times  per  week  for  up  to  12  weeks. Alemtuzumab pharmacokinetics displayed nonlinear elimination kinetics.  After the last 30 mg dose, the  mean volume of distribution at steady-state was 0.1 to 0.4 L/kg.  Systemic clearance decreased with  repeated  administration  due  to  decreased  receptor-mediated  clearance  (i.e.,  loss  of  CD52 receptors in the periphery).  After 12 weeks of dosing, patients exhibited a seven-fold increase in mean AUC.  The mean half-life was 2 to 32 hours after the first 30 mg dose and was 1 to 14 days after the last 30 mg dose.

The loss of CD52 expression on tumour cells was assessed for any sample where at least 1% of the total cell population analyzed was comprised of B-CLL cells, defined by the cell population that coexpressed  CD5  and  CD19.  For  these  samples,  concomitant  loss  of  CD52  expression  (i.e.  0% expression  of  CD52)  on  the  CD5+/CD19+  population  defined  'loss  of  CD52  expression'.  This definition  applies  stringent  criteria  to  'loss  of  CD52  expression,'  and  may  not  fully  account  for transient emergence of a CD52- negative clone(s) or clones that do not fully replace the entire B-CLL population.

While  pharmacokinetic  data  were  not  collected  in  the  submitted  study  CAM307,  the  expression  of CD52, the target antigen on B-CLL cells recognized by alemtuzumab, following exposure of patients to  alemtuzumab  was  assessed,  as  was  the  potential  immunogenicity  of  alemtuzumab  in  patients randomized to the alemtuzumab arm of the trial. Following analyses were performed: · Assessment of the incidence of loss of CD52 expression at the time of relapse or disease progression during or following alemtuzumab therapy. · A  quantitative  analysis  of  the  incidence  and  magnitude  of  HAHA  and  antiidiotypic antibodies at study entry and following exposure to alemtuzumab. CD52 expression The  emergence  of  CD52-negative  lymphocytes  (note:  not  leukaemia  cells)  following  alemtuzumab therapy has been reported in both RA patients and leukaemia (B cell NHL and B-CLL) patients. The primary intent of the assessment of the incidence of loss of CD52 expression at the time of relapse or disease progression during or following alemtuzumab therapy was to determine whether patients who recur  have  loss  of  CD52  expression  on  their  malignant  cells.  These  data  are  relevant  to  the consideration  of  patient  populations  who  received  alemtuzumab  as  the  primary  therapy  and  are candidates for re-treatment with alemtuzumab for second line therapy. Potential mechanisms for loss of CD52 expression, in vitro studies using the Wien 133 cell line were published by Rowan, et al. in 1998.  Rowan,  et  al.  concluded  that  the  defect  in  the  Wien  133  cells  is  reversible,  with  an  unclear molecular mechanism. The CAM307 protocol directed that flow cytometry evaluation of peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate,  when  available,  was  to  be  done  on  study  and  during  follow-up.  This  evaluation  included markers to identify clonal tumour cells, including CD52 expression and CD3 subsets to analyze T-cell subpopulations. Follow-up flow cytometry performed after the end of study drug administration (at 1, 2 , 6 and 24 months post therapy) was also to be performed to assess the emergence of CD52 negative clones  when  patients  relapse  as  well  as  recovery  of  T-cell  populations.  There  was  no  protocolmandated  measurement  of  CD52  expression  at  the  time  of  documented  relapse  or  progression. However, analyses have been performed to evaluate whether there is any relationship between CD52 expression measured at the protocol specified time points (1, 2, 6 and 24 months) and patients' date of relapse or progression. edicinal product no longer authorise

However, given that the preponderance of values at or near the time of progression was at or near 100%,  there  is  little  evidence  that  such  clones,  even  if  they  did  transiently  exist,  succeeded  in

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

emerging to any significance as assessed in this study population. Of the CD52 data available at any time point in patients who received alemtuzumab, loss of expression was observed in only 4 patients, two of which have progressed and this loss was observed only during active alemtuzumab therapy. However prior to progression, CD52 expression returned to essentially 100%.

With relevance to the intent of this analysis, CD52 expression had recovered in both of the patients who progressed prior to their relapse, and therefore, apparent loss of CD52 expression at or near the time of progression has not been observed in any patient. In patients treated with alemtuzumab for whom data are available at or near the time of progression (n=31), the median CD52 expression within ± 30 days of progression was the same, i.e. 100%, in both the alemtuzumab and chlorambucil arms. An expanded analysis of patients for whom CD52 expression data were available from 30 days prior to  any  time  after  progression  yielded  similar  results;  the  median  remained  at  100%.  Of  these  44 patients, only 2 had CD52 expression ≤ 90%. Five patients on the alemtuzumab arm appeared to be primary refractory to alemtuzumab therapy, i.e. their best response to treatment was progression. No loss of CD52 expression was observed in these patients. Immunogenicity of alemtuzumab The  potential  for  immunogenicity  of  recombinant  therapeutic  proteins  exists,  with  the  underlying concern  that  development  of  antibodies  may  affect  therapeutic  outcomes.    In  trials  supporting  the original approvals, anti-alemtuzumab antibodies were measured in previously treated B-CLL patients and  these  data  revealed  minimal  levels  of  immunogenicity  (4  out  of  211  (1.9%))  in  this  patient population.  The levels of antibody measured in three of the four patients were low (164 to 262 U/mL; the  limit  of  detection  reported  for  the  assay  at  that  time  was  160  U/mL).  One  patient  was  antibody negative  up  to  one  month  post-treatment  then  developed  a  high  concentration  of  anti-MabCampath antibody 5 months post-treatment, measured at a single time point. As first line patients may be less immunocompromised than previously treated patients, there was a potential that these patients could have a greater risk of developing anti-MabCampath antibodies. To examine the potential for immunogenicity in the first line population with an expanded database, the incidence of anti-MabCampath antibodies was monitored in CAM307 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and samples that tested positive by ELISA were further analyzed using an anti-MabCampath neutralizing antibody assay. Patient samples from CAM307 were analyzed using a human anti-human antibody (HAHA) ELISA, wherein  test  samples  are  incubated  in  microtitre  plates  coated  with  alemtuzumab  and  bound antiglobulin  is  detected  using  biotin-labelled  alemtuzumab  and  avidin-peroxidase.  The  ELISA response is standardized using an anti-idiotype monoclonal antiglobulin. Samples that tested positive by ELISA were further analyzed using an anti-MabCampath-neutralizing antibody assay. A total of 539  samples  from  125  MabCampath-treated  patients  were  analyzed.  Overall,  13  samples  from  11 patients in CAM307 tested positive (&gt; 444 U/mL) for anti-MabCampath antibody. At baseline, antiMabCampath antibody results were available for 125 patients; among them 1/125 patient (0.8%) tested positive. At the first and second month post-treatment evaluations, 3/117 patients (2.6%) and 3/112 patients  (2.7%)  tested  positive,  respectively.  At  the  sixth  month  post-treatment  evaluation,  6/102 patients (5.9%) tested positive. Overall, a total of 11 out of 133 patients tested (8.3%) had a positive anti-MabCampath antibody result during the follow up period. All of the 13 positive samples were tested  using  the  neutralizing  HUT-72  assay.    Two  of  the  12  post-dose  samples  tested  were  weakly positive for neutralizing antibodies.  These were found to have neutralizing titres of 1 (at 6 months follow-up) and 100 (at 2 months follow-up), respectively. edicinal product no longer authorise

To assess whether development of anti-alemtuzumab antibodies had any effect on efficacy, patients who  were  anti-alemtuzumab  antibody  positive  at  any  time  point  were  evaluated  for  response outcomes.  Based upon the IRRP assessment of response, only one (of 11) patient that tested positive for  the  anti-alemtuzumab  antibody  at  the  2-month  follow-up  time  did  not  respond  to  alemtuzumab therapy.  This non-responder was non-evaluable; the patient was only on treatment for 11 days and refused further treatment due to adverse events.  The remaining patients that tested positive for anti-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

alemtuzumab antibodies during the follow-up period were all responders to alemtuzumab treatment (7 partial responses, 3 complete responses).

Ten of the eleven patients who were antibody-positive did have adverse events that were potentially infusion-related (e.g. fever, chills); most of these events were Grade 1 or 2. However, events in four patients were Grade 3: fever, hypertension, and dyspnea. In addition, there was a grade 4 event of a drug-related anaphylaxis that was considered potentially infusion-related.

2.2. Clinical Efficacy The data presented in this application to support the first-line indication in B-CLL results from the clinical study CAM307. This was a Phase III, open-label, multicenter, randomized, comparative study of MabCampath versus chlorambucil as front line therapy in patients with progressive B-CLL. Eligible patients were to have previously untreated, Rai stage I-IV disease, and be experiencing progression of their B-CLL requiring treatment. Patients were randomized on a 1:1 basis to 1 of 2 treatment arms, Arm A for MabCampath and Arm B for chlorambucil. Patients enrolled in Arm A were treated to a maximum of 12 weeks with MabCampath. Patients enrolled in Arm B were treated to a maximum of 12 months with chlorambucil. Response to treatment was to be determined by the investigator based on  the  1996  NCIWG  criteria.  The  investigator  was  to  determine  the  date  of  progression  for  each patient based on the definitions provided in the protocol. During the post-treatment follow-up period, all patients were to be evaluated for the assessment of disease status, safety, and survival. Patients were to be randomly assigned on a 1:1 basis to one of two treatment arms. Treatment was to begin within 7 days following randomization. · Treatment  arm  A:  MabCampath  30  mg  IV;  three  times  per  week,  up  to  12  total  weeks, inclusive of any dose escalation periods · Treatment arm B: Chlorambucil 40 mg/m2 PO once every 28 days, up to a maximum of 12 months MabCampath was to be administered intravenously (IV) at a daily starting dose of 3 mg. The dose was to be increased to 10 mg when the dose was well tolerated; the same procedure was to be followed when the dose was increased from 10 mg to 30 mg. All subsequent doses of MabCampath were to be 30 mg administered three times per week for up to 12 weeks, inclusive of dose escalation period(s). The primary objective of this study was to demonstrate that MabCampath is superior to chlorambucil as  front-line  therapy  in  patients  with  progressive  B-CLL  as  measured  by  progression-free  survival (PFS). The secondary objectives of this study are to evaluate: · Complete response (CR) and overall response rate (ORR) using the 1996 National Cancer Institute Working Group (NCIWG) criteria, · duration of response, · time to alternative treatment, · survival, · safety, and · time to treatment failure. The efficacy of study treatment was to be determined by assessing progression free survival (PFS), disease response using the NCIWG response criteria, overall survival, duration of response, time to treatment failure, and time to alternative therapy. The safety of study treatment was to be assessed by monitoring the incidence, severity, and type of adverse events. The changes in physical examination results, incidence of infection, vital signs, bone marrow  toxicity,  and  clinical  laboratory  results  were  to  be  evaluated.  The  NCI  Common  Toxicity Criteria (CTC) (version 2.0, 30 April 1999) was to be used by the investigator to grade adverse events. edicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

The planned sample size of this study was 284 patients (142 per treatment arm). Patients were to be randomized on a 1:1 basis to receive either MabCampath (Arm A) or chlorambucil (Arm B). Total enrollment: 297 (213 male; 84 female); Arm A: 149 (50%) and Arm B: 148 (50%)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Patients were to be randomized to receive either MabCampath or chlorambucil as controlled by the IVRS  for  all  study  sites.  Randomization  was  to  be  accomplished  by  utilizing  the  minimization (adaptive randomization) method described by Pocock and Simon using a randomization probability parameter of 0.80. Patients were to be allocated to a cohort group according to a set of predefined variables that would assure a balanced population between the 2 groups. The process of minimization is  superior  to  conventional  randomization  in  that  balance  can  be  achieved  over  a  larger  number  of variables than can otherwise occur through conventional stratified randomization. The system was to be tested and validated according to standard life cycle development process guidelines.

This randomization methodology would ensure a balance between treatment arms by study centre, by Rai stage: (Rai I-II; Rai III-IV), by performance status (WHO = 0 or 1; WHO = 2) By age (&lt;65; ≥ 65), by gender and by maximum lymph node size (none palpable or &lt;5 cm; ≥ 5 cm) All  randomized  patients  were  to  be  evaluated  for  efficacy  on  an  intent-to-treat  (ITT)  basis.  The primary efficacy endpoint in this study was PFS, defined as the time from randomization date to first objective documentation of disease progression or death due to any cause. This study was designed to detect  a  50%  improvement  in  PFS  in  either  the  MabCampath  or  chlorambucil  treatment  arm  (80% power, α =0.05 two-sided). Differences in PFS in the MabCampath versus chlorambucil arm will be tested using the log-rank test, stratified by Rai stage. The primary analysis will be performed on an ITT  basis  for  all  randomized  patients.  The  primary  efficacy  analysis  was  to  be  based  on  an independent  response  review  panel's  determination  of  eligibility  (Rai  stage  and  B-CLL  diagnosis), response, and date of disease progression after response for all patients. Summary statistics included sample size, mean, standard deviation, median, and range for continuous variables,  where  appropriate;  number  and  percent  were  to  be  used  for  categorical  variables.  All confidence  intervals  for  parameters  to  be  estimated  were  constructed  with  a  significance  level  of alpha = 0.05. Kaplan-Meier analyses of time-to-event variables were done using PROC LIFETEST in Statistical Application Software (SAS). Toxicities,  including  laboratory  results,  were  evaluated  using  the  NCI  Common  Toxicity  Criteria. Adverse  events,  serious  adverse  events,  and  infections  were  tabulated  using  the  MedDRA  coding system (version 9). Results Baseline data Table 1 below summarizes the demographic characteristics across the two treatment arms for the ITT population, i.e., all patients who were randomized to a treatment arm. Patients  in  each  treatment  arm  were  well  balanced  for  pre-defined  prognostic  factors  including  Rai stage, performance status, age, sex, and maximum lymph node size.  Overall, there were more male than  female  patients,  213/297  male  (71.7%)  and  84/297  female  (28.3%),  enrolled  in  the  study; however, the treatment arms were balanced for males and females, 106/149 male (71.1%) and 43/149 female  (28.9%)  patients  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  and  107/148  male  (72.3%)  and  41/148  female (27.7%) patients in the chlorambucil arm.  The majority of the study population was &lt;65 years old, 64.6 % (192/297 patients) were &lt;65 years old.  The treatment arms were balanced for age ≥ 65 years old vs &lt;65 years old, 96/149 patients (64.4%) in the alemtuzumab arm and 96/148 patients (64.9%) in the chlorambucil arm were &lt;65 years old and 53/149 patients (35.6%) in the alemtuzumab arm and 52/148 patients (35.1%) in the chlorambucil arm were ≥ 65 years old.  The median age overall was 60 years (range: 35 to 86 years).  The majority of the study population was Rai stage I-II as assessed by both investigator and the IRRP.  The study population was also well balanced by Rai stage by both methods of assessment. edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1: Summary of Patient Demographics (CAM307 ITT Population)

· Primary endpoint: PFS A total of 193 events of PD or deaths were identified, of which 191 events occurred in patients with Rai  stage  I-IV  disease  and  2  events  occurred  in  patients  who  were  either  Rai  stage  0  or  had  an unconfirmed B-CLL diagnosis by the IRRP.  The primary analysis of PFS was based on the IRRP's assessment  of  eligibility  (Rai  stage  and  B-CLL  diagnosis)  and  date  of  progression;  the  191  events occurred in patients with Rai I-IV disease was used. Table 2: Summary of Overall PFS by IRRP Assessment (CAM307) edicinal product no longer authorise

| Variable                 | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Overall (N=297)   |
|--------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| Race                     |                       |                        |                   |
| Caucasian                | 148 (99.3%)           | 147 (99.3%)            | 295 (99.3%)       |
| Hispanic                 | .                     | .                      | .                 |
| Black                    | 1 (0.7%)              | 1 (0.7%)               | 2 (0.7%)          |
| Asian                    | .                     | .                      | .                 |
| Other                    | .                     | .                      | .                 |
| Sex                      |                       |                        |                   |
| Male                     | 106 (71.1%)           | 107 (72.3%)            | 213 (71.7%)       |
| Female                   | 43 (28.9%)            | 41 (27.7%)             | 84 (28.3%)        |
| Age Group                |                       |                        |                   |
| < 65                     | 96 (64.4%)            | 96 (64.9%)             | 192 (64.6%)       |
| >= 65                    | 53 (35.6%)            | 52 (35.1%)             | 105 (35.4%)       |
| Age (Years)              |                       |                        |                   |
| N                        | 149                   | 148                    | 297               |
| Mean (SD)                | 59.8 (9.92)           | 59.2 (10.70)           | 59.5 (10.30)      |
| Median                   | 59.0                  | 60.0                   | 60.0              |
| Range                    | 35, 86                | 36, 83                 | 35, 86            |
| Rai Stage (Investigator) |                       | longer                 |                   |
| 0                        | .                     | 2 (1.4%)               | 2 (0.7%)          |
| I                        | 37 (24.8%)            | 32 (21.6%)             | 69 (23.2%)        |
| II                       | 61 (40.9%)            | 63 (42.6%)             | 124 (41.8%)       |
| III                      | 23 (15.4%)            | 22 (14.9%)             | 45 (15.2%)        |
| IV                       | 28 (18.8%)            | 29 (19.6%)             | 57 (19.2%)        |
| Rai Stage (IRRP)         |                       |                        |                   |
| 0                        | 4 (2.7%)              | 1 (0.7%)               | 5 (1.7%)          |
| I                        | 50 (33.6%)            | 54 (36.5%)             | 104 (35.0%)       |
| II                       | 43 (28.9%) no         | 42 (28.4%)             | 85 (28.6%)        |
| III                      | 24 (16.1%)            | 25 (16.9%)             | 49 (16.5%)        |
| IV                       | 26 (17.4%)            | 24 (16.2%)             | 50 (16.8%)        |
| Missing                  | 2 (1.3%)              | 2 (1.4%)               | 4 (1.3%)          |

| Overall Statistic           | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Unadjusted          | Adjusted by Rai Group   |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|
| N                           | 149                   | 148                    | .                   | .                       |
| KMMedian (95% CI) in months | 14.6 (12.3, 21.7)     | 11.7 (9.9, 13.2)       | .                   | .                       |
| Min, Max                    | 0.6, 25.1             | 0.3, 27.9              | .                   | .                       |
| %Censored                   | 45.0                  | 26.4                   | .                   | .                       |
| p-value a                   | .                     | .                      | 0.0002              | 0.0001                  |
| Hazard Ratio (95% CI) b     | .                     | .                      | 0.58 (0.435, 0.775) | 0.58 (0.431, 0.768)     |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(95%  confidence  interval  [CI]:  0.431,  0.768)  after  adjustment  by  Rai  stage  group  (I-II  vs  III-IV), meaning  that  the  risk  of  progression  or  death  in  treatment  naïve  B-CLL  patients  treated  with alemtuzumab is 42% less than for those treated with chlorambucil.

The overall Kaplan-Meier median PFS was 14.6 months (95% CI: 12.3, 21.7 months) for patients in the alemtuzumab arm and 11.7 months (95% CI: 9.9, 13.2 months) for patients in the chlorambucil arm based on the IRRP determination of PD.

<!-- image -->

-

| Months On Study   | Alemtuzumab a (N=149)   | Chlorambucil a (N=148)   |   EstimatedHR |
|-------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|---------------|
| 6 Months          | 83.7% (77.5%, 89.9%)    | 72.2% (64.8%, 79.6%)     |          0.94 |
| 12 Months         | 58.7% (50.3%, 67.1%)    | 48.3% (39.8%, 56.9%)     |          0.69 |
| 18 Months         | 46.3% (37.8%, 54.8%)    | 23.8% (16.3%, 31.3%)     |          0.3  |
| 24 Month          | 38.6% (30.0%, 47.3%)    | 18.9% (11.8%, 26.0%)     |          0.54 |

-

Figure 1 below shows two Kaplan-Meier curves as separating early and remaining separated with the difference increasing over time; the difference in treatment effect on PFS between alemtuzumab and chlorambucil was statistically significant (p=0.0001, stratified log-rank test). Figure 1: Kaplan-Meier Curve for PFS by Treatment Arm based on IRRP Assessment Data Source: CAM307, Figure 14.2.1-2(a) Table 3 presents the cumulative probability of PFS from the Kaplan-Meier analysis and an estimated hazard ratio calculated using the Life Table method at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months on-study time.  The relative difference between the 2 arms increases at 18 and 24 months with the estimated hazard ratios generally  smaller  in  the  second  year  of  the  study  suggesting  a  stronger  benefit  of  alemtuzumab treatment with longer follow-up, despite the shorter duration of treatment (median of 11.7 weeks on alemtuzumab vs. 28.3 weeks on chlorambucil). Table 3: Probability of PFS at Every 6-Month Intervals (CAM307 ITT Population) a Probability of progression-free survival is calculated using Kaplan-Meier methods. edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## · Secondary endpoints

## Disease Response to treatment

Table 4 provides a summary of best response to treatment for the ITT population (N=297).

Table 4: Summary of Treatment Response by IRRP Assessment (CAM307)

(N=149) Response Category a,b n (%) ORR 124 (83.2%) CR 36 (24.2%) PR 88 (59.1%) SD 9 (6.0%) PD 5 (3.4%) NE 11 (7.4%) Stage I-II f 93 ORR 81 (87.1%) CR 27 (29.0%) PR 54 (58.1%) SD 4 (4.3%) PD 1 (1.1%) NE 7 (7.5%) Stage III-IV f 50 ORR 38 (76.0%) CR 7 (14.0%) PR 31 (62.0%) SD 4 (8.0%) PD 4 (8.0%) NE 4 (8.0%) -a ORR: Overall Response Rate=CR+PR, CR: Complete Response, PR: Partial Response, SD: Stable Disease, PD: Disease Progression, NE: not evaluable or not assessed. -b Patients whose response cannot be evaluated will be treated as non-responders in order to run the Chi-Square test. -c The 95% confidence interval is calculated using Exact method for binomial. -d This p-value is based on the Pearson Chi-squared test for ORR or Fisher exact method for CR. -e This p-value is based on the CMH method controlling for Rai stage (I-II vs III-IV), missing stratum is considered. -f Denominators for the Rai group (I-II and III-IV) are based on the number of patients in that subgroup, which might differ between IRRP Assessment. -Data Source: CAM307, Table 14.2.1-4 -Program:  t\\_eff\\_resp.sas, 10:31 22DEC06 Per the IRRP-determined response, there was a slightly higher response rate for patients with Rai stage I-II  disease  compared  to  patients  with  Rai  stage  III-IV  disease  in  both  treatment  arms  as  would  be expected.    The  overall  response  rate  for  the  Rai  stage  I-II  patients  was  81/93  patients  (87.1%) compared  to  38/50  patients  (76.0%)  with  Rai  stage  III-IV  disease  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm.    The overall  response  rate  for  the  Rai  stage  I-II  patients  was  61/96  patients  (63.5%)  compared  to  19/49 patients  (38.8%)  with  Rai  stage  III-IV  disease  in  the  chlorambucil  arm.    Among  the  patients  that achieved a CR according to the IRRP assessment, there were more Rai stage I-II patients with a CR in the  alemtuzumab  arm  compared  to  the  chlorambucil  arm;  27/93  patients  (29.0%)  were  in  the alemtuzumab arm and 3/96 patients (3.1%) were in the chlorambucil arm.  Similarly, among the Rai stage III-IV patients that responded with a CR, 7/50 patients (14.0%) were in the alemtuzumab arm and no patients were in the chlorambucil arm.  Confidence intervals were only calculated for ORR and CR.  Differences in both ORR and CR rate were statistically significant in each Rai stage subgroup. edicinal product no longer authorise

|                       | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   |           |           |
|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|-----------|-----------|
| Response Category a,b | n (%)                 | 95% CI c              | n (%)                  | 95% CI c               | p-value d | p-value e |
| ORR                   | 124 (83.2%)           | (76.2%, 88.8%)        | 82 (55.4%)             | (47.0%, 63.6%)         | <.0001    | <.0001    |
| CR                    | 36 (24.2%)            | (17.5%, 31.8%)        | 3 (2.0%)               | (0.4%, 5.8%)           | <.0001    | <.0001    |
| PR                    | 88 (59.1%)            | .                     | 79 (53.4%)             | .                      |           |           |
| SD                    | 9 (6.0%)              | .                     | 42 (28.4%)             | .                      |           |           |
| PD                    | 5 (3.4%)              | .                     | 18 (12.2%)             | .                      |           |           |
| NE                    | 11 (7.4%)             | .                     | 6 (4.1%)               | .                      |           |           |
| Stage I-II f          | 93                    | .                     | 96                     | .                      | .         | .         |
| ORR                   | 81 (87.1%)            | (78.5%, 93.2%)        | 61 (63.5%)             | (53.1%, 73.1%)         | 0.0002    | .         |
| CR                    | 27 (29.0%)            | (20.1%, 39.4%)        | 3 (3.1%)               | (0.6%, 8.9%)           | <.0001    | .         |
| PR                    | 54 (58.1%)            | .                     | 58 (60.4%)             | .                      |           | .         |
| SD                    | 4 (4.3%)              | .                     | 28 (29.2%)             | .                      |           | .         |
| PD                    | 1 (1.1%)              | .                     | 6 (6.3%)               | .                      |           | .         |
| NE                    | 7 (7.5%)              | .                     | 1 (1.0%)               | .                      |           | .         |
| Stage III-IV f        | 50                    | .                     | 49                     | .                      | .         | .         |
| ORR                   | 38 (76.0%)            | (61.8%, 86.9%)        | 19 (38.8%)             | (25.2%, 53.8%) longer  | 0.0002    | .         |
| CR                    | 7 (14.0%)             | (5.8%, 26.7%)         | 0 (0.0%)               | (0.0%, 7.3%)           | 0.0125    | .         |
| PR                    | 31 (62.0%)            | .                     | 19 (38.8%)             | .                      |           | .         |
| SD                    | 4 (8.0%)              | .                     | 14 (28.6%)             | .                      |           | .         |
| PD                    | 4 (8.0%)              | .                     | 12 (24.5%)             | .                      |           | .         |
| NE                    | 4 (8.0%)              | .                     | 4 (8.2%)               | .                      |           | .         |

Table  5  below  provides  a  summary  of  best  response  to  treatment  for  the  ITT  population  by  IRRP assessment  and  investigator  assessment  of  overall  response.    The  investigator-determined  ORR (CR + PR) was 115/149 patients (77.2%) in the alemtuzumab arm, which was slightly lower compared to  the  IRRP-determined  ORR  of  124/149  patients  (83.2%).    The  investigator-determined  ORR (CR+PR) was 60/148 patients  (40.5%)  in  the  chlorambucil  arm,  which  was  lower  compared  to  the IRRP-determined  ORR  of  82/148  patients  (55.4%).    Per  the  investigators'  assessment  in  the alemtuzumab arm, there were 46/149 patients (30.9%) with a CR and 69/149 patients (46.3%) with a PR; however, the IRRP determined there were 36/149 patients (24.2%) with a CR and 88/149 patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

(59.1%)  with  a  PR.    Per  the  investigators'  assessment  in  the  chlorambucil  arm,  there  were 6/148 patients  (4.1%)  with  a  CR  and  54/148  patients  (36.5%)  with  a  PR;  however,  the  IRRP determined  there  were  3/148  patients  (2.0%)  with  a  CR  and  79/148  patients  (53.4%)  with  a  PR. Although  there  was  not  full  agreement  between  the  IRRP  and  the  investigator  assessments,  both assessments supported the result that alemtuzumab therapy produced a better ORR than chlorambucil therapy.

|              |                     | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   |
|--------------|---------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|------------------------|
| Assessment   | Response Category a | n (%)                 | (95% CI) b            | n (%)                  | (95% CI) b p-value c   |
| IRRP         | ORR                 | 124 (83.2%)           | (76.2%, 88.8%)        | 82 (55.4%)             | (47.0%, 63.6%) <.0001  |
|              | CR                  | 36 (24.2%)            | (17.5%, 31.8%)        | 3 (2.0%)               | (0.4%, 5.8%) <.0001    |
|              | PR                  | 88 (59.1%)            | .                     | 79 (53.4%)             | . .                    |
| Investigator | ORR                 | 115 (77.2%)           | (69.6%, 83.7%)        | 60 (40.5%)             | (32.6%, 48.9%) <.0001  |
|              | CR                  | 46 (30.9%)            | (23.6%, 39.0%)        | 6 (4.1%)               | (1.5%, 8.6%) <.0001    |
|              | PR                  | 69 (46.3%)            | .                     | 54 (36.5%)             | . .                    |

| IRRP Assessment   | Response Category a   | Statistic         | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|
| Overall b         | CR+PR                 | N                 | 124                   | 82                     |
|                   |                       | KMMedian (95% CI) | 16.2 (11.5, 23.0)     | 12.7 (10.2, 14.3)      |
|                   |                       | Min, Max          | 0.7, 23.7             | 3.7, 48.9              |
|                   |                       | %Censored         | 46.0                  | 34.1                   |
| Overall b         | CR                    | N                 | 36                    | 3                      |
|                   |                       | KMMedian (95% CI) | n/e (17.4, n/e)       | n/e (n/e, n/e)         |
|                   |                       | Min, Max          | 4.6, 23.7             |                        |
|                   |                       | %Censored         | 69.4                  | 100.0                  |

-

-

-

-

Table 5. IRRP vs Investigator Assessment of Response (CAM307 ITT Population) -a ORR: Overall Response Rate=CR+PR, CR: Complete Response, PR: Partial Response. -b The 95% confidence interval is calculated using Exact method for binomial. -c This p-value is based on the Pearson Chi-squared test for ORR or Fisher's exact method for CR. -Data Source: CAM307, Table 14.2.1-4 -Program:  t\\_eff\\_resp.sas, 10:31 22DEC06 Duration of Response The  duration  of  response  was  defined  in  the  protocol  as  the  interval  between  the  date  of  the  first documented objective response (CR or PR) to the date of documentation of disease progression or death due to any cause.  However the IRRP determined the date of best response (not the date of first response); therefore, in this section the duration of response is the time from best response to disease progression or death due to any cause. The table below summarizes the duration of response for patients by overall response (CR+PR), CR alone,  and  by  Rai  stage  using  the  IRRP  date.    For  the  overall  response  patients,  the  Kaplan-Meier median  duration  of  response  was  16.2 months  (95% CI: 11.5, 23.0 months)  for  patients  in  the alemtuzumab arm and 12.7 months (95% CI: 10.2, 14.3months) for patients in the chlorambucil arm. Table 6: Summary of Duration of Response per IRRP Assessment (CAM307) a Duration of response in months = (date of first objective measure of disease progression or death - IRRP reported date of best response [CR or PR]+1)/30.4375. b Primary analysis censors patients who are unconfirmed as Rai I-IV per IRRP (n=7 [2 CR+5 PR]) at day 1. n/e: not estimated Data Source: CAM307, Table 14.2.1-5 -Program:  t\\_eff\\_dr.sas, 10:32 22DEC06 edicinal product no longer authorise

## Overall Survival

Overall  survival  is  defined  as  the  time  from  randomization  to  date  of  death  due  to  any  cause. CAM307 was not designed or powered to detect differences in overall survival.

There was no overall difference in survival with a total of 24 deaths in the alemtuzumab arm (83.9% censored), and 24 deaths in the chlorambucil arm (83.8% censored).  There were not enough events or long enough follow-up data to expect to detect a difference in the overall survival.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Time to treatment failure

The time to treatment failure is defined as the time from date of randomization to the earliest date of disease  progression,  death  due  to  any  cause,  or  discontinued  from  study  treatment  due  to  an  AE. Treatment interruption due to an adverse event resulted in treatment delay over 4 weeks (i.e., 9 weeks [8 weeks + 1 week window]) since the last dose for chlorambucil, or 4 weeks since the last scheduled dose for alemtuzumab) are considered discontinuation of treatment for the purpose of comparing time to treatment failure between treatment arms.  The date of treatment failure is taken as the earliest date of  the  documented disease progression, death, or the start date of the AE that resulted in treatment discontinuation.

<!-- image -->

| Time to Treatment Failure Statistic a   | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Statistic b, c        | Unadjusted          | Adjusted by RAI Group   |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|
| N                                       | 149                   | 148                    | p-value               | 0.1551              | 0.1542                  |
| KMMedian (95% CI)                       | 9.8 (7.8, 13.4)       | 11.3 (9.3, 12.9)       | Hazard Ratio (95% CI) | 0.82 (0.625, 1.079) | 0.82 (0.624, 1.077)     |
| Min, Max                                | 0.3,                  | 0.2, 27.9              | .                     | .                   |                         |
|                                         | 22.3                  |                        |                       |                     | .                       |
| %Censored                               | 35.6                  | 22.3                   | .                     | .                   | .                       |

| Statistic a (months)   | Alemtuzumab (N=149)   | Chlorambucil (N=148)   | Statistic b, c, d     | Unadjusted          | Adjusted by Rai Group (IRRP)   |
|------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------|
| N                      | 149                   | 148                    | p-value               | 0.0002              | 0.0001                         |
| KMMedian (95% CI)      | 23.3 (20.7, 31.0)     | 14.7 (12.6, 16.8)      | Hazard Ratio (95% CI) | 0.55 (0.398, 0.753) | 0.54 (0.391, 0.742)            |
| Min, Max               | 0.6, 31.0             | 0.4, 29.9              |                       |                     |                                |
| %Censored              | 56.4                  | 37.2                   |                       |                     |                                |

Table 7 summarizes the time to treatment failure for all patients.  These results showed no statistically significant  difference  between  the  treatment  arms  for  time  to  treatment  failure.    It  is  a  composite endpoint of discontinuations or delays &gt;4 weeks due to adverse events (favouring chlorambucil) and PFS (favouring alemtuzumab).  The overall Kaplan-Meier median time to treatment failure was 9.8 months (95% CI: 7.8, 13.4 months) for patients in the alemtuzumab arm and 11.3 months (95% CI: 9.3, 12.9 months) for patients in the chlorambucil arm based on the IRRP determination of PD with a non-significant  hazard  ratio  of  0.82  (95%  CI:  0.624,  1.077)  benefiting  the  alemtuzumab  arm.    No statistically significant difference between the treatment arms for TTF was observed. Table 7: Summary of Overall Time to Treatment Failure by IRRP Assessment (CAM307 ITT Population) -a Time to treatment failure in months = (date of treatment failure - date of randomization +1)/30.4375 b Comparisons between treatment groups are based on the log-rank test unadjusted or stratified for Rai stage, missing stratum is considered. c Hazard ratios are calculated using the Cox model unadjusted or stratified for Rai stage, missing stratum is considered. Time to alternative treatment During  the  follow-up  period,  59/149 patients  (39.6%)  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  and  86/148  patients (58.1%)  in  the  chlorambucil  arm  had  been  treated  with  an  alternative  or  subsequent  therapy  after discontinuing study treatment.  Table 8 and Figure 2 present the time to alternative treatment results for the ITT patients.  The overall Kaplan-Meier median time to alternative treatment was 23.3 months (95% CI: 20.7, 31.0 months) for patients in the alemtuzumab arm and 14.7 months (95% CI: 12.6, 16.8 months) for patients in the chlorambucil arm, which was highly significant (p=0.0001).  Note that the  time  to  alternative  treatment  does  not  adjust  for  the  difference  in  duration  of  therapy,  which  is important because patients were generally treated for a maximum of 12 weeks with alemtuzumab vs up to 12 months with chlorambucil.  Thus, with a median duration on treatment of 11.7 weeks for alemtuzumab  and  28.3  weeks  for  chlorambucil,  the  difference  in  time  off  active  treatment  is  even greater for the alemtuzumab-treated patients. Table 8: Summary of Time to Alternative Treatment (CAM307 ITT Population) edicinal product no longer authorise

-

a Time to alternative treatment in months = (start date of alternative treatment or death - date of randomization +1)/30.4375.

-b Primary analysis censors patients who are unconfirmed as Rai I-IV per IRRP (n=9, 5 Rai 0 and 4 unconfirmed for B-CLL diagnosis) at day 1.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- -c Comparisons between treatment groups are based on the log-rank test unadjusted or stratified for Rai stage, missing stratum is considered.

-

d Hazard ratios are calculated using Cox model unadjusted or stratified for Rai stage, missing stratum is considered.

Figure 2: Kaplan-Meier Curve for Time to Alternative Treatment by Treatment Arm

Survival

Subgroup analyses Patients  were  randomized  at  enrollment  in  order  to  ensure  a  balance  between  treatment  arms  with respect to the following prognostic factors: Rai stage (Rai stage I-II vs Rai stage III-IV), age ( &lt; 65 vs ≥ 65), gender, performance status (WHO = 0 or 1 vs WHO = 2), and maximum lymph node size (none palpable or &lt; 5 cm vs ≥ 5 cm).  An examination of these subgroups in relation to treatment outcomes of PFS and response rate was conducted. The exploratory analysis of PFS by the prognostic factors that were used to randomize and stratify patients  at  enrollment  generally  showed  a  consistent  effect  across  subgroups  with  a  statistically significant  difference  in  outcome  in  favour  of  alemtuzumab  for  patients &lt; 65 years  old,  for  patients with  maximum  lymph  node  size &lt; 5cm,  male,  female,  and  for  patients  with  performance  status &lt; 2 although the study was not powered to detect differences in each of these subgroups. Discussion on clinical efficacy edicinal product no longer authorise

<!-- image -->

The  data  from  CAM307  demonstrate  superiority  of  alemtuzumab  compared  to  chlorambucil  as assessed by PFS, response rate, and time to alternative therapy in the intent to treat study population of previously  untreated  patients  with  progressive  B-CLL  requiring  first-line  therapy.    Duration  of response  was  also  longer  in  the  alemtuzumab  treated  patients.    The  hazard  ratio  for  PFS  is  0.58 (p=0.0001,  stratified  log  rank  test)  after  adjustment  by  Rai  stage  group,  meaning  that  the  risk  of progression or death in treatment naïve B-CLL patients treated with alemtuzumab is 42% less than for those treated with chlorambucil. In terms of median PFS this improvement is almost 3 months (14.6 months vs. 11.7 months). As expected no clear PFS plateau emerges after 26-30 months on study. The ORR (CR or PR) was also significantly higher in alemtuzumab treated patients (83.2% versus 55.4%; p &lt; 0,0001),  and in absolute values alemtuzumab seems to be very effective in high-tumour burden CLL. Also for the duration of CR+PR endpoint alemtuzumab was superior to chlorambucil. There was a significantly higher percentage of  CR  patients  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  compared  to  the chlorambucil  arm;  24.2%  vs  2.0%,  respectively;  p &lt; 0.0001.    The  overall  median  time  to  alternative treatment was 23.3 months for patients in the alemtuzumab arm and 14.7 months for patients in the chlorambucil arm (p=0.0001, stratified log-rank test).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

As stated previously, all larger randomised clinical trials in CLL for the past two decades have failed to show superiority with regards to overall survival even if the test regimen often was superior for the ORR endpoint and produced a higher CR rate.

Therefore,  clinical  benefit  in  CLL  has  to  be  demonstrated  on  the  basis  of  PFS  and  ORR  and  the relation between a decrease in tumour load and improvement in haemoglobin levels and constitutional symptoms.

2. 3.   Clinical Safety Alemtuzumab has been marketed for the treatment of B-CLL since 2001, and the predominant safety concerns are reasonably well understood.  The approach to monitoring and management of safety in CAM307 was  based  on  prior  experience  with  alemtuzumab  in  previously  treated  B-CLL  patients. CAM307  was  a  multicenter,  2-arm,  randomized,  phase  III  open-label  study  designed  to  compare alemtuzumab (escalation from 3 mg to 30 mg 3 times a week administered intravenously (IV) for up to  12  weeks)  to  chlorambucil  (40 mg/m 2 per  os  (PO)  once  every  28 days,  for  up  to  12  months)  in patients  with  previously  untreated  progressive  B-CLL  (i.e.  'first-line  patients').    The  safety  of alemtuzumab and chlorambucil was assessed by monitoring the incidence, severity, seriousness and relationship  of  AEs  on  the  basis  of  clinical  laboratory  evaluations,  physical  examinations,  and  vital signs.    Adverse  events  were  quantified  by  the  investigators  using  NCI  CTC  grades  and  laboratory toxicities were quantified using NCI CTCAE grades.  In addition, a Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) was convened to formally review the safety and efficacy of study treatment. Exposure to 30 mg of alemtuzumab in 147 first-line patients (CAM307) was as follows: 75 patients (51%)  received  &gt;30  doses,  30  patients  (20%)  received  between  21  to  30 doses,  24 (16%)  patients received between 10 to 20 doses, 14 (10%) patients received between 1-9 doses and four patients (3%) did not receive a single dose of alemtuzumab.  The median cumulative dose was 956 mg.  Median duration of therapy, including treatment delays and interruptions, was 11.7 weeks.  Nearly all patients were able to be treated with the target dose of 30 mg and for almost all patients the 30 mg dose was reached within 5 calendar  days.    The  median  number  of  weeks  of  chlorambucil  exposure  was  28.3 weeks.  The median cumulative dose of chlorambucil was 515 mg and the median number of cycles administered was 7. The protocol for CAM307 provided for patients in the alemtuzumab arm to receive a second course of alemtuzumab  if  they  had  progressive  disease  (PD)  &gt;6  months  after  achieving  a  complete  response (CR) or partial response (PR).  Although there were patients in the alemtuzumab arm that had PD after achieving  a  CR  or  PR,  the  investigator(s)  did  not  re-treat  these  patients  with  alemtuzumab  on  this protocol. During the follow-up period of CAM307, there were reports of patients that were subsequently treated with alemtuzumab alone or in combination, as an alternative therapy. The  number  of  patients  with  dose  modifications  or  dose  delays  in  CAM307  were  17/147  patients (11.6%)  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  that  were  dose  reduced  and  4/147  patients  (2.7%)  in  the chlorambucil arm that were dose reduced.  There were 80/147 patients (54.4%) in the alemtuzumab arm that had a dose delayed, and 40/147 patients (27.2%) in the chlorambucil arm that had a dose delayed.    In  the  alemtuzumab  arm,  36/147  patients  (24.5%)  had  a  drug  infusion  interrupted. According to protocol, patients in the alemtuzumab arm were to be discontinued from study treatment if  the  dose  was  delayed  for  &gt;4  weeks.    Ten  of  147  patients  (6.8%)  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  were delayed &gt;4 weeks; all 10 patients were dose delayed due to AEs.  One of 147 patients (1/147, 0.7%) in the  chlorambucil  arm  was  delayed  &gt;4  weeks  (i.e.,  &gt;8  weeks  elapsed  from  date  of  previous  drug administration until treatment resumed.) edicinal product no longer authorise

## Adverse Events

Overall, the incidence of reported AEs on study (overall study period), on treatment and post treatment was higher for patients in the alemtuzumab arm than for patients in the chlorambucil arm.  At least one AE was reported for 91.2% of patients, 98.6% in the alemtuzumab arm and 83.7% in the chlorambucil arm.  Furthermore, more patients were discontinued from study treatment due to an AE regardless of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

causality in the alemtuzumab arm (n=33) than in the chlorambucil arm (n=17).  The AEs presented below reflect the drug related events that occurred during the on treatment period (during treatment or within 30 days of last dose) with the exception of particular AEs of interest for alemtuzumab where the  events  are  discussed  regardless  of  causality,  namely  the  infusion-related  events,  haematologic toxicities, and infections, including CMV, and SAEs.

| MedDRA System Organ Class a                          | Alemtuzumab (N=147)   | Chlorambucil (N=147)   | Overall (N=294)   |
|------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| Patients Experiencing At Least One Adverse Event b   | 145 (98.6%)           | 123 (83.7%)            | 268 (91.2%)       |
| Infections and Infestations                          | 118 (80.3%)           | 80 (54.4%)             | 198 (67.3%)       |
| General Disorders and Administration Site Conditions | 123 (83.7%)           | 40 (27.2%) longer      | 163 (55.4%)       |
| Gastrointestinal Disorders                           | 54 (36.7%)            | 74 (50.3%)             | 128 (43.5%)       |
| Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Disorders               | 53 (36.1%)            | 25 (17.0%)             | 78 (26.5%)        |
| Blood and Lymphatic System Disorders                 | 35 (23.8%)            | 29 (19.7%)             | 64 (21.8%)        |
| Nervous System Disorders                             | 36 (24.5%)            | 27 (18.4%)             | 63 (21.4%)        |
| Respiratory, Thoracic and Mediastinal Disorders      | 38 (25.9%)            | 24 (16.3%)             | 62 (21.1%)        |
| Vascular Disorders                                   | 46 (31.3%)            | 5 (3.4%)               | 51 (17.3%)        |
| Cardiac Disorders                                    | 33 (22.4%)            | 10 (6.8%)              | 43 (14.6%)        |
| Musculoskeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders      | 17 (11.6%) no         | 26 (17.7%)             | 43 (14.6%)        |
| Psychiatric Disorders                                | 22 (15.0%)            | 11 (7.5%)              | 33 (11.2%)        |
| Metabolism and Nutrition Disorders                   | 12 (8.2%)             | 14 (9.5%)              | 26 (8.8%)         |
| Injury, Poisoning and Procedural Complications       | 1 (0.7%)              | 8 (5.4%)               | 9 (3.1%)          |

|                  | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   |
|------------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| MedDRA           | (N=147)         | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | (N=147)         | Maximum Grade    | Maximum Grade    | Maximum Grade    |
| Preferred Term   | n (%)           | 3               | 4               | 5               | n (%)           | 3                | 4                | 5                |
| Thrombocytopenia | 8 (5.4%)        | 5               | 3               | .               | 6 (4.1%)        | 4                | 2                | .                |
| Neutropenia      | 11 (7.5%)       | 3               | 8               | .               | 2 (1.4%)        | .                | 2                | .                |
| Pyrexia          | 12 (8.2%)       | 11              | 1               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                |
| Anaemia          | 3 (2.0%)        | 3               | .               | .               | 5 (3.4%)        | 4                | 1                | .                |
| CMV infection    | 6 (4.1%)        | 6               | .               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                |
| CMVviraemia      | 6 (4.1%)        | 6               | .               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                |
| Chills           | 5 (3.4%)        | 5               | .               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                |

In first-line patients, during the overall study period at least 1 AE was reported for 268/294 patients (91.2%);  145/147  patients  (98.6%)  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  and  123/147  patients  (83.7%)  in  the chlorambucil arm.  Table 9 summarizes the MedDRA SOC for all AEs regardless of causality reported for &gt;5% of all patients during the overall study period for CAM307 Table 9: MedDRA SOC for all AEs Regardless of Causality for &gt;5% of Either Arm in Patients Treated with First-Line Therapy During the Overall Study Period (CAM307, Safety Population) -a Patients may have more than 1 occurrence of the same AE, but only 1 incidence at the highest grade is counted for each patient. -b Includes all AEs reported on study (i.e., during both on-treatment and post-treatment periods). Table  10  summarizes  the  drug  related  AEs  grade  3  or  higher  (by  NCI  CTC  grade)  by  MedDRA preferred term as reported during the on treatment period for ≥ 3% of patients in at least one of the treatment arms.  (CAM307). Table 10: All Drug Related, Grade 3 or Higher AEs by MedDRA Preferred Term and NCI CTC Grade for ≥ 3% of Patients in at Least One Treatment Arm in the On Treatment Period (CAM307) edicinal product no longer authorise

-

a Patients may have more than one occurrence of the same adverse event, but only one incidence, at the highest grade, is counted for each patient. Data Source:  CAM307, Table 14.3.1-11

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Many of the events reported in the alemtuzumab arm were consistent with infusion-related events.  All patients  were  to  be  premedicated  per  protocol  with  diphenhydramine  and  acetaminophen  (or paracetamol) to limit the incidence and severity of infusion-related events.  Thus, for the most part these  were  mild  or  moderate  in  severity,  and  decreased  in  frequency  with  subsequent  doses.    An additional contributory factor may have been the more frequently scheduled visits in the alemtuzumab arm  (3  times  per  week  whilst  receiving  study  treatment)  compared  to  in  the  chlorambucil  arm (monthly for the whole of the study).

<!-- image -->

In this randomized first-line study, the rate of infections excluding CMV was similar between the two treatment  groups  (45.6%  of  alemtuzumab  patients  and  50.3%  of  chlorambucil  patients).    Although there are distinct differences between the 2 treatment arms in the rate of infections when one considers CMV events, there is no evidence of important differences in the occurrence of drug-related febrile neutropenia  (4.8%  vs  2.7%)  or  bacteraemia/sepsis  (3%  vs  1.4%)  events  between  alemtuzumab  and chlorambucil, respectively.

Infusion-Related Adverse Events Alemtuzumab has been associated with infusion-related events including fever, chills/rigors, nausea, hypotension,  urticaria,  dyspnea,  rash,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and  bronchospasm.    Although  the  study was  not  explicitly  designed  to  capture  AEs  as  infusion-related  and  infusion-related  AEs  were  not predefined  in  the  protocol,  there  is  a  general  recognition  that  these  types  of  events  occur  as  a consequence of alemtuzumab administration and decrease in frequency and severity over time.  As such,  the  most  conservative  approach  for  safety  reporting  was  to  include  all  events  regardless  of temporal relationship to study drug administration.  Therefore, the more appropriate term to describe these events may be 'infusion-associated' as opposed to 'infusion-related'. For first-line patients (CAM307), infusion-related AEs were divided into 2 groups: noncardiopulmonary events (i.e., pyrexia, chills, nausea, vomiting, urticaria and rash) and cardiopulmonary events (i.e., hypotension, dyspnea and bronchospasm).  All of these representative adverse events were most common in the first week of therapy, and generally declined in the second and third weeks of treatment.  The only exception to this trend of decreasing AEs during the second and third weeks of treatment was urticaria, which increased slightly from Week 1 to Week 2 (from 6.8% to 7.1%) then decreased (to 3.7%) by Week 3. Infections As a consequence of the mechanism of action of alemtuzumab, profound lymphopenia can develop and  persist  throughout  the  on  treatment  period.    Patients  with  B-CLL  suffer  from  infectious complications as a result of their underlying disease, other co-morbidities, and therapies used to treat the malignancy.  The infectious complications reported herein represent the investigators assessment of causality and, excluding CMV events, are representative of patients suffering from B-CLL. Infections reported in ≥ 2 patients overall:  Among the patients in the alemtuzumab arm, regardless of causality,  the  infections  experienced  in ≥ 3%  (i.e., ≥ 5/147  patients)  were  CMV  viremia  (81/147 patients, 52.4%), CMV infection (23/147 patients, 15.6%), pharyngitis (8/147 patients, 5.4%), rhinitis (6/147 patients, 4.1%), and bronchitis (6/147 patients, 4.1%) while on-treatment or within 30 days of last administration of study drug.  Among the patients in the chlorambucil arm, regardless of causality, the infections experienced in ≥ 3% (i.e., ≥ 5/147 patients) were CMV viremia (11/147 patients, 7.5%), pharyngitis (14/147 patients, 9.5%), rhinitis (8/147 patients, 5.4%), bronchitis (7/147 patients, 4.8%), pneumonia (6/147 patients, 4.1%), urinary tract infection (5/147 patients, 3.4%) and Herpes simplex (5/147 patients, 3.4%) while on treatment or within 30 days of last administration of study drug. Regarding other opportunistic infections, the very low incidence of non-CMV opportunistic infections reported  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  was  most  likely  due  to  the  protocol-specified  administration  of prophylactic antibiotic and antiviral therapies. edicinal product no longer authorise

## CMV Events

The following MedDRA coding convention was used to distinguish between 2 distinct categories of CMV events: (i) CMV Viremia: a report of a positive CMV by PCR laboratory result for patients who

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

were without any evidence of symptomatic CMV infection.  These events are referred to in the draft label as 'asymptomatic PCR positive CMV' and (ii) CMV Infection: a report of a positive CMV by PCR laboratory result for patients who had 1 or more symptoms consistent with a CMV infection, e.g., fever.  These events are referred to in the draft label as 'symptomatic PCR positive CMV infection'. During the process of reconciling the database, by convention an AE was added to the database for any patient with a single positive PCR assay result and coded as 'CMV viremia' although the protocol required independent confirmation prior to study drug interruption and institution of anti-viral therapy.

The  difference  in  the  monitoring  schedules  for  CMV  by  PCR  may  have  contributed  to  the  higher incidence of CMV positivity in the alemtuzumab arm of CAM307 (first-line patients).  Because of the frequent monitoring for CMV by PCR (weekly for alemtuzumab and monthly for chlorambucil while on treatment), CMV viremia was identified in 52.4% of the patients in the alemtuzumab arm during the on-treatment period.  Only 15.6% of the patients developed CMV infections in the on-treatment period.  The majority of CMV viremia/infection events were mild to moderate in severity and were readily managed by anti-viral therapy.  None of the clinical cases of CMV infection was above grade 3.    Although  CMV  viremia  occurred  commonly  among  patients  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm,  it  was managed in most cases without permanently disrupting therapy. Asymptomatic laboratory positive CMV (i.e., CMV viremia) should not necessarily be considered a serious infection requiring interruption of alemtuzumab therapy, as was specified in CAM307.  The CMV management guidelines recommended by experts in the field have matured since the design of CAM307 (O'Brien, 2006, Clin Lymphoma Myeloma; Keating, 2004, Clin Lymphoma). Deaths on Treatment Four patients (one in the alemtuzumab arm and 3 in the chlorambucil arm) died during treatment or within 30 days of the last dose of study drug.  The one death in the alemtuzumab arm was attributed by  the  investigator  to  the  underlying  disease.    The  causes  of  death  for  the  three  patients  in  the chlorambucil arm were Listeria monocytogenes encephalitis, cardiac insufficiency, and sudden death (cause unknown).  The only death considered by the investigator to be likely related to study drug was the patient with the Listeria monocytogenes encephalitis infection in the chlorambucil arm. Eight patients died during the post-treatment period, ie, more than 30 days but within 6 months after last  drug  administration.    Two  patients  were  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  and  6  patients  were  in  the chlorambucil arm.  None of these deaths were associated with a study drug-related AE.  During the extended follow-up period of first-line patients (i.e., &gt;6 months after the last administration of study drug),  deaths  were  reported  for  an  additional  34  patients  (19 patients  in  alemtuzumab  arm,  and  15 patients in chlorambucil arm).  None of these deaths were associated with a study drug-related AE. Serious Adverse Events The overall incidence of SAEs was also higher in the alemtuzumab arm than in the chlorambucil arm. When considering drug related SAEs, the only event that was more common in alemtuzumab patients was CMV events.  The serious adverse events during the on treatment period are discussed regardless of relationship to study drug, either alemtuzumab or chlorambucil, in decreasing frequency.  Among the  patients  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm,  the  SAEs  regardless  of  causality  experienced  in ≥ 3%  (i.e., ≥ 5/147 patients) were CMV viremia, pneumonia, pyrexia, and CMV infection.  Among the patients in the chlorambucil arm, the only SAE regardless of causality experienced in ≥ 3% (i.e., ≥ 5/147 patients) was pneumonia. Table 11 summarizes the SAEs experienced in ≥ 3% of patients per treatment arm regardless  of  causality  as  reported  during  the  on  treatment  period  in  order  of  overall  descending frequency, including the NCI CTC grades for these events. edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 11: Summary of SAEs Experienced in ≥ 3% of Patients per Treatment Arm and Overall Regardless of Causality with NCI CTC Grade During the On Treatment Period (CAM307)

|                | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Alemtuzumab a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   | Chlorambucil a   |
|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| MedDRA         | (N=147)         | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | Maximum Grade   | (N=147)          | Maximum Grade    | Maximum Grade    | Maximum Grade    | Maximum Grade    | Overall (N=294)  | Overall (N=294)  |                  |
| Preferred Term | n (%)           | 1               | 2               | 3               | 4               | 5               | n (%)            | 1                | 2                | 3                | 4                | 5                | n (%)            |                  |
| CMV viraemia   | 16 (10.9%)      | 7               | 3               | 6               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                | .                | .                | .                | 16 (5.4%)        |                  |
| CMV infection  | 8 (5.4%)        | 1               | 3               | 4               | .               | .               | .                | .                | .                | .                | .                | .                | 8 (2.7%)         |                  |
| Pneumonia      | 2 (1.4%)        | .               | .               | 2               | .               | .               | 5 (3.4%)         | .                | 1                | 4                | .                | .                | 7 (2.4%)         |                  |
| Pyrexia        | 5 (3.4%)        | 1               | 3               | 1               | .               | .               | 2 (1.4%)         | 1                | .                | 1                | .                | .                | 7 (2.4%)         |                  |

<!-- image -->

|            |                | Alemtuzumab   | Alemtuzumab   | Chlorambucil   | Chlorambucil   |           |
|------------|----------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|-----------|
| Toxicity a | Study Period   | Evaluable b   | n (%)         | Evaluable b    | n (%)          | P-value c |
| ALC        | Overall d      | 145           | 142 (97.93)   | 144            | 4 (2.78)       | <0.0001   |
|            | On Treatment e | 145           | 142 (97.93)   | 144            | 2 (1.39)       | <0.0001   |
| ANC        | Overall d      | 146           | 65 (44.52)    | 144            | 38 (26.39)     | 0.0014    |
|            | On Treatment e | 146           | 60 (41.10)    | 144            | 36 (25.00)     | 0.0041    |
| Hemoglobin | Overall d      | 146           | 18 (12.33)    | 145            | 27 (18.62)     | 0.1477    |
|            | On Treatment e | 146           | 16 (10.96)    | 145            | 26 (17.93)     | 0.0978    |
| Platelets  | Overall d      | 147           | 24 (16.33)    | 147            | 18 (12.24)     | 0.4049    |
|            | On Treatment e | 147           | 18 (12.24)    | 147            | 17 (11.56)     | 1.0000    |
| WBC        | Overall d      | 147           | 91 (61.90)    | 146            | 2 (1.37)       | <0.0001   |

-a Patients may have more than one occurrence of the same SAE, but only one incidence at the highest grade is counted for each patient. In  particular,  the  incidence  of  SAE  infections  was  higher  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  than  in  the chlorambucil arm.  This can be attributed to the incidence of CMV viremia/infection SAEs, which was higher for the alemtuzumab arm than for the chlorambucil arm.  Apart from this difference, there was no  other  apparent  difference  in  the  infection  SAEs  in  particular  nor  in  SAEs  in  general  that  were reported for the two treatment arms. The most frequently reported SAE in the alemtuzumab arm was CMV viremia.  Treatment of CMV viremia/infection  with  IV  ganciclovir  required  hospitalization  in  many  European  countries.    These hospitalizations, by definition an SAE, contributed to the increase in the overall incidence of SAEs in the  alemtuzumab arm.  An exploratory analysis for PFS in patients treated with alemtuzumab who experienced a CMV event during therapy revealed that efficacy was not compromised. Clinical Laboratory Evaluations · Haematologic Toxicity Abnormal  laboratory  findings  were  not  defined  as  AEs  for  the  purpose  of  CAM307  (first-line patients).    Clinical  syndromes  associated  with  laboratory  abnormalities  were  to  be  recorded  as appropriate  (e.g.,  diabetes  mellitus  instead  of  hyperglycaemia).    As  a  result,  the  haematologic toxicities reported are lab shift data from baseline to worst grade regardless of relatedness. The table below summarizes the number of first-line patients that had a shift from low at baseline to a maximum CTC grade 3 or greater post-baseline for the haematology parameters, for both the overall (all values reported) and the on treatment periods in CAM307. Table 12: Shift from Low Baseline Grade to Maximum Post-Baseline Grade ≥ 3 for Haematology Parameters in First-Line Patients (CAM307, Safety Population) edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|            |                | Alemtuzumab   | Alemtuzumab   | Chlorambucil   | Chlorambucil   |           |
|------------|----------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|-----------|
| Toxicity a | Study Period   | Evaluable b   | n (%)         | Evaluable b    | n (%)          | P-value c |
|            | On Treatment e | 147           | 91 (61.90)    | 146            | 2 (1.37)       | <0.0001   |

- -a Toxicity is defined as lab grade shift from low baseline grade to a maximum post-baseline grade ≥ 3.

-b Number of patients with evaluable lab test both baseline and post-baseline overall or on-treatment period.

- -c Fisher's exact method

For  patients  who  had  baseline  and  post-baseline  data,  12.2%  (18/147)  of  patients  treated  with alemtuzumab and 11.6 % (17/147) of patients treated with chlorambucil had one or more episodes of new onset NCI CTC Grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia during the on-treatment period.  The median time to onset of treatment emergent Grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia was 1.3 weeks for patients treated with alemtuzumab and 7.9 weeks for patients treated with chlorambucil.  No patients in the alemtuzumab arm and two patients in the chlorambucil arm developed autoimmune thrombocytopenia (related to treatment) while on study drug.  Both chlorambucil patients were discontinued from the study. The median platelet count results recovered to baseline or above by week 3 of alemtuzumab treatment, but did not recover to baseline during treatment or during the post-treatment period.  Platelet transfusions were required by 34/93 patients (36.6%) during the overall study period.

-d Overall study period includes on-treatment period and post-treatment period. -e On-Treatment study period includes treatment period through 30 days after last dose administration -Denominators for the percentages are based on the number of patients with evaluable shifts Haematologic toxicity was common in both treatment arms.  Except for neutropenia, the incidence of treatment-emergent grade 3 and 4 haematologic toxicities including anaemia and thrombocytopenia were  similar  between  the  two  treatment  arms.    The  observed  events  in  both  treatment  arms  are consistent with recognized complications of B-CLL. Pancytopenia/Marrow Hypoplasia: With the exception of one case of pure red cell aplasia that occurred approximately 6 months after completion  of  treatment  with  alemtuzumab,  no  adverse  events  of  pancytopenia/marrow  hypoplasia were observed in first line patients treated with alemtuzumab. Anaemia: For patients who had baseline and post-baseline data, 11% of patients treated with alemtuzumab and 18% of patients treated with chlorambucil had one or more episodes of new onset NCI CTC Grade 3 or 4 anaemia during the on-treatment period.  The median time to onset of treatment emergent Grade 3 or 4 anaemia was 4.4 weeks for patients treated with alemtuzumab and 8.1 weeks for patients treated with chlorambucil.  The median haemoglobin recovered to a level greater than baseline by month 1 post-treatment for both study arms.  Transfusions and/or erythropoietin were required in 61/93 patients (65.6%) during the overall study period. One  patient  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  developed  haemolytic  anaemia  four  months  (related  to malignancy)  after  the  last  dose  of  study  drug  and  two  patients  in  the  chlorambucil  arm  developed haemolytic anaemia (one related to treatment and one related to malignancy) while on study drug. Neutropenia: For  patients  who  had  baseline  and  post-baseline  data,  41.1%  (60/146)  of  patients  treated  with alemtuzumab and 25% of patients treated with chlorambucil had one or more episodes of new onset NCI CTC Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia  during  the  on-treatment  period.    The  median  time  to  onset  of treatment  emergent  Grade  3  or  Grade  4  neutropenia  was  4.35  weeks  for  patients  treated  with alemtuzumab and 3.65 weeks for patients treated with chlorambucil.  The median ANC results for all patients stayed within normal limits post-treatment for both study arms.  Colony-stimulating factors were required for 33/93 patients (35.5%) during the study. Although  the  incidence  of  grade  3  and  4  treatment-emergent  neutropenia  was  higher  in  the alemtuzumab arm, the incidence of infection adverse events (excluding CMV events) was similar. Thrombocytopenia: edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Blood Product Use

Overall, of the 140 patients in the alemtuzumab arm who had not received blood products at baseline (i.e.,  within  1  month  prior  to  study  enrollment),  19/140 patients  (13.6%)  received  blood  product support  post  baseline.    Of  the  141 patients  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  who  had  not  received  packed RBCs at baseline (i.e., within 1 month prior to study enrollment), 19/141 patients (13.5%) received packed  RBCs  post  baseline.    Overall,  of  the  142  patients  in  the  chlorambucil  arm  who  had  not received blood products at baseline (i.e., within 1 month prior to study enrollment), 21/142 patients (14.8%) received blood product support post-baseline.  Of the 142 patients in the chlorambucil arm who had not received packed RBCs at baseline (i.e., within 1 month prior to study enrollment), 21/142 patients  (14.8%) received packed RBCs post baseline.  Only a few patients in either treatment arm received platelet transfusions.  One patient in the alemtuzumab arm received standard unit platelets and  2  patients  received  apheresis  unit  platelets.    Three  patients  in  the  chlorambucil  arm  received standard unit platelets and 2 patients received apheresis unit platelets.

There have been two other clinical studies which have utilized single agent alemtuzumab as first-line therapy,  a  study  conducted  by  Österborg,  et  al  and  a  second  study  conducted  by  Lundin,  et  al. Österborg  treated  nine  patients  with  alemtuzumab  administered  either  intravenously  (N=5)  or subcutaneously  (N=4)  thrice  weekly  for  up  to  18  weeks  in  a  pilot  study.    Adverse  events  were consistent  with  the  alemtuzumab  safety  profile,  the  most  common  being  fever  (8/9  patients),  rigors (8/9  patients),  nausea  (3/9  patients)  and  rash  (3/9  patients).    All  patients  developed  lymphopenia; however  there  was  only  one  serious  infectious  event  (CMV  pneumonitis).    Grade  3  neutropenia occurred in one patient, two patients had grade 2 and one patient had grade 1 (WHO grade).  One patient  developed  transient  grade  1  thrombocytopenia.    In  the  Lundin  study,  alemtuzumab  was administered subcutaneously (SC) for up to 18 weeks.  Adverse events associated with the route of administration  (i.e.,  infusion-related  events)  when  alemtuzumab  is  administered  IV  are  uncommon

Lymphopenia: In  first-line  patients  receiving  alemtuzumab,  the  median  time  to  recovery  of  CD4+  counts  to ≥ 200 cells/ μ L occurred by 6 months post-treatment; however the median at 2 months post-treatment was 183 cells/ μ L.    Patients  in  CAM307  did  not  have  baseline  samples  available  for  comparison  to  full recovery. Subgroup analyses Analyses of adverse events in subgroups (age group ≥ 65, &lt;65 years old, and gender) were performed and revealed no substantial differences. A summary of AEs by race is not provided because only 2/297 first-line patients (0.7%) enrolled in CAM307  were  non-Caucasian;  1  Black  patient in the alemtuzumab arm and 1 Black patient in the chlorambucil arm. Post marketing experience The eighth PSUR for alemtuzumab has been provided as supportive evidence summarising the safety data received by Schering Global Medical Safety Surveillance from worldwide sources between 08NOV-2005 and 07-MAY-2006. Discussion on clinical safety CAM307  confirms  the  safety  profile  of  previously  reported  studies  utilizing  alemtuzumab  in  the treatment  of  first-line  B-CLL  patients.    The  previously  reported  studies  were  conducted  with  SC alemtuzumab and therefore direct comparison of infusion-related events is not appropriate.  However, haematologic toxicities and infectious complications are similar. The  most  important  difference  between  alemtuzumab  and  chlorambucil  is  the  frequency  of  CMV events.  Although the incidence of CMV viremia/infection is greater in the alemtuzumab arm than in the  chlorambucil  arm,  the  data  from  CAM307  show  that  CMV  events  were  easily  managed  and resulted  primarily  in  only  the  temporary  interruption  of  alemtuzumab  therapy,  without  apparently compromising efficacy. There  is  little  doubt  that  alemtuzumab  is  more  toxic  than  chlorambucil  but  this  toxicity  is  not associated with a higher mortality supporting the applicant's claim that the toxicity can be managed. edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

when it is administered SC; however, 'first dose' reactions, such as injection site reactions and fever, do occur.  In fact, transient rigors were noted in 17%, but rash/urticaria, bronchospasm, hypotension and  nausea  were  not  reported.    Twenty  one  percent  of  patients  experienced  grade  4  neutropenia; however, there were no events of febrile neutropenia.  Symptomatic CMV (fever without pneumonia) occurred in only 4/41 patients and one patient developed PCP.  Among the patients for whom longterm follow-up data were available, there were no opportunistic or other major infections recorded. The median time to both CD4+ and CD8+ recovery to &gt; 100 cells/µL was 4 months.  The safety profile of  subcutaneous  alemtuzumab  thus  is  confirmed  with  CAM307,  the  largest  study  treating  B-CLL patients in the first-line setting.

| Safety Concern           | Proposed Pharmacovigilance Activities (routine and additional) no   | Proposed Risk Minimisation (routine and additional)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Infusion-related events  | Routine Pharmacovigilance product                                   | Warning in SmPC section 4.4: The frequency of infusion-related reactions was highest in the first week of therapy, and declined in the second or third week of treatment, in patients treated with MabCampath both as first line therapy and in previously treated patients. SmPC section 4.8 of the SmPC updated: 'Fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, urticaria, dyspnoea, rash, bronchospasm, infusion site erythema &infusion site oedema'. • Educational Material.                                                                                                                        |
| Opportunistic infections | Routine Pharmacovigilance                                           | All events listed below in bold can be described as ' opportunistic infections ': Warnings in SmPC section 4.4: Cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) viraemia should not necessarily be considered a serious infection requiring interruption of therapy. Ongoing clinical assessment should be performed for symptomatic CMV infection during MabCampath treatment and for at least 2 months following completion of treatment. SmPC section 4.8 updated to include infections and infestations in the table of 'undesirable effects in first-line patients': Very Common adverse events: cytomegalovirus viraemia , |

The 8 th PSUR has been assessed and adopted by the CHMP. In the 8th PSUR the MAH was asked to continue to keep 'cardiac disorders' and 'autoimmune phenomena' (including autoimmune thyroid dysfunction) under close surveillance. Some minor additional points were also raised. In addition this product was renewed in 2006 with the conclusion to stay under exceptional circumstances due to the outstanding specific obligation which now is addressed with this application. Pharmacovigilance and Risk Management Plan The  applicant  has  provided  documents  that  set  out  a detailed description of the  system  of pharmacovigilance. A statement signed by the applicant and the qualified person for pharmacovigilance, indicating that the applicant has the services of a qualified person responsible for pharmacovigilance  and  the  necessary  means  for  the  notification  of  any  adverse  reaction  occurring either in the Community or in a third country has been provided. The MAA submitted a risk management plan, which included a risk minimisation plan Table 13: Summary of the risk management plan edicinal product no longer authorise

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

|                       |                           | cytomegalovirus infection Common adverse events: oral candidiasis Uncommon adverse events: tuberculosis , herpes ophthalmicus , candidiasis SmPC section 5.1 updated to include wording on assessment of CMV . •                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-----------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Haematologic toxicity | Routine Pharmacovigilance | Educational Material. Guidance in SmPC section 4.2 updated: 'For a decrease of ANC and/or platelet count to ≤ 50% of the baseline value in patients initiating therapy with a baseline ANC ≤ 500/ μ l and/or a baseline platelet count ≤ 25,000/ μ l: Withhold MabCampath therapy. When ANC and/or platelet count return to baseline value(s), resume Campath therapy.* Guidance in SmPC section 4.2 updated: There are no dose modifications recommended for severe lymphopenia given the mechanism of action of MabCampath. Warning in SmPC section 4.4: 'If a severe haematological toxicity develops, MabCampath treatment should be interrupted until the event resolves. SmPC section 4.8: Include the following adverse reactions occurring in first-line patients: Blood and lymphatic system disorder Common adverse events: febrile neutropenia, neutropenia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, anaemia Uncommon adverse events: agranulocytosis, lymphopenia, lymphadenopathy, epistaxis no longer |

•

Haematologic toxicity Uncommon adverse events: agranulocytosis, lymphopenia, lymphadenopathy, epistaxis The CHMP, having considered the data submitted in the application is of the opinion that the following risk minimisation activities are necessary for the safe and effective use of the medicinal product: · The MAH shall agree to the details of an educational brochure with the National Competent Authorities. · The MAH shall ensure that all doctors who prescribe MabCampath are provided with a healthcare professional information pack containing the following: Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC) and Package Leaflet and Labelling Key elements to be included in the educational brochure · The risk of opportunistic infections, in particular CMV viraemia · Recommendation to avoid vaccination with live vaccines for at least 12 months following MabCampath therapy edicinal product no longer authorise

•

- The risk of infusion reactions
- o Need for premedication
- o That treatment for hypersensitivity reactions, including measures for resuscitation should be available during administration
- o That the risk of infusion reactions is highest in first week of therapy

Educational brochure

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- o That if the reaction is moderate or severe dosing should continue at the same level (ie no dose escalation) until each dose is well tolerated
- o That if therapy is withheld for more than 7 days then MabCampath should be reinstituted with gradual dose escalation

## 3. OVERALL DISCUSSION AND BENEFIT-RISK ASSESSMENT

B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is one of the most common malignant lymphoid neoplasms in adult  populations  worldwide.  Because  the  disease  is  generally  not  curable,  occurs  in  an  elderly population,  and  often  progresses  slowly,  it  is  most  often  treated  in  a  conservative  fashion.  In asymptomatic  patients,  treatment  may  be  deferred  until  the  patient  becomes  symptomatic  as  the disease progresses. Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) ranges from periodic observation with treatment of  infectious,  haemorrhagic,  or  immunologic  complications  to  a  variety  of  therapeutic  options, including steroids, alkylating agents (chlorambucil=CLB), purine analogues (fludarabine, cladribine or pentostatin),  combination  chemotherapy,  monoclonal  antibodies  (alemtuzumab,  rituximab),  and transplant options. Most  recent  randomised  studies  including  one  from  the  French  Cooperative  Group  on  CLL  have showed  higher or equivalent response rates for fludarabine as compared  to  CLB  or  CAP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, prednisone) and most showed an improvement in progression-free survival,  though  none  showed  an  advantage  in  OS.    Therefore,  current  first-line  therapy  includes fludarabine although it must be recognised that purine analogues are more toxic than CLB in terms especially  granulocytopenic  infections,  herpes  infections,  autoimmune  haemolytic  anaemia,  and persistent  thrombocytopenia.  The  increased  risk  of  infection  may  persist  for  months  or  years  after treatment with a purine analogue. The CAM307 study initiated at the request of the CPMP in 2001 compares alemtuzumab IV with a conventional scheme of chlorambucil in a randomised phase III design in treatment naïve patients with B-CLL. The data from CAM307 demonstrate superiority of alemtuzumab compared to chlorambucil as assessed by PFS, response rate, and time to alternative therapy in the intent to treat study population of  previously  untreated  patients  with  progressive  B-CLL  requiring  first-line  therapy.  Duration  of response  was  also  longer  in  the  alemtuzumab  treated  patients.  The  hazard  ratio  for  PFS  is  0.58 (p=0.0001, stratified log rank test) after adjustment by Rai stage group. The ORR (CR or PR) was also significantly higher in alemtuzumab treated patients (83.2% versus 55.4%; p &lt; 0.0001).  There was a significantly higher percentage of CR patients in the alemtuzumab arm compared to the chlorambucil arm; 24.2% vs 2.0%, respectively; p &lt; 0.0001.  The overall median time to alternative treatment was 23.3 months for patients in the alemtuzumab arm and 14.7 months for patients in the chlorambucil arm (p=0.0001, stratified log-rank test). It should be stressed that response rate in CLL is a valid surrogate endpoint since it is closely associated with increasing haemoglobin  levels and decrease in constitutional symptoms. The trial was not designed to show overall survival benefit and such data are not  required  in  this  indication  because  no  single  agent  or  combination  has  so  far  demonstrated prolonged survival for patients with CLL CAM307  confirms  the  safety  profile  of  previously  reported  studies  utilizing  alemtuzumab  in  the treatment  of  first-line  B-CLL  patients.    The  previously  reported  studies  were  conducted  with  SC alemtuzumab and therefore direct comparison of infusion-related events is not appropriate.  However, haematologic toxicities and infectious complications are similar. edicinal product no longer authorise

As expected treatment with alemtuzumab is associated with more toxicity than the older conventional chlorambucil  scheme.  Alemtuzumab  is  associated  with  infusion-related  events  including  fever, chills/rigors,  nausea,  hypotension,  urticaria,  dyspnea,  rash,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and  bronchospasm. The infusion-related events are most common during the first infusions. The high frequency of CMV viraemia irrespective  of  clinical  signs  of  CMV-disease  resulting  from  the  severe  lymphopenia  is  of concern. Infections per se are not rare events among patients with B-CLL. Clinical CMV infection was observed in 2.7% of the patients, none of the cases exceeded Grade 3. Although the incidence of CMV

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

viremia/infection  is  greater  in  the  alemtuzumab  arm  than  in  the  chlorambucil  arm,  the  data  from CAM307 show that CMV events were easily managed and resulted primarily in only the temporary interruption  of  alemtuzumab  therapy,  without  apparently  compromising  efficacy.    The  toxicity  of MabCampath is not associated with a higher mortality supporting the claim that the toxicity can be managed.

Overall, no  new  clinical laboratory  safety  concerns  were  detected.  Cases  of  ITP  (a  known manifestation  of  B-CLL)  were  not  seen  in  the  alemtuzumab  group  and  there  is  no  mentioning  of thyroid abnormalities (seen in clinical trials in MS patients treated with alemtuzumab). One case of pure red cell  aplasia  in  the  alemtuzumab  group  6  months  after  exposure  should  be  noted. Lymphopenia  seems  to  be  the  only  specific  laboratory  finding  in  this  comparative  trial  against chlorambucil. At the time when CAM307 was initiated chlorambucil was a valid comparator since this alkylating agent  has  been  the  backbone  of  therapy  for  CLL  for  40  years.  Since  2000  fludarabine  containing regimens have become more widely used as first-line therapy because of higher response rates and prolongation  of  PFS  observed  in  randomised  studies  including  one  from  the  French  Cooperative Group on CLL. However, an advantage in OS has not been observed. Alemtuzumab  is  clearly  superior  to  chlorambucil  in  terms  of  efficacy.  The  main  problem  while assessing this application was the lack of knowledge on how alemtuzumab performs in a head-to-head comparison  against  current  state-of-the  art  first-line  therapy;  fludarabine  containing  chemotherapy. The only efficacy comparison is with literature data but such data were not sufficient for the approval of  a  wide  first-line  indication.  The  therapeutic  indication  was  to  be  defined  as  fludarabine  based regimens currently are viewed as the most appropriate first-line therapy for patients with B-CLL who can tolerate this treatment. However,  as  pointed  out  by  the  applicant  and  supported  by  both  a  recent  ESMO  CLL  Guideline (2007) and a market survey, chlorambucil is not an obsolete first-line agent since its known activity and better safety profile (as compared to fludarabine) makes it a suitable therapy for elderly patients with CLL. The way alemtuzumab would perform in a head-to-head comparison against other treatment standards than chlorambucil in patients with CLL is a meaningful clinical research question, as are others, such as its  role  in  consolidation  or  in  combination  with other active  agents in the disease. The CAM307 data support consideration of such additional questions given MabCampath has been demonstrated to be among the most active agents, including the most active immunotherapeutic, in this disease. The heterogeneity  of the disease necessitates the availability of alternative treatment  options, the comparator  is  not  obsolete  in  the  front-line  treatment  of  the  disease,  the  clinical  trial  results  of CAM307  are  statistically significant and robust, and the safety profile of  MabCampath  is demonstrated to be predictable, manageable, and in line with other treatment regimens tested in the patient population under study. edicinal product no longer authorise

Though chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is one of the most common malignant lymphoid diseases in non-Asian  populations,  with  15,340  new  cases  estimated  in  the  United  States  in  2007  and  similar incidences expected across Europe (Jemal, CA Cancer J Clin ,  2007), the annual incidence is several fold  lower  than  many  other  cancers,  creating  challenges  in  the  development  of  new  therapies. Significant  advances  in  diagnosis,  identification  of  prognostic  factors,  and  treatment  options  have recently  occurred,  allowing  previous  paradigms  with  respect  to  disease  management  to  undergo  reexamination.    Taking  these  factors  into  consideration,  heterogeneity  in  both  natural  history  and outcomes in individual patients, as well as response to alternative therapies, becomes apparent.  This heterogeneity is characterized by a variable clinical course, such that the overall median survival for patients  with  the  disease  ranges  from  a  few  months  to  the  same  survival  as  that  observed  in  agematched normal populations (Catovsky, Eur J Cancer , 1995).  Due to the limited number of patients with CLL, particularly those requiring therapy, controlled clinical trials such as CAM307, however, are  performed  in  a  relatively  broad  patient  population.    Evidence  from  CAM307  demonstrates  the clinical  benefit  of  MabCampath  relative  to  chlorambucil  in  the  overall  patient  population,  while subgroup analyses suggest that benefit is also likely in certain subpopulations.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The above referenced published guidelines advocate the availability of a number of treatment options for the prescribing clinician so that factors such as the patient's overall health status can be taken into consideration when making treatment choices.  In the 2007 ESMO clinical guidelines for the first-line treatment  of  CLL,  there  is  a  variety  of  suggested  options  including  fludarabine  monotherapy  or  in combination,  chlorambucil  monotherapy  and  MabCampath  monotherapy  or  in  combination.    While the ESMO guidelines suggest that the more myelotoxic FC regimens be reserved for more 'physically fit'  patients, they also recognize that randomized trials have not demonstrated a survival benefit for purine analogues (e.g. fludarabine, cladribine) either alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide, versus chlorambucil (ESMO, 2007, Annals of Oncology).

<!-- image -->

The  results  from  CAM307  demonstrate  that  the  patients  enrolled  into  this  study  reflect  the heterogeneity  of  the  patients  who  present  with  CLL  and  that  alemtuzumab  represents  a  significant advance  in  the  treatment  of  these  patients  based  on  superior  PFS  (the  primary  endpoint),  overall response rate, complete response rate, and time to alternative treatment in the overall study population compared to chlorambucil, with a predictable and manageable safety profile. In an attempt to provide greater context for these data, comparisons of results across studies, particularly with respect to timeto-event endpoints such as PFS, are fraught with the potential for misinterpretation due to differences in  patient  population  characteristics,  study  design  (including  methodological  differences  in  the determination of endpoints, e.g., the independence and/or frequency and rigor of response and disease progression assessments), and other factors.  Moreover MabCampath is recognized as the single most effective agent in treating specific CLL subpopulations, e.g. patients with del 17p or p53 mutations, as these patients respond poorly to fludarabine, or fludarabine-based combination therapies. The CHMP therefore considered that the benefit risk of MabCampath is positive in the indication: · treatment  of  patients  with  B-cell  chronic  lymphocytic  leukaemia  (B-CLL)  for  whom fludarabine combination chemotherapy is not appropriate A  risk minimisation  plan focusing  on opportunistic infections, infusion-related reactions  and haematologic toxicities has been agreed with the CHMP. edicinal product no longer authorise