---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:36:12
document_pages: 19
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/prevenar-h-c-323-ii-80-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: prevenar-h-c-323-ii-80-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.545343
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 05:17:14.841388
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 26 April 2007 Product name: Prevenar Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/000323/II/0080

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION Medicinal product no longer authorised

7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK

Tel. (44-20) 74 18 84 00   Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68

E-mail: mail@emea.europa.eu     http://www.emea.europa.eu

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I. SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

## 1.1. Introduction

Prevenar is a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine developed by Wyeth Lederle Vaccines. The vaccine contains  capsular  polysaccharide  of  7  serotypes  conjugated  to  a  carrier  protein.  The  European Marketing Authorisation was granted in February 2001 for use in infants and young children from 2 months through 2 years of age for the prevention of invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD). Following a type II variation (EMEA/H/C/323/II/18) in August 2004, the indication was extended to children aged 24  months  to  5  years.  The  indication  was  further  extended  in  January  2007  to  include  protection against otitis media caused by the serotypes against which Prevenar protects (EMEA/H/C/323/II/76).

The efficacy of Prevenar against IPD is well established and has been documented in several studies. Population-based  post-marketing  analysis  of  the  impact  of  Prevenar  in  the  US  has  reported  a  69% decline (~1.3 fewer episodes per 1000 children) in culture-confirmed invasive pneumococcal disease in children &lt;2 years by 2001 (Whitney et al. 2003) Apart from the observed reduction in vaccine type disease  among  children  below  5  years  after  the  introduction  of  Prevenar  in  the  child  immunisation program in the US, indirect effects (herd immunity) have been observed in older children, adults and in the elderly &gt;65 years.

Prevenar  is  a  sterile  solution  of  saccharides  of  the  capsular  antigen  of  Streptococcus  pneumoniae serotypes  4,  6B,  9V,  14,  18C,  19F  and  23F  individually  conjugated  to  the  non-toxic  mutant  of diphtheria toxin (CRM197 protein). The vaccine is presented in single dose (0.5 ml) vials and prefilled syringes. The  infant  primary  vaccination  schedule  consists  of  three  doses  beginning  at  2  months  of  age  and given with an interval of at least one month between doses. A booster dose is recommended in the second year of life. Previously unvaccinated infants from 7-11 months are recommended to receive three doses, children from 12-23 months of age are recommended to receive two doses and children aged 24 months - 5 years one single dose. The route of administration is deep intramuscular injection. The pre-licensure pivotal efficacy trial in US infants (Northern California Kaiser Permanente (NCKP) trial)  demonstrated  vaccine  efficacy  (VE:  87%  (95%  CI:  7,  99))  against  bacteraemic  pneumonia, which was included in the indication of Prevenar. However, overall reduction of clinical pneumonia was only 10% (95% CI: 0.1; 19.8). At the time of the granting of the initial Marketing Authorisation, protection against pneumonia could not be sufficiently demonstrated. Therefore the data on clinical pneumonia was only included in section 5.1 of the SPC. The  MAH  submitted  this  application  to  include  pneumonia  caused  by Streptococcus  pneumoniae serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F and 23F other than those associated to with bacteraemia in infants and children from 2 months of age to 5 years of age. During  the  Vaccine  Working  Party  (VWP)  meeting  in  January  2007,  the  overall  wording  of  the indication  was  discussed  in  view  of  the  addition  of  otitis  media  to  the  indication  (variation  II-76, which received a positive opinion in January 2007). No new clinical study reports supporting the proposed extension of indication to include prevention of pneumonia  were  submitted.  However,  additional  data  from  the  NCKP  trial,  data  from  two  trials conducted post-licensure with an investigational 9-valent pneumococcal CRM197 conjugate vaccine (PCV9) and data from a US post-marketing surveillance study were provided. All new documentation was provided in the form of published articles in scientific journals. 1.2 Clinical aspects 1.2.1 Rationale for the proposed change Medicinal product no longer authorised

IPD is the most severe clinical manifestation of the pneumococcal disease spectrum, but represents a small fraction of the pneumococcal disease burden. In Europe today, the reported incidence of IPD among children less than 2 years of age is about 40 cases per 100,000 children per year. By contrast, it

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

is  estimated  that,  each  year,  about  one  percent  of  young  children  would  have  an  episode  of pneumococcal pneumonia.

Bacterial pneumonia is a significant cause of paediatric morbidity and mortality, particularly in less developed countries where most of the yearly 2 million deaths due to pneumonia are reported.  The microbiologic  aetiology  of  pneumonia  remains  problematic  in  the  absence  of  standardised,  noninvasive, diagnostic tools that are both sensitive and specific.

Efficacy against bacteraemic  pneumonia  cannot  be  projected  to  that  against  non-bacteraemic pneumonia,  which  represents  the  overwhelming  fraction  of  pneumonia  cases.  Whereas  vaccine induced antibodies are effective against pneumococcal bacteraemia, they may not have a similar effect on  pneumococcus  at  the  mucosal  level  where  higher  antibody  concentrations  are  required  for protection.  It is further possible that an increase in non-bacteraemic infections, caused by non-vaccine serotypes, may have partly offset the reduction due to vaccine serotypes (although this phenomenon has had little impact on the overall effect against invasive diseases). Paediatric community acquired pneumonia (CAP) is a medical condition that is not clearly delineated. Although clinical features have not been evaluated thoroughly, tachypnoea, as suggested by the World Health  Organisation  (WHO),  appears  to  be  the  main  predictive  clinical  sign.  In  practice,  the  best available  method  for  diagnosis  of  pneumonia  is  chest  radiography.  Within  this  background  of diagnostic imprecision, a few studies have evaluated the incidence rates of pneumonia. In developed countries,  rates  in  children  less  than  5  years  of  age  range  from  30  to  40  per  1,000  child-years.  In developing  countries,  incidence  rates  are,  on  the  average,  five  to  ten  times  greater,  and  pneumonia causes 20% of the deaths in children less than 5 years. Establishing the aetiological diagnosis of paediatric CAP is a complicated problem in clinical practice. Many viruses, and bacteria that include S. pneumoniae, can cause pneumonia, and mixed infections or bacterial supra-infections are common. Taken together, studies show that 25 to 40% of radiologically proven pneumonia can presumably be considered as pneumococcal. These projections were concurrent with  the  estimates  of  vaccine  preventable  fraction  of  pneumonia  from  the  recent  double-blind, controlled  trials  of  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccines  (trials  in  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  The Gambia, and at NCKP, see below).  Since vaccine efficacy cannot be 100%, the vaccine-preventable fraction  that  ranged  from  20  to  37%  likely  underestimates  the  pneumococcal  contribution  to pneumonia. Serotype distribution in complicated pneumonia has been described in one multi-centre, retrospective, US study that involved 368 children hospitalised for pneumococcal pneumonia.  Of these 368 cases, 133 children were considered to suffer from a complicated form of pneumonia (essentially, pleural effusion  or  empyema).  Whereas  86.5%  of  strains  from  uncomplicated  pneumonia  were  Prevenar serotypes,  only  58.3%  of  isolates  were  Prevenar  types  in  complicated  presentations (Tan  TQ  et  al. 2002). As the published studies indicated protection against pneumococcal pneumonia, the MAH presented the available data to support the extension of the indication to include protection against pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F and 23F. 1.2.2 Clinical Data NCKP efficacy trial (Black S. et al.) Medicinal product no longer authorised

Between October 1995 and August 1998, 37,868 healthy, 2-month-old infants were enrolled in this study,  and  they  received  either  Prevenar  or  a  control  vaccine  at  2,  4,  6  and  12-15  months  of  age, concomitantly with other recommended infant vaccines. Cases of pneumonia (seen in the outpatient clinic, emergency room, or hospital) were identified through the computerised databases of diagnosis made  by  the  treating  physician  at  NCKP,  which  included  bronchopneumonia,  viral  pneumonia, pneumonia with consolidation, and pleural empyema. A positive radiograph, defined as any area of

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

consolidation,  empyema, or a parenchyma infiltrate, was considered to correspond more likely to a bacterial  infection.  At  the  end  of  blinded  follow-up  in  April  1999,  the  study  population  included children up to the age of 3.5 years.

Of  11  cases  of  bacteraemic  pneumococcal  pneumonia  that  occurred  during  follow-up  in  this  trial, pneumococcal isolates from 9 cases were vaccine serotypes in the intent-to-treat analysis; 8 were from control  patients.  The  effectiveness  estimate  was  87.5%  (p  =  0.04).  Including  the  two  additional nonvaccine serotype cases in controls  for  an  analysis  of  all  serotypes,  the  effectiveness  was  90.0% (p = 0.01). One case was observed among vaccinees.

|                                         | Intent-to-Treat                  | Intent-to-Treat         | Per-Protocol             | Per-Protocol             | Per-Protocol            |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|
| Outcome                                 | Cases/1000 person- years product | VE % (95% CI)           | Cases/1000 person- years | Cases/1000 person- years | VE% (95% CI)            |
|                                         | Prevenar Control                 |                         | Prevenar                 | Control                  |                         |
| All clinical pneumonia                  | 43.5 45.8                        | 6.0 (-1.5-11.0); P=0.13 | 53.4                     | 55.9                     | 4.3 (-3.5-11.5); P=0.27 |
| Clinical pneumonia, radiograph obtained | 26.3 28.9                        | 8.9 (0.9-16.3); P=0.03  | 30.9                     | 34.2                     | 9.8 (0.1-18.5); P=0.05  |
| Clinical pneumonia, positive radiograph | 8.3 10.1                         | 17.7 (4.8-28.9); P=0.01 | 8.7                      | 11.0                     | 20.5 (4.4-34.0); P=0.02 |

To  measure  the  vaccine-induced  reduction  in  incidence  of  clinical  pneumonia  that  cannot  be microbiologically proven to be of pneumococcal aetiology, multiple outcomes were analysed: · The first episodes of any clinical diagnosis of pneumonia, the outcome of highest sensitivity but lacking specificity, were decreased by 4.3% (p=0.27). · Among  children  who  completed  their  immunisation  series  per  protocol,  the  rate  of  clinical pneumonia with a positive radiograph, the outcome of higher specificity but less sensitive, was reduced by 20.5% (95% CI, 4.4 to 34.0%).  Vaccine efficacy was greatest for children younger than 2 years: 32.2% (95% CI, 3.3 to 52.5%) in less than one year of age and 23.4% (95% CI, 5.2 to 38.1%) in less than two years of age. Vaccine efficacy estimate was lower in those older than 2 years, 9.1% (p=0.61). Based on the intent-to-treat analysis with an incidence rate of 10.6 cases per 1,000  child-years,  it  was  estimated  that  there  would  be  approximately  5  cases  of  clinical pneumonia  with  a  positive  radiograph,  as  defined  by  the  authors,  prevented  per  1,000  infants immunised, before they reach the age of 2 years. Table 1: Efficacy for first episode of pneumonia in children receiving Prevenar versus controls. The data from the NCKP trial were extrapolated to the population of children aged less than 2 years living  in  the  25  Member  States  of  the  EU  (birth  cohort  statistics,  preliminary  estimates  for  2005, Eurostat  01-2006).    Applied  to  a  birth  cohort  of  4,816,400  infants,  the  number  of  radiologically defined pneumonia would be 102,100 per year in children less than 2 years.  The projected number of vaccine-prevented episodes of radiologically confirmed pneumonia in this age group would be about 24,000 in any one year, considering that 5 episodes would be prevented in the first two years of life per 1,000 vaccinated children. Medicinal product no longer authorised

It  was  acknowledged that the effectiveness of Prevenar against pneumonia was demonstrated in the NCKP trial. The overall reduction (4.3%) (p=0.27) of the primary outcome measure was, however, low.  Efficacy  was  more  promising  in  the  group  with  positive  radiographs  (20.5%),  however  the calculated  vaccine  efficacy  value  for  this  group  was  lower  in  children  older  than  2  years,  9.1% (p=0.61).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

For those with potentially more serious pneumonia (consolidation), the efficacy was  73%. These data suggest that pneumococcal infections play a more important role in severe disease, which is clinically relevant. However, at the time of the initial Marketing Authorisation the CHMP considered that the pneumonia  part  of  the  NCKP  trial  suffered  from  important  deficiencies,  since  there  were  no  prespecified criteria for the diagnosis and no bacteriologic confirmation. Taking this into consideration, the CHMP did not approve a pneumonia indication at the time of the granting of the initial Marketing Authorisation, but the effectiveness data on pneumonia were included in section 5.1 of the SPC.

The CHMP noted that the NCKP data suggested a waning protection against radiologically confirmed pneumonia in  children  &gt;2  years.  The  reasons  for  the  apparent  lack  of  benefit  of  Prevenar  in  older children were considered unclear. Similar decreases in effectiveness against invasive pneumococcal disease (or acute otitis media (AOM)) with age have not been demonstrated, so it was not considered likely that this finding represents waning immunity in this age group. The CHMP therefore requested that the apparent age differences in effectiveness of Prevenar should be further discussed by the MAH. The MAH indicated in his response that the expected value for vaccine effectiveness was based on the assumption that the onset and the duration of a vaccine-induced protective immune response match the peak incidence of the vaccine-targeted infection. Black S, et al . have re-evaluated the effectiveness of Prevenar against pneumonia using WHO-criteria for  reading  chest  radiographs  (issued  in  2001).  Overall,  vaccine  efficacy  against  a  first  episode  of clinical  pneumonia  with  a  positive  radiograph  was  30.3%  (95%  CI,  10.7-  45.7)  in  the  per  protocol analysis ( Hansen J, et al .). However, this analysis did not include stratification by age. Several factors including waning immunity and lower contribution of pneumococcal vaccine serotypes to  pneumonia, could explain this observed waning protection in older children as  mentioned in the initial  publication  (Black  S,  et  al.).  Waning  immunity  has  not  been  observed  for  invasive  diseases. Vaccine efficacy against IPD caused by vaccine serotypes (VST) has remained high, 97.4%, through the same follow up period of the NCKP trial in the per protocol analysis of April 1999 ( Black S, et al.). In the Finnish Otitis Media (FinOM) follow up study, which was included in the previously submitted variation  to  extend  the  indication  to  include  AOM  (EMEA/H/C/000323/II/0076)  and  followed  the study children up to the age of 5 years, nasopharyngeal carriage of vaccine serotypes was reduced in the Prevenar group, 8.5% versus 13.6% (relative risk of 0.62, 95% CI: 0.41- 0.95) ( Palmu A, et al. ). This global trend for lower carriage of vaccine serotype pneumococci among vaccinated children in the FinOM follow up study was considered not supportive of a hypothesis of 'waning immunity' in older children. The MAH further responded that altogether, it was unlikely that waning immunity was a predominant factor for the lower protection against pneumonia that has been observed in children older than 2 years of age. By contrast, it was considered that the contribution of vaccine serotypes to the total burden of pneumonia might change as a function of age. In older children, vaccine serotypes may represent a decreasing  proportion  of  pneumococcal  pneumonia.  Epidemiological  studies  on  IPD  in  European children have shown a natural trend for the seven vaccine serotypes to have a lower contribution to disease in older children ( Miller E et al., Perez Mendez C et al., McIntosh E et al., Vergison A et al.). Medicinal product no longer authorised

Replacement of  vaccine  serotypes  by  non-vaccine  serotypes  has  been  reported  in  AOM  during  the FinOM trial during the study follow-up period up to the age of 24 months ( Palmu A, et al. ). Because the  large  majority  of  pneumonia  cases  were  mucosal,  non-invasive  infections,  such  a  phenomenon could  not  be  ruled  out.  It  was  also  considered  possible  that  pneumococcal  pneumonia  represents  a smaller  percentage  of  pneumonia  in  children  older  than  2  years  because  other  bacterial  pathogens (Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Chlamydia pneumoniae) cause a larger fraction in the older age group.

In general, the CHMP agreed that most often paediatric pneumonia is not bacteraemic, however the aetiology of childhood pneumonia cannot be identified in the vast majority of cases as no reliable noninvasive diagnostic procedures are available that could be used routinely. Therefore, the CHMP agreed

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

that it was not possible to investigate what could be the contribution of these microbiological factors to the observed waning protection against clinical pneumonia in children above 2 years of age.

In  conclusion,  the  CHMP  agreed  that  according  to  the  NCKP  trial  the  fraction  of  disease  burden preventable by Prevenar, in the EU each year, for children in the first two years of life would represent approximately 24,000 episodes of radiologically defined pneumonia.

<!-- image -->

|              |   PCV9 |   Control | VE (95% CI)   |    p |
|--------------|--------|-----------|---------------|------|
| HIV-negative |    169 |       212 | 20 (2, 35)    | 0.03 |
| HIV-positive |    182 |       209 | 13 (-7, 29)   | 0.19 |
| All children |    336 |       428 | 17 (4, 28)    | 0.01 |

Placebo-controlled trials with an investigational PCV9 in South-Africa and Gambia The investigational PCV9 vaccine used in these studies contained the seven pneumococcal CRM197conjugated  antigens  in  Prevenar,  plus  serotype  1  and  5  CRM197  glycoconjugates.  Both  studies included CAP endpoints. Children in the study populations were poor and represented a population characteristic for developing countries. In addition, a substantial proportion of children in the South African study, about 25%, were born to HIV-infected mothers. In  these  two  trials,  microbiological  diagnoses  could  not  be  made  for  the  CAP-related  endpoints. Assuming that the serotype distribution in these clinical entities was similar to that in IPD in the same population, the likely impact of the seven Prevenar components could then be calculated. South African trial (Klugman Ket al.) In  this  South  African  study  (n=39836),  19,922  children  received  the  9-valent  pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine conjugated to CRM197, and 19,914 received placebo (both at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age). All children received Haemophilus influenzae type b conjugate vaccine. Efficacy and safety were analysed according to the intention- to-treat principle. Clinical  pneumonia  was  defined  as  radiologically  confirmed  pneumonia  or  a  clinical  diagnosis  of lower  respiratory  tract  infections  (LRTI),  without  wheeze  on  auscultation,  but  with  crackles  and/or bronchial breathing.  Severe pneumonia was defined as cough of less than 14 days with lower chest wall indrawing and/or feeding difficulties, convulsions, central cyanosis or encephalopathy. In the per-protocol analysis, there were 119 first episodes of pneumonia among HIV-negative children receiving PCV9 and 158 among HIV-negative controls, for a vaccine efficacy estimate of 25% (95% CI: 4-41%). Mortality was not significantly reduced: 5% among all children and 6% among HIV-infected subjects. Pneumonia and bronchiolitis were associated with 66% of deaths among study subjects.  There were 153  deaths  attributable  to  pneumonia  in  the  PCV9  group  and  160  in  the  control  group,  for  a  4% reduction in mortality attributable to pneumonia (p=NS). The results from the Intention-to Treat (ITT)analysis can be found in table 2. Table  2:  Efficacy  of  PCV9  against  first  episodes  of  radiographically  confirmed  pneumonia; intent-to-treat analysis. South-Africa (VE= Vaccine efficacy) Medicinal product no longer authorised

Efficacy against virus-associated pneumonia in the South African study (for which a pneumococcal aetiology could not be confirmed by blood culture) was 31% (95% CI, 15 to 43%). This effect was significant  for  HIV-infected  children  but  did  not  reach  statistical  significance  for  HIV-uninfected

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

children.  These observations provide evidence of the role of pneumococcal superinfection in virusassociated  pneumonia in this study in children whose conditions required admission.  In particular, there  was  significant  efficacy  against  influenza  A-associated  pneumonia,  both  overall  and  in  HIVinfected children

In the South African study, the efficacy against IPD caused by any of the seven Prevenar types was 72%, an estimate that is very similar to that against IPD caused by any of the nine types in PCV9. Immune  responses  to  Prevenar  were  similar  to  the  overall  response  to  the  serotypes  in  the  PCV9 vaccine; therefore, it was considered that efficacy against Prevenar type pneumonia would be similar to that against PCV9 type pneumonia, but that the overall efficacy against pneumococcal pneumonia might  be  about  10  to  15%  lower  because  of  reduced  serotype  coverage.    This  would  signify  an efficacy for Prevenar against radiologically confirmed pneumonia of 20 to 30% and against all clinical pneumonia of 5 to 6%.  These projections were congruent with the results from the NCKP study.

Overall,  this  controlled  study  showed  significant  efficacy  of  the  PCV9  vaccine  against  IPD  and pneumonia. Efficacy against vaccine serotype IPD was 72% and, thus, somewhat lower than that seen in the NCKP trial (VE: 93%). These results might be partly explained by the inclusion of HIV-positive children in the African trial, for whom vaccine efficacy was lower (65% vs. 83% for HIV-negative children). This was the first efficacy study in HIV-infected children and showed  that the pneumococcal conjugate vaccine is also useful in this high risk group. The level of protection obtained in this study was observed over a mean follow-up of 2.3 years without a booster dose.

With respect to pneumonia, efficacy was only presented for radiologically confirmed pneumonia (VE: 17%  in  the  total  cohort).  As  argued  by  the  authors,  the  use  of  a  radiological  endpoint  probably underestimated the true vaccine efficacy, since the specificity of alveolar consolidation, as a diagnostic test  of  pneumococcal pneumonia is suboptimal. Among HIV-negative children, there were 169 first episodes among PCV9 recipients and 212 among controls, for a VE of 20% (per-protocol 25%). These findings were similar to those of the Kaiser trial for radiological pneumonia . For the HIV infected children in South Africa, the study failed to show  statistically significant efficacy against radiologically  confirmed  pneumonia  (13%,  95%  CI,  -7  to  29%).  However,  the  burden  of  vaccine preventable pneumonia was 909 cases per 100,000 child-years in this infected population, whereas it was 100/100,000 child-years in the HIV-uninfected population. However, the burden of vaccine preventable pneumonia was 909 cases per 100,000 child-years in this infected  population,  whereas  it  was  100/100,000  child-years  in  the  HIV-uninfected  population.  The lower efficacy estimate might be influenced by other pathogens such as Pneumocystis carinii infecting the HIV-infected population. An  important  finding  was  the  observed  efficacy  of  the  vaccine  against  antibiotic  resistant  strains. Overall,  the  vaccine  reduced  the  incidence  of  penicillin-resistant  pneumococci  by  67%.  Antibiotic resistant  strains  were  more  commonly  reported  in  HIV-infected  children,  with  penicillin-resistant strains  found  in  one  third  of  IPD  cases.  Currently,  almost  all  drug-resistant  clones  belong  to  the  7 vaccine serotypes. The 9-valent vaccine differed from Prevenar as it contained 2 additional serotypes (1 and 5). These two serotypes, however, occurred in few IPD cases: serotype 1 was identified in 1 of a total of 11 cases in the vaccine group vs. 4 of 43 cases in the placebo group. The corresponding figures for serotype 5 were 0 vs. 2. The most common vaccine serotypes in the placebo group were 6B and 14 as well as the related serotype 6A. A non-significant increase of nonvaccine serotype IPD was seen among vaccinated subjects, but the limited number of cases (13 vs. 9 placebo cases) allows no conclusion to be drawn. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Vaccine  efficacy  against  bacteraemic  pneumococcal  CAP  caused  by  a  vaccine  serotype  was  61% (95% CI, 16 to 82%) in the ITT analysis, whereas the VE estimate was not statistically significant in the PP analysis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP considered that this large controlled trial in South Africa using a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine similar to  Prevenar  provided  supporting  data  with  respect  to  efficacy  against  radiologically confirmed pneumonia.

## Gambian trial (Cutts F et al.)

In  this  study  carried  out  in  The  Gambia  (n=17437),  clinical  pneumonia  was  defined  as  history  of cough or breathing difficulty of less than 14 days' duration, with a raised respiratory rate for age or with indrawing of the lower chest wall. If a doctor diagnosed indrawing, the pneumonia was classified as severe. About 10% of cases were classified as severe. The  primary  endpoint  of  this  independent  study  was  a  pneumonia  outcome  measure  and  thus,  this study confirmed and defined more precisely vaccine efficacy against pneumonia with consolidation. The study demonstrated that the 9-valent vaccine had high efficacy against radiological pneumonia (VE:  36%  ITT-analysis,  37%  per-protocol  analysis)  and  substantially  reduced  admissions  and improved child survival. No decrease of vaccine efficacy with age was noted in this study by contrast to observation in the Kaiser trial. However, a malaria diagnosis seemed to reduce vaccine efficacy. Vaccine efficacy against radiological pneumonia attributed to the vaccine serotypes was 70% (95% CI: 31-88) (see also table 3 below). The extent of vaccine efficacy against vaccine serotype invasive disease (VE: 71% ITT) was similar to that  noted  in  the  South  African  trial  (VE:  72%).  Test  for  HIV  infection  was  not  performed  in  this study. Overall 65% of IPD episodes were of serotypes contained in the 9-valent vaccine and 48% were of serotypes  in  Prevenar.  Thus,  a  greater  effect  on  IPD  was  noted  for  the  9PCV  vaccine.  The  most common  serotypes  causing  IPD  were  14,  5  and  23F.  A  non-significant  increase  in  non-vaccine serotypes  was  observed,  but  the  full  potential  of  replacement  diseases  could  not  be  assessed  since children  were  randomised  individually.  Indirect  protection  was  not  evaluated,  which  needs  to  be monitored also in a developing country setting. The preventable burden of pneumococcal-related pneumonia was at least 7 times greater than that of invasive pneumococcal disease (absolute rate 15 vs. 2 episodes per 1000 child years). The finding of a 16% reduction in mortality suggested that CAP is a more common cause of childhood mortality than previously recognised. Table 3: Efficacy of PCV9 against first episodes of radiographically confirmed pneumonia, perprotocol analysis (Gambia). Medicinal product no longer authorised

|                  | Vaccine (n=8189)   | Vaccine (n=8189)               | Placebo (n=8151)   | Placebo (n=8151)               | VE %(95% CI)     |
|------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|------------------|
|                  | Number             | Rate/1000 child- years(95% CI) | Number             | Rate/1000 child-years (95% CI) | VE %(95% CI)     |
| Overall          | 333                | 26 (23.3, 28.9)                | 513                | 40.9 (37.5, 44.6)              | 37 (27, 45)      |
| Age (months)     | Age (months)       | Age (months)                   | Age (months)       | Age (months)                   | Age (months)     |
| 3-11             | 124                | 34.4 (28.8, 41.0)              | 188                | 53.0 (45.9, 61.1)              | 35 (19, 48)      |
| 12-23            | 181                | 25.8 (22.3, 29.9)              | 285                | 41.7 (37.1, 46.8)              | 38 (25, 49)      |
| 24-29            | 28                 | 12.7 (8.8, 18.4)               | 40                 | 18.7 (13.7, 25.4)              | 32 (-10, 58)     |
| Admission Status | Admission Status   | Admission Status               | Admission Status   | Admission Status               | Admission Status |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|                   | Vaccine (n=8189)   | Vaccine (n=8189)               | Placebo (n=8151)   | Placebo (n=8151)               | VE %(95% CI)      |
|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------|
|                   | Number             | Rate/1000 child- years(95% CI) | Number             | Rate/1000 child-years (95% CI) | VE %(95% CI)      |
| Outpatient        | 180                | 14.0 (12.1, 16.2)              | 253                | 20.2 (17.8, 22.8)              | 30 (15, 43)       |
| Inpatient         | 153                | 11.9 (10.2, 14.0)              | 260                | 20.7 (18.4, 23.4)              | 42 (30, 53)       |
| Vaccine Serotypes | Vaccine Serotypes  | Vaccine Serotypes              | Vaccine Serotypes  | Vaccine Serotypes              | Vaccine Serotypes |
| X-ray positive    | 8                  | 0.6 (0.3, 1.2)                 | 26                 | 2.0 (1.4, 3.0)                 | 70 (31, 88)       |
| Lung aspirate     | 3                  | 0.2 0.07, 0.7)                 | 11                 | 0.8 (0.5, 1.5)                 | 73 (-2, 95)       |
| All Serotypes     | All Serotypes      | All Serotypes                  | All Serotypes      | All Serotypes                  | All Serotypes     |
| X-ray positive    | 19                 | 1.5 (0.9, 2.3)                 | 45                 | 3.5 (2.6, 4.7)                 | 58 (27, 77)       |
| Lung aspirate     | 6                  | 0.5 (0.2, 1.0)                 | 20                 | 1.5 (1.0, 2.4)                 | 68 (18, 89)       |

(10.2, 14.0) Vaccine Serotypes X-ray positive 8 0.6 (0.3, 1.2) Lung aspirate 3 0.2 0.07, 0.7) All Serotypes X-ray positive 19 1.5 (0.9, 2.3) Lung aspirate 6 0.5 (0.2, 1.0) The efficacy against clinical pneumonia was low; overall 7% in the per-protocol analysis and 6% in the ITT  analysis. This might be due to the low  specificity of the clinical diagnosis with misclassification of clinical pneumonia. However,  efficacy  was  significant  against  all  pneumonia,  as  well  as  radiologically  confirmed pneumonia, in both trials. Amongst HIV-negative children (over 90% of children in South Africa), efficacy estimates were higher for radiologically confirmed pneumonia: 37% (95% CI, 25 to 48%), in the South African trial. 1.2.3 Post-marketing experience Prevenar in clinical pneumonia in the US and indirect effects of vaccination (herd immunity) In the US, the impact that routine infant immunisation with Prevenar had on invasive pneumococcal diseases including bacteraemic pneumonia is well documented. Its impact on CAP has been evaluated in a US population-based surveillance program for CAP among enrolees of Group Health Cooperative, a commercial insurance program in the State of Washington (Nelson JC et al. 2005 ).  Pneumonia cases were  identified  as  ICD9  codes  for  diagnosis  made  at  inpatients  or  outpatients  visits,  and  chest radiographs reports and hospitalisations records were reviewed.  Among children less than 2 years, age-specific  rates  of  CAP  were  lower  in  2003-2004,  19.3  per  1,000  child-years,  compared  to  time periods before Prevenar (1998-2000) or during its introduction phase (2001-2002), when rates were estimated to be 21.3 and 25.4/1,000 child-years, respectively. Furthermore, the authors reported that a more pronounced reduction was noted on hospitalised cases in this age group, with an incidence rate ratio of 0.56 (95% CI, 0.40 to 0.79) for the years 2003-2004 versus 1998-2000. A consistent reduction in CAP rates in older children and adults after PCV 7 introduction was not detected. In this report, a comparison  was  made  between  the  incidence  rate  during  pre-  and  post-Prevenar  time  periods. Differences  in  case  ascertainment,  in  intercurrent  viral  infections  and  changes  in  the  degree  of surveillance  consequent  to  the  introduction  of  pneumococcal  vaccination  were  potential  biases  that may affect such comparison. Nonetheless, such a reduction was consistent with the expected direct effect of Prevenar on CAP in this age group. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The CHMP considered that this population-based surveillance program for CAP provided evidence that the introduction of Prevenar has resulted in reduction of CAP rates in the age group 0-2 years. However, no indirect effects in older children and adults were detected and no consistent reduction in CAP rates was noted in these age groups.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP therefore considered that this observation needed to be addressed by the MAH, especially in  the  light  of  the  substantial  decrease  in  the  incidence  of  invasive  pneumococcal  disease  reported among older adults after the introduction of US-wide childhood immunisation with Prevenar.

The  MAH  responded  that  in  this  study,  consistent  variations  in  age-specific  rates  of  communityacquired pneumonia (CAP) for all age groups, except young children less than 2 years of age were described. Compared to the pre-vaccine era, rates increased in the study years 2001 - 2002, and then slightly decreased in 2003 - 2004. Overall, these findings do not provide any evidence of an indirect effect (herd immunity) for pneumonia in older children or in adults

Using reviews of medical insurance databases in two geographically and demographically distinct US regions (Tennessee and Rochester, New York), the authors measured annual rates of medical visits for pneumococcal-related diseases (otitis media, pneumococcal and non-specific pneumonia, and invasive disease) for children aged less than 2 years and children aged 3-5 years in the years prior to (19952000  for  Tennessee;  1998-2000  for  New  York)  and  the  two  years  after  (2000-2002)  Prevenar introduction. Expected disease rates were calculated for children aged less than 2 years in each postvaccine year, and the difference between the expected and observed rates was defined as the estimated vaccine effect. Additionally, ratios of disease rates between children aged less than 2 years and those aged  3-5  years  were  calculated  (because  vaccine-related  outcomes  should  preferentially  decline  in vaccinated children, and because year-to-year variability in pneumococcal diseases should affect both

As  there  was  no  aetiological  diagnosis  of  pneumonia,  it  was  considered  impossible  to  investigate whether  a  reduction  in  pneumococcal  pneumonia  due  to  vaccine  serotypes  would  have  been overshadowed, either by an increase in cases due to non-vaccine serotypes, or by other pathogensincluding  influenza  that  could  contribute  to  the  burden  of  pneumonia  in  adults.  In  young  children, pneumococcal  pneumonia  may  result  from  the  mucosal  spread  of  pneumococcus  to  the  lower respiratory  tract  related  to  the  nasopharyngeal  carriage  of  this  pathogen.  Despite  the  absence  of diagnostic methods to identify the causative agent in pneumonia, the observed reduction in rates of CAP in children less than 2 years of age indicates that replacement by non vaccine serotypes did not blunt  the  beneficial  reduction  in  cases  caused  by  vaccine  serotypes.  This  age  group  is  the  most susceptible to pneumococcal infections because protective immunity would not have been established without  vaccination.  Therefore,  one  may  speculate  that  these  non-vaccine  serotypes  are  associated with a lower likelihood of pneumonia in older children and adults. Nonetheless, the possible role of host factors specific to the elderly, that leave this age group more susceptible, cannot be ruled out. Additionally, several factors in the adult population might have led to an increase in reported cases of CAP that would obscure a true decrease in pneumococcal pneumonia caused by vaccine serotypes. These include possible changes over time in the diagnosis of and treatment practices for pneumonia, as well inconsistencies in diagnosis codes. Pneumonia in adults and the elderly is also associated with influenza infection, and variations in the severity  of  influenza  seasons  are  known.  Such  variations  were  considered  likely  to  influence  the reported rates of pneumonia in any given season. The  absence  of  a  microbiological  diagnosis  for  pneumonia,  together  with  the  fact  that  it  was  not possible  to  explore  possible  factors  that  would  influence  the  rates  of  reported  pneumonia,  were limitations to this study. The CHMP acknowledged the limitations of the study. Population-based impact of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in young children (Poehling KA et al.) The  primary  objective  of  this  observational  study  was  to  evaluate  the  reduction  in  pneumococcal diseases  on  a  population  basis  after  the  introduction  of  Prevenar  in  the  US,  and  it  was  the  first  to document declines in all pneumococcal-related diseases since the introduction of Prevenar in children aged &lt;2 years. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

age groups equally on an absolute incidence basis). Potentially important differences between these populations  include  overall  lower  socioeconomic  status  and  higher  proportion  of  racial/ethnic minorities in the Tennessee population, with a two-fold greater proportion of children under 2 years who were considered 'high-risk' than the New York population.

The  Tennessee  population  included  442,281  child-years  of  observation  for  children  &lt;2  years  and 586,027 child-years of observation for children aged 3-5 years; child-years of observation for the same age  groups  in  the  New  York  population  were  44,233  and  77,540,  respectively.  These  observation times were further broken down into three time periods: 1) baseline (1995-2000 for Tennessee; 19982000 for New York), 2) a transition period during which practitioners began to use Prevenar (20002001),  and  3)  a  post-Prevenar  period  (2001-2002).  For  the  post-Prevenar  year,  there  were  67,380 child-years of observation for children &lt;2 years in Tennessee, and 9,485 child-years of observation for the same age group in New York. The rate of visits for pneumonia and invasive disease for children &lt;2  years  was  higher  in  Tennessee  (110-135/1000  child-years)  than  in  New  York  (87/1000  childyears), whereas the rate of visits for otitis media was higher in New York (2125-2247/1000 child-years for  children  &lt;2  years  and  795-903/1000  child-years  for  children  aged  3-5  years)  than  in  Tennessee (1175-2019 and 471-562 visits/1000 child-years for each age group, respectively). Rates of visits for pneumonia and invasive disease were similar in each area for  children aged 3-5 years (44-53/1000 child-years).

diseases. However, the results of this population-based study were considered important. With regard to invasive disease and pneumonia, there was a 16% decline in hospitalisations and a 17% decline in outpatient visits in Tennessee. A larger decline was noted in New York, with outpatient visits being reduced by 35% compared to the pre-vaccination period.

To control for yearly variability in disease rates, rate ratios (children aged &lt;2 years vs. 3-5 years) were calculated for each disease for each year and population (Tennessee and New York). Finally,  the  authors  calculated  the  estimated  vaccine  effects  on  medical  visits  for  pneumococcalrelated  diagnoses,  based  on  the  product  of  1)  the  average  ratios  for  the  2  pre-vaccine  years  (19982000) and 2) observed rates in children aged 3-5 years. Compared with the pre-vaccine baseline, it was estimated that the significant declines in pneumonia and invasive disease represented a decrease of 8 emergency department (ED) visits and 12 outpatient (clinic) visits per 1000 Tennessee children, and 33 fewer outpatient visits per 1000 New York children. A higher decrease was noted for otitis media. Per 1000 Tennessee children, significant declines in otitis media represented 56 fewer ED visits and 62 fewer outpatient visits. Declines in ED visits were similar for New York children, an estimated 34 fewer visits per 1000 children; outpatient visits for otitis media were most drastically reduced in this group, with 396 fewer outpatient visits for otitis media per 1000 children. The overall impact of routine Prevenar vaccination on pneumonia and otitis media in this study was 10-fold  and  100-fold  greater,  respectively,  than  the  reported  decrease  of  1.3  culture-confirmed invasive pneumococcal disease cases per 1000 children in 2001, as reported by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( Whitney C et al ) and were also considerably greater than estimated by the pre-licensure experience at NCKP ( Black S et al. 2001) . The  CHMP  considered  that  this  study  had  several  limitations,  i.e.  a)  the  vaccination  status  of  the children  in  the  post-vaccine  years  was  not  known  (the  results  with  a  greater  decrease  in  cultureconfirmed pneumococcal disease in New York (92%) than Tennessee (69%) suggests that New York had  a  higher  uptake),  b)  the  study  population  was  selected  including  only  those  who  qualified  for commercial insurance in the two states, c) potential errors in the administrative database (e.g. possible inconsistency in diagnostic codes; multiple visits for a single episode of illness may be indistinguishable; and  only  billed visits would  be  included)  and  d)  lack  of  confirmation  of pneumococcal disease as the causative study outcomes. Additionally, vaccine shortages in 2001-2002 may have decreased the vaccination rate overall, and so the findings of this study may in fact be an underestimation of the impact of Prevenar vaccination on pneumococcal and pneumococcal related diseases. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In  conclusion,  this  population-based  study  provided  data  on  the  impact  of  routine  vaccination  with Prevenar  on  pneumonia  (and  invasive  disease)  in  children  &lt;2  years.  Rates  of  hospitalisations, emergency  visits  and  outpatients  visits  for  pneumonia  fell  by  16  to  18%  as  compared  to  pre-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

vaccination rates. Due to high prevalence of pneumonia, the impact of Prevenar in this study was 10fold greater than the reported declines in invasive disease in children aged &lt;2 years. Based on the data from the NCKP trial, it was estimated that for every episode of invasive disease prevented, Prevenar would prevent on average 4.4 episodes of pneumonia.

## Continued Surveillance of pneumococcal disease - serotype replacement and antibiotic resistance

The CHMP considered that there is a need for further continued surveillance of prevalence of invasive pneumococcal  disease  in  order  to  study  serotype  replacement  with  potential  virulent  organisms, emergence of antibiotic resistance in non- vaccine pneumococcal serotypes and any modification in the clinical manifestations of the disease. A  small  increase  in  the  frequency  of  disease  caused  by  non-vaccine  serotypes  has  been  observed; while in general these newly emerging serotypes are susceptible to penicillin (with the exception of serotype 19A in the United States (US) (Kyaw M, et al), the ability of organisms to acquire resistance determinants  is well known.  Additionally,  considerable declines have  also been  observed  in bacteraemic pneumonia incidence during the same time period. Recent reports demonstrate a shift in pneumococcal  disease  states  such  that  pneumonia  now  makes  up  a  greater  proportion  of  the  total documented number of all IPD in US children less than 5 years of age than in the pre-vaccine era. The reasons for this observation were unclear: but could be in part related to outbreaks caused by serotypes not included in the vaccine independent of any vaccine selection pressure ( Byington C, et al.). The MAH presented surveillance programmes in the EU; some of these at least in part supported by Wyeth.  The  MAH  also  presented  a  discussion  of  the  surveillance  programs  of  several  European countries,  including  type  and  scope  of  surveillance,  funding  sources,  and  outcomes  of  such surveillance programs. The CHMP considered that surveillance studies should also include a close monitoring of pneumonia and nasopharyngeal carriage with respect to serotype replacement and bacteriological shifts as well as patterns of antibiotic resistance in the EU. Therefore the MAH was requested by the CHMP to present an overview on this issue. The MAH pointed out in his response that less than 5% of paediatric pneumonia were bacteraemic or complicated  by  pleural  effusion.  Therefore,  in  the  absence  of  sensitive  and  specific  non-invasive diagnostic methods, laboratory confirmation of the aetiology will not be obtained for most paediatric pneumonia.  Consequently,  the  assessment  of  the  impact  that  Prevenar  immunisation  programs  will have on pneumonia will be essentially based on monitoring clinically defined syndromes. The  MAH  presented  an  overview  from  population-based  surveillance  programmes,  based  on computerised databases of hospital admissions and of general practitioners consultations in the UK, where Prevenar was introduced in September 2006 (Melegaro A, et al.) and the Netherlands, where Prevenar was introduced for all infants in June 2006. Furthermore, a five-year surveillance of nasopharyngeal carriage among young French children aged 6 to 24 months presenting with AOM was set up in 2001, when Prevenar was introduced in France, to follow evolving patterns of S. pneumoniae microbiology and antibiotic resistance trends. In July 2006, routine immunisation with Prevenar was recommended for all infants less than 2 years of age. Medicinal product no longer authorised

In addition, a study of nasopharyngeal colonisation will be performed in 6-24 month olds from 2007 to 2011 as a follow up assessment to the above mentioned study EU-005 ('Evaluation of pneumococcal carriage in French children younger than 2 years of age') in France.

The MAH has previously committed in the frame of the variation EMEA/H/C/323/II/76 to extend this surveillance  program  for  another  period  of  5  years  until  2011.  During  the  2006-07-study  year, approximately 90 paediatricians and 30 general practitioners throughout France will collect nasopharyngeal swabs from two groups of children, 6 to 24 months of age, presenting at their clinics.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

At the same practices, approximately 700 children who are presenting with AOM and 300 children who are otherwise healthy will be enrolled each year.

The CHMP considered the response acceptable and agreed with the MAH's commitments to monitor serotype replacement and antibiotic resistance.

Overall, the CHMP considered that the planned surveillance programmes would be sufficient to detect potential shifts in the serotype distribution.

<!-- image -->

| High estimate   | < 2years old     |   174 | 85%   |   148 |
|-----------------|------------------|-------|-------|-------|
| High estimate   | 2 to 5 years old |  16.1 | 73%   |    12 |

Extrapolation of available data to the European setting The MAH presented an overview concerning vaccine- attributable reduction in pneumococcal disease among European children less than 2 years or 2 to 5 years of age. In the European Union, the published values for the serotype coverage for IPD in children &lt; 2 years of age range from 54 to 85% (median value, 73%); for children 2 to 5 years of age, they range from 48 to 73% (median value, 61%). Based on national reports from Europe, the serotype coverage rate for IPD in children 2 to 5 years of age  was  about  10  percentage  points  less  than  for  children  &lt;  2  years  of  age.  Furthermore,  in  these surveillance systems, which are mostly passive and laboratory based (essentially, by hospital, region or city), the reported incidence of invasive pneumococcal disease (cases per 100,000 population per year) in children less than 2 years of age varies widely from 5.9 to 174 (median value, 26). The burden of paediatric IPD in Europe is considerable, even though the reported incidences vary 100-fold from country  to  country.  Nonetheless,  it  remains  difficult  to  obtain  the  actual  rates  for  some  countries. Under-reporting,  differences  in  reporting  methods,  antibiotic  prescribing  and  disparities  in  bloodculturing practices may distort the true picture, although real differences do exist due to variability in pneumococcal carriage, transmission, exposure and susceptibility among different populations. By contrast to IPD, there is less variability in the reported rates of pneumococcal meningitis (range, 3.0 to 16.1; median value, 9), which probably reflects the diligence with which any clinician faces of a suspected case of bacterial meningitis. Although few European countries have reported specifically the rates  of  invasive  pneumococcal  disease  in  the  2-  to  5-  year-  old  age  group,  incidence  values  range from 2.4 to 29.6 for IPD (median value, 8) and from 1.0 to 2.4 for pneumococcal meningitis (median value, 2). From these national reports in Europe, a three- to four- fold greater rate of invasive pneumococcal disease was observed in children less than 2 years of age compared to children 2 to 5 years of age. Taken  together,  it  could  be  estimated  that  impact  of  Prevenar  against  the  reported  invasive pneumococcal disease burden in European children would be as outlined in the Table 4. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  anticipated  vaccine-  attributable  reduction  in  pneumococcal  disease  is  from  two  (3.4/1.4)  to twelve (148/12) times larger for children less than 2 years of age than for children 2 to 5 years of age. In the absence of wide variations in the degree of poverty, crowding or underlying chronic diseases across Europe, any disparity in the effectiveness of Prevenar could be therefore attributable to the age of  the  paediatric  group  under  investigation.  Consequently,  Prevenar  vaccination  in  Europe  would reduce most of the disease burden because the vaccine serotypes target the paediatric population that has the greatest rates of pneumococcal disease, namely young children less than 2 years of age.

Impact of vaccination on the incidence of pneumonia in children &lt; 2 years of age in the EU As the CHMP considered that the current database on efficacy was comparably weak and primarily based on US data, the MAH was requested to submit a detailed programme on how the impact of incidence of pneumonia in children &lt; 2 years of age will be studied in the EU. The MAH responded that Prevenar showed to be effective against childhood pneumonia, both blood culture-positive episodes ('bacteraemic pneumonia') that were caused by the vaccine serotypes and radiograph-positive  episodes  that,  in  the  absence  of  sensitive  and  specific  detection  methods,  were assumed  to  have  been  caused  by  the  vaccine  serotypes.  With  respect  to  the  impact  of  Prevenar immunisation on nasopharyngeal colonisation, a decrease in the proportion of vaccine serotypes was observed that was compensated for by an increase in the proportion of non-vaccine serotypes. The result of Prevenar vaccination on another mucosal surface, in this case, infections of the middle ear, has also been studied, and the impact on vaccine and non-vaccine serotypes documented. In the FinOM  trial,  a  shift  upon  Prevenar  immunisation  for  the  pneumococcal  serotypes  isolated  from children presenting with a first episode of AOM could be observed. For the Prevenar serotypes, this was equivalent to a vaccine efficacy value of 57%, and for serotype 6A, a vaccine efficacy value of 57% was also measured. There appeared to be a decrease for episodes caused by most of the other vaccine-related serotypes (for 19A, 9N, and 23A, but not 18B). On the other hand, for episodes caused by the nonvaccine serogroups, there was no change (serotype 3 and 22), a slight increase (serogroup 15, 16, 35 and 38), or a more substantial increase (serogroups 33 and 11) in the Hepatitis B group compared to the Prevenar group. Although there were no comparable data for paediatric pneumonia because of the paucity of clinical isolates,  one  can  speculate,  based  on  the  results  for  AOM,  that  pneumonia  caused  by  non-vaccine serotypes is unlikely to overshadow the benefits of the reduction in vaccine serotype disease. PostPrevenar surveillance establishes that a substantial fall in the incidence of vaccine serotype IPD has been tempered by a small increase in the incidence of non-vaccine serotype IPD, leading to an overall positive protective effectiveness of Prevenar against all IPD episodes. With respect to non- invasive pneumococcal  disease,  as  exemplified  by  blood  culture-negative/radiograph-positive  episodes  of pneumonia,  the  role  of  non-vaccine  serotypes  in  eventual  'serotype  replacement'  pneumococcal disease remains to be elucidated. In preparation for the introduction of Prevenar into the National Immunisation Program in the United Kingdom,  the  Health  Protection  Agency  ( Melegaro  A,  et  al .) has reassessed the  burden  of pneumococcal  disease.  Based  on  a  statistical  model  that  used  national  data  sources  and  general practitioner sentinel surveillance systems, from 1995 to 2000, it was estimated that: Medicinal product no longer authorised

- S.  pneumoniae  is  responsible  for  26%  of  general  practitioner  consultations  for  communityacquired pneumonia.
- The  incidence  of  outpatient  pneumonia,  children  less  than  2  years  of  age,  is  about  100 episodes/100,000 population/year.
- The incidence of hospitalisation for 'lobar pneumonia (organism unspecified)', in children 1 to 11 months of age, is 260 / 100,000 population/year.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  a  two-year  prospective  study  of  13  UK  hospitals  between  2001  and  2002  ( Clark  J,  et  al. ),  the incidence among children less than 5 years of age with 'severe' CAP was 194 cases/100,000/year, of lobar pneumonia 'assessed in hospital' was 56 cases/100,000 population/year, and of hospitalisation for CAP was 320 admissions/100,000 population/year.

Taken together with previous surveillance results from Europe for the incidence of CAP in children less  than  2  years  of  age  (Clark  J,  et  al.),  the  range  of  values  for  community-based  surveillance  is roughly 100 to 2000 cases/100,000 population/year, and for hospital-based surveillance about 300 to 2000 cases/100,000 population/year.

Consequently, as an order of magnitude, the annual incidence for CAP in children less than 2 years of age is about 1000 cases / 100,000 population. Based on the assumption that the pneumococcus is responsible for about one-third of childhood CAP, the  incidence  of  pneumococcal  CAP  in  young  European  children  is  roughly  300  cases  /  100,000 population  /  year,  leading  to  an  order  of  magnitude  in  Europe  (birth  cohort,  4.9  million)  of  about 29,000 annual pneumococcal CAP cases among children less than 2 years of age. The efficacy of a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine against pneumococcal CAP should fall between the value  for  a  mucosal  infection  (i.e.,  about  60%  against  pneumococcal  AOM)  and  the  value  for  an invasive infection (i.e.,  about  90%  against  IPD).  Consequently,  it  can  be  anticipated  in  Europe  that Prevenar could prevent each year between 18,000 and 26,000 cases of pneumococcal CAP in children less than 2 years of age. Once  Prevenar  has  been  introduced  into  national  immunisation  programmes  in  Europe,  ecological shifts  in  the  circulation  of  pneumococcal  serotypes  within  the  population  can  be  anticipated.  Nonvaccine serotypes will predominate in colonisation of the nasopharynx of vaccinated children, which might lead to increased rates of disease. Surveillance will continue in France for mucosal colonisation among young children suffering from AOM. This will provide an insight into potential non-vaccine serotype causes of pneumococcal CAP. Surveillance will continue throughout Europe for IPD, including bacteraemic pneumonia, which will provide documentation of any possible non- vaccine serotypes causing pneumococcal CAP. Finally, from the clinical perspective, large-scale surveillance of childhood pneumonia will be conducted in the United Kingdom  and  in the Netherlands to establish the short-term and long-term clinical effectiveness of Prevenar. Current  surveillance  plans  in  Europe  should  establish  the  clinical  effectiveness  of  Prevenar  against CAP in both the short and long term perspectives. If long-term effectiveness of Prevenar against CAP cannot be established, 'serotype replacement' might be an explanation. (The MAH is developing a 13valent  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccine  in  Phase  III  trials  that  will  additionally  target  clinical important  'paediatric'  and  'outbreak'  serotypes).  Documentation  of  any  important  non-vaccine serotypes for mucosal disease is provided by the French study; whereas childhood IPD caused by nonvaccine serotypes is monitored in many European countries. The CHMP agreed with the argumentation of the MAH and considered this point resolved. Pre-Prevenar experience Medicinal product no longer authorised

The MAH also provided an overview of the clinical experience before the introduction of Prevenar in England and Wales ( Eastham et al. ,Taiwan (Hsieh Y et al. ), Spain (Aristegui J et al.) and the US (Tan T et al.)

It  was  concluded  that  in  the  period  before  introduction  of  Prevenar  vaccination,  complicated pneumonia cases fell into three categories, as described in table 5.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5: Categories of complicated pneumonia cases before introduction of Prevenar, classified by the predominant serotypes / serogroups and their antibiotic sensitivity. PenS = penicillin sensitive, PenR = penicillin resistant

| Country        | Predominant serotypes   | Antibiotic susceptibility   |
|----------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|
| England &Wales | Serogroups 1,14 & 3     | PenS                        |

Parapneumonic  empyema  (PPE)  can  be  a  complication  of  pneumonia  in  children,  which  has  been reported from England &amp; Wales, Taiwan and the US. Among the organisms that can be isolated from the pleural fluid, Streptococcus pneumoniae is the pathogen most often identified in cases of paediatric PPE. Other bacterial pathogens include Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes, but the prevalence of these contributory microorganisms varies across studies. In addition to uncomplicated pneumonia in young children and complicated pneumococcal pneumonia in older children, outbreaks of  pneumococcal  disease,  especially  pneumonia,  that  were  due  to  epidemic  serotypes  (such  as serogroups 1, 5, 8, or 12) were reported in the literature. These occur most characteristically among close-living collections of non-elderly adults (e.g., homeless shelters, jails and military settings) or in 'crowded,  often  impoverished,  communal  settings.'  These  outbreaks  of  pneumococcal  disease, especially  pneumonia,  were  due  to  epidemic  serotypes  among  certain  narrow  age  ranges,  such  as neonates  and  older  children,  as  well  as  outbreaks  in  adults.  Continuing  surveillance  will  determine their importance among the target group for Prevenar vaccination in Europe. As will be addressed in the  remainder  of  this  response,  complicated  pneumococcal  pneumonia  (i.e.,  empyema,  complex parapneumonic effusion, or necrotising pneumonia) tends to be caused by relatively few pneumococcal serogroups (i.e., serogroups 1, 3, 6, 19, and 23), occurring among older children at a rate of about 5 cases / 100,000 population/year.

The  prevalence  of  antibiotic  susceptibility  among  the  clinical  isolates  may  provide  an  explanation. England  &amp;  Wales  exemplified  a  setting  where  there  is  little  antibiotic  resistance,  and  complicated pneumonia cases tend to be associated with the 'outbreak' serotype 1, and the 'paediatric' serotypes, 14 and 3. By  contrast,  in  a  country  with  a  strong  prevalence  of  antibiotic  resistant  pneumococcal  strains  in circulation,  which  is  typical  of  Taiwan,  the  'paediatric'  serogroups  14,  6,  and  23  cause  all  of  the complicated  pneumonia  cases.  Finally,  the  US  seems  to  represent  an  epidemiology  that  falls somewhere between the previous extremes, which may be a dual result of moderate antibiotic usage and  of  the  wide  scale  introduction  of  Prevenar  into  the  National  Immunisation  Program.  For  the Prevenar  serotypes,  there  has  been  a  decrease  in  6B,  14  &amp;  23F  isolates  from  cases  of  complicated pneumonia, but no change for 19F. For the non-vaccine serotypes, there is a continuing predominance of serotype 1 and an increase in serotypes 3 and 19A cases. In conclusion, to rely on coverage for a particular  serotype  (i.e.  the  proportion  of  clinical  isolates  belonging  to  a  given  serotype)  without precisely defining the underlying, age-specific incidence of IPD may be misleading. Relying solely on \"serotype  coverage  proportions\"  can  propagate  confusion  about  the  pertinence  of  any  set  of epidemiological  data,  and  it  is  important  that  serotype-specific  and  age  group-specific,  populationbased surveillance is maintained and enhanced in Europe. The  CHMP  considered  that  the  MAH  has  given  a  fair  overview  of  the  literature  on  the  clinical experience before the introduction of Prevenar. Complicated pneumococcal pneumonia (i.e. empyema, complex parapneumonic effusion, or necrotising pneumonia) in children Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1.2.4 Risk Management

Although  no  formal  Risk  Management  Plan  was  submitted  at  the  time  of  the  initial  Marketing Authorisation in 2001 or at the 5- year renewal earlier in 2006 the MAH has several clinical studies ongoing as follow up commitments to the Marketing Authorisation. The information obtained from these, together with the data from surveillance programs in place in a number of countries, will ensure that there is a continued review of the risk benefit ratio for Prevenar. Any change observed will be notified to the appropriate authorities. The CHMP also agreed that the addition of pneumonia to the indications  for  Prevenar  would  not  fundamentally  change  the  use  of  the  vaccine;  however,  this indication should help to improve compliance with national recommendations to enhance vaccination uptake.

Since  Germany  introduced  Prevenar  into  the  national  immunisation  programme  in  the  summer  of 2006, the MAH has previously committed to fund this surveillance study for an additional two years (2007 - 2008). This surveillance was considered appropriate by the CHMP to detect and monitor the extent  of  serotype  replacement  for  invasive  disease  and  to  provide  information  on  antibiotic susceptibility of emerging strains.

Listed  below  are  the  ongoing  studies  with  Prevenar  that  Wyeth  has  undertaken  to  respond  to  the outstanding  MAH  commitments,  which  addressed  questions  raised  at  the  time  of  granting  of  the Marketing Authorisation or which originate from other post-authorisation procedures. · EU-002: Population based nationwide surveillance of invasive pneumococcal disease in France. · EU-003: Population  based  study  (100170)  on  systemic  pneumococcal  infections  (SPI)  among children in Germany ( 2000 - 2003). · EU- 005: Evaluation of pneumococcal carriage in French children younger than 2 years of age. · 6106A1- 500: Study to assess the effect of prophylactic use of antipyretics. Report to be submitted 30 July 2007 6106A1- 800: PM surveillance study on fever- related events and febrile seizures. · 100681: Comparison of early and late immunisations of 3 doses of conjugate vaccine in allogenic stem cell transplant subjects. Surveillance for antimicrobial resistance trends was considered an important part of IPD surveillance. To  that  end,  the  European  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Surveillance  System  (EARSS)  has  been implemented  to  conduct  ongoing  surveillance  regarding  antimicrobial  susceptibility  trends  across Europe. EARSS is a European surveillance and information system that provides validated data on the prevalence and spread of major disease- causing bacteria with resistance to one or more antibiotics. EARSS performs ongoing  surveillance  of  seven  indicator  bacteria  commonly  causing  infections  in humans including Streptococcus pneumoniae. Finally, results of an EU wide survey funded by the European Union project on pneumococcal disease (PnC - EURPO) has recently summarised all publicly funded national surveillance programs across the EU and presents, in tabular form, the data elements being collected by each program ( Pebody RG, et al.). Several European countries have adopted routine vaccination with Prevenar (e. g., Germany, France, The Netherlands, Norway, and the UK). In a number of these European countries, such as France, Norway  and  the  UK,  the  public  health  authorities  have  launched  surveillance  programs  that  will closely  monitor  the  evolution  of  the  serotype  distribution  in  invasive  disease  and  the  antibiotic susceptibility of pneumococcal isolates. It should be noted that the individual public health authorities run these surveillance programs. In Germany, a population-based nationwide surveillance of IPD cases among children requiring hospitalisation (ESPED) is ongoing. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Epidemiological studies based on nasopharyngeal culture may provide insights into the microbiology of  non-invasive  pneumococcal  infections.  In  France,  the  MAH  will  conduct  a  continuing  10-year

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

study on the microbiology of the nasopharyngeal flora associated with AOM in children 6-24 months of  age.  Furthermore,  the  MAH  has  engaged  in  a  number  of  surveillance  studies  to  monitor pneumococcal disease.

## 1.2.5   Overall Discussion and conclusion

Following the assessment of the data from the NCKP trial, the CHMP considered that the potential risks with the use of the vaccine need to be addressed. Serotype replacement might reduce the benefit of  the  vaccine  and  change  the  epidemiology  of  pneumococcal  disease,  which  may  have  adverse consequences for children over time. As demonstrated for otitis media in the US, widespread use of Prevenar  has  resulted  in  replacement  of  vaccine  types  by  non-vaccine  types  in  nasopharyngeal carriage. In the FinOM trial a significant increase in AOM episodes due to non-vaccine serotype was observed, reducing  VE  against  pneumococcal  AOM  from  57%  to  34%.    Several  subsequent  carriage  studies have  documented  shifts  towards  non-vaccine  pneumococcal  serotypes.  Corresponding  data  on pneumonia were considered more limited. However,  in  both  9PCV  trials  an  increase  of  non-vaccine  serotype  invasive  disease  in  vaccinated children compared with placebo was noted, although at a non-significant level. The CHMP therefore considered  that  this  phenomenon  deserves  close  monitoring.  For  pneumonia,  serotype  replacement with  potential  virulent  organisms,  emergence  of  antibiotic  resistance  in  non-vaccine  pneumococcal serotypes  and  any  modification  in  the  clinical  manifestations  of  the  disease  should  be  specifically addressed. Until now most surveillance studies have been performed in the US, but data should also be collected in the EU, since serotype epidemiology and resistance pattern differ substantially between continents  and  countries.  The  CHMP  considered  that  the  MAH  presented  satisfactory  plans  for surveillance in his response. The CHMP also noted  that invasive disease from non-vaccine serotypes has increased up to a 3-fold post Prevenar vaccine licensure, which may also be the case for pneumonia. Additionally,  an  increased  occurrence  of  empyema  was  reported  from  UK  and  other  countries. Empyema  or  parapneumonic  empyema  (PPE)  is  most  frequently  associated  with  pneumococcal serotype 1, a serotype not contained in Prevenar. A US report from Texas stated that PPE in the postPCV era is more common, representing up to one-third of the IPD in children. Serotype 1 remains the most common but it appears that serotypes 3 and 19A are emerging. The CHMP was also concerned that more virulent serotypes  will  take  over  the  place/space  left  by vaccine serotypes. Other authors do not confirm an increase in empyema and even report a decrease in number of patients with empyema. In other countries an increase in empyema is seen but this increase does not seem concordant with Prevenar usage. The surveillance systems put in place by the MAH were considered sufficient to address the issue of such serotype shifts. The MAH stated in his submission that in view of the magnitude of the pneumonia burden, the vaccine efficacy shown in pre- and post-licensure experiences against acquired pneumonia (CAP) represents important population wide, long-term, public health benefits. Although the short-term balance looked favourable, the CHMP considered that the long-term evolution of pneumococcal invasive disease as well as empyema by non -vaccine serotypes is not yet clear. Medicinal product no longer authorised

The claim that Prevenar decreased the burden of 'non-invasive pneumococcal' pneumonia in young children seems correct, and the data have been published in a peer-reviewed journal. A post marketing surveillance study reports a decrease in pneumonia and two 9-valent vaccine trials also document a decrease in clinical pneumonia and radiologically defined pneumonia; which adds further support to the  claim.  Although  the  vaccine  efficacy  for  pneumonia  is  lower  than  for  invasive  pneumococcal disease, the disease burden from pneumonia is larger and therefore the vaccine contribution to health is considerable.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The MAH provided an estimation of the extent of disease in the EU that could be prevented by the vaccine. The data from the NCKP trial were extrapolated to the EU population of children aged less than  2  years.  The  projected  number  of  vaccine-prevented  episodes  of  radiologically  confirmed pneumonia  in  this  age  group  would  be  about  24,000  in  any  one  year,  considering  that  5  episodes would be prevented in the first two years of life per 1,000 vaccinated children. However, the CHMP pointed  out  that  the  next  generation  of  pneumococcal  conjugate  vaccines  including  more  serotypes could have an even greater effect.

The CHMP considered that the benefit-risk for Prevenar is positive for the extension of the indication from active immunisation against bacteraemic pneumonia to active immunisation against pneumonia. The target population was considered the same for both indications and the pneumonia indication will not result in any change in the use of the vaccine. Medicinal product no longer authorised