---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 17:33:06
document_pages: 13
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/quixidar-h-c-404-ii-10-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: quixidar-h-c-404-ii-10-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 10.6483042
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-28 12:11:37.658242
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 25 January 2005 Product name: Quixidar Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/404/II/10

## Medicinal Product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

7 Westferry Circus, Canary Wharf, London, E14 4HB, UK

Tel. (44-20) 74 18 84 00 Fax (44-20) 74 18 86 68

E-mail: mail@emea.eu.int http://www.emea.eu.int

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. Introduction

This  type  II  variation  was  submitted  to  request  a  new  indication  for  the  of  2.5  and  1.5  mg  doses, namely the 'prevention of VTE in medical patients who are at risk for thromboembolic complications due to restricted mobility during acute illness'. The application is supported by a single pivotal study, ARTEMIS/63129, clinical summaries of the key studies in MOSLL and PMS data (cut-off date of 31 August 2003).

<!-- image -->

Inclusion criteria were age ≥ 60 years, expected bed rest of at least 4 days and hospitalisation due to congestive heart failure New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III/IV, and/or acute respiratory illness  in  the  presence  of  chronic  lung  disease,  and/or  acute  infectious  or  inflammatory  disease. Patients were examined for DVT by routine bilateral ascending venography of the legs between Day 6 and 15 (within one day after stopping study treatment), or earlier if DVT was clinically suspected. The exclusion criteria were consistent with those used in the MOSLL studies and were mainly related to a

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1.1 Rationale for the proposed change The  incidence  of  confirmed  asymptomatic  venous  thromboembolism  (VTE)  in  general  medical patients  has  been  reported  to  be  10-25%  in  surveillance  studies.  There  are  several  randomised controlled trials  showing  that  conventional  unfractionated  heparin (UFH), as  well  as  low  molecular weight  heparin  (LMWH),  can  significantly  reduce  the  incidence  of  VTE  diagnosed  with  objective methods. The clinical relevance of these often non-symptomatic thrombi is partly controversial. The incidence of death from PE is 4-11% in autopsy studies of hospital in-patients, the majority of who are non-surgical patients. Various surveys have shown that systematic application of thromboprophylaxis in medical patients remains limited. A recent systematic review of the field of VTE by The Swedish Council on Technology Assessment in Health Care (2002; 'Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment of Venous Thromboembolism') evaluated and  synthesised  approximately  1,300  scientific  studies  and  developed  conclusions  based  on  the following 4-grade scale: Grade 1: Strong scientific evidence (for the conclusions). Grade 2: Moderate scientific evidence. Grade 3: Weak scientific evidence. Grade 4: Insufficient evidence, including consensus of experts or completely lacking scientific base The  results  for  prophylaxis  and  treatment  in  medical  conditions  such  as  congestive  heart  failure, chronic obstructive lung disease and infections were the following: · Both heparin agents reduce the risk for VTE in severely ill internal medicine patients (Grade 1). · UFH does not reduce the risk for fatal PE (Grade 2) · Neither LMWH nor UFH reduce mortality in severely ill internal medicine patients (Grade 3). · The scientific evidence is insufficient for assessing whether they have an effect on symptomatic DVT (Grade 4). The efficacy and safety of thromboprophylaxis in medical patients have already been demonstrated for two low molecular weight heparins. The MEDENOX and PREVENT trials provided, as single pivotal studies, adequate evidence of thromboprophylaxis with enoxaparin and dalteparin, respectively, in this indication.  The  fondaparinux  ARTEMIS  study  is  similar  in  design,  conduct  and  size  to  the MEDENOX study. 2. Clinical aspects. Artemis trial Methods Artemis  was  a  multicentre,  multinational,  randomised,  double  blind,  placebo-controlled  trial  in patients  at  risk  for  thromboembolic  complications  due  to  restricted  mobility  during  acute  illness. Patients were randomly assigned to receive once-daily SC injections of either 2.5 mg fondaparinux or placebo. Treatment was scheduled to continue until Day 6 to 14.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

known  bleeding  risk or difficulties to perform venography. In addition, patients  for  whom anticoagulant therapy was indicated due to a coexisting condition were to be excluded.

The primary efficacy endpoint was VTE recorded up to Day 15 or up to the first venogram, whichever came first, and defined as a composite of the following:

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Venogram positive for DVT, Symptomatic DVT, Non-fatal PE, Fatal PE (including death without another plausible cause). Secondary efficacy outcomes were the separate components of the primary efficacy outcome during the same time period: any DVT, any proximal DVT, distal only DVT and symptomatic VTE (DVT, non-fatal  PE  or  fatal  PE).  Additional  efficacy  outcomes  were  symptomatic  VTE  up  to  Day  32  and initiation of antithrombotic curative treatment based on local VTE assessments. The study design is illustrated in Figure (9.1) 1. A venogram had to  be  performed  within  one  day  after  stopping  study  treatment  on  Day  6-15,  but earlier in case of symptomatic VTE or if the treatment was stopped prematurely. Three committees, blinded to treatment allocation, were formed to monitor different aspects of the study and adjudicate the primary efficacy outcome and the primary safety outcome (major bleedings). Patients were examined for DVT by routine bilateral ascending venography of the legs between Day 6 and  15  (within  1  day  after  stopping  study  treatment),  or  earlier  if  DVT  was  clinically  suspected. Clinically suspected VTE had to be confirmed by objective tests (i.e. venography for suspected DVT; lung scanning, pulmonary angiography or helical computed tomography for suspected PE). Suspected fatal PE had to be confirmed (if possible) by autopsy. Patients were to be followed-up at Day 30 ± 2. The primary efficacy analysis was performed on all randomised patients with a non-missing primary efficacy  outcome during  the  primary  efficacy  period  (from  the  day  of  first  study  drug  injection,  or randomisation  for  randomised  but  non-treated  patients,  up  to  the  first  venogram  or  up  to  Day  15, whichever came first).

A 10-14% rate of VTE in the placebo group was assumed based on the MEDENOX study (14.9% placebo VTE rate). The sample size was calculated using a 5% two-sided type I error, a power of 85%, and an assumed risk reduction of 60%. Based on an expected 30% of patients with an inadequate or no venogram, at least 800 patients were included in the trial.

The analysis of the primary efficacy outcome was the comparison of the two groups (fondaparinux placebo) using a 2-sided Fisher's exact test at an error level of 5%. Point estimates and 2-sided 95%

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

confidence intervals (CIs) (binomial method) per treatment group were calculated as well as 2-sided 95%  CIs  (normal  approximation)  on  odds  ratio,  relative  risk  and  the  difference  between  the  2 treatment groups. Point estimates and 95% CI per treatment group were calculated for all secondary parameters.  Exploratory  analyses  included  baseline  covariate  analysis:  gender,  race,  age,  weight, history of VTE, baseline creatinine clearance (Clcr) according to Cockroft and Gault, the main reason for hospitalisation and cancer. For each subgroup, point estimates and 95% CIs per treatment group were calculated.

| Deviation                                                 | Fondaparinux (N=429)   | Placebo (N=420)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| No VTE assessment up to Day 15 a, b                       | 78 (18.2%)             | 66 (15.7%)        |
| Non-evaluable VTE assessment up to Day 15                 | 30 (7.0%)              | 31 (7.4%)         |
| no Total patients excluded from primary efficacy analysis | 108 (25.2%)            | 97 (23.1%)        |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised Artemis trial Results Eight  hundred  and  forty  nine  patients  were  randomised.  Ten  patients  (1.2%)  were  not  treated  with study  drug,  mainly  because  of  unmet  selection  criteria  or  withdrawn  informed  consent.  Of  the  839 treated  patients,  92  (11.0%)  prematurely  discontinued  study  drug.  The  majority  of  premature discontinuations of study drug were due to withdrawal of consent by the patient, followed by adverse events  (AE)/serious  adverse  events  (SAE).  Most  cases  of  premature  treatment  discontinuation occurred before Day 6 in both treatment groups (40/48 in the fondaparinux group and 35/44 in the placebo  group).  No  statistically  significant  difference  regarding  the  overall  rate  of  permanent discontinuation was found between the treatment groups. As defined in the protocol, a missing VTE evaluation (i.e. non-evaluable or no VTE assessment) up to Day 15 was the only reason for exclusion from the primary efficacy analysis. Table 1 Number (%) of patients excluded from primary efficacy analysis by reason for exclusion - All Randomised Patients a Note that patients adjudicated as negative in the absence of a venogram are also excluded b Includes all non-treated patients (4 in the fondaparinux group and 6 in the placebo group) Most  of  the  missing  VTE  evaluations  correspond  to  venograms  not  performed.  The  percentage  of patients excluded from the primary efficacy analysis was similar for both treatment groups and was lower than the projected 30% non-evaluable patients in the protocol. As regards patient demographics , both treatment groups were similar with respect to demographic and baseline characteristics, except regarding the history of VTE which was higher in the primary efficacy population in the placebo group ( 6.2%) compared to the fondaparinux group ( 2.5%) .

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2. Summary of demographic and baseline characteristics

| Parameter                               |                                           | Fondaparinux (N=321)                               | Placebo (N=323)                                    |
|-----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Age (years) [n (%)]                     | Mean ± SD < 65 ≥ 65 - <75 ≥ 75            | 74.3 ± 8.3 49 (15.3 %) 110 (34.3 %) 162 (50.5 %)   | 74.0 ± 8.2 46 (14.2 %) 117 (36.2 %) 160 (49.5 %)   |
| BMI (kg/m 2 ) [n (%)]                   | Mean ± SD < 30 ≥ 30 Missing               | 25.6 ± 5.2 253 (80.3 %) 62 (19.7 %) 6              | 25.8 ± 5.9 247 (77.9 %) 70 (22.1 %) 6              |
| Creatinine clearance a (ml/min) [n (%)] | < 30 ≥ 30 - < 50 ≥ 50 - < 80 ≥ 80 Missing | 22 (6.9 %) 105 (33.0 %) 144 (45.3 %) 47 (14.8 %) 3 | 21 (6.6 %) 107 (33.8 %) 140 (44.2 %) 49 (15.5 %) 6 |
| Gender [n (%)]                          | Male Female                               | 129 (40.2 %) 192 (59.8 %)                          | 144 (44.6 %) 179 (55.4 %)                          |
| Risk factors for VTE History of DVT     | Risk factors for VTE History of DVT       | 55 (17.1 %) 7 (2.2 %)                              | 70 (21.7 %) 15 (4.6 %)                             |
| History of PE                           | History of PE                             | 2 (0.6 %)                                          | 10 (3.1 %)                                         |
| History of VTE (DVT and/or PE)          | History of VTE (DVT and/or PE)            | 8 (2.5 %)                                          | 20 (6.2 %)                                         |
| b                                       | b                                         | 47 (14.6 %)                                        | 51 (15.8 %)                                        |
| Cancer                                  | Cancer                                    |                                                    |                                                    |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised BMI: body mass index a Last value available before first study drug injection, using the equation of Cockroft &amp; Gault Note: A patient could have more than one risk factor for VTE b History of cancer or active cancer The two treatment groups were similar with respect to reason for hospitalisation. a With no other reason for hospitalisationThe study drug exposure was also similar in both treatment groups, with a median number of 7 dosing days  in  both  groups  and  means  (SD)  of  7.7  (1.9)  and  7.6  (1.7)  in  the  fondaparinux  and  placebo  groups, respectively. Efficacy Fondaparinux was superior to placebo for prevention of VTE since the rate of VTE was statistically significantly lower in the fondaparinux group than in the placebo group; 5.6% versus 10.5%, p=0.029. The VTE incidence in the placebo group was in line with the anticipated VTE rate (i.e. 10-14%) in this population.

<!-- image -->

| Reason for hospitalisation                        | Fondaparinux (N=321)   | Placebo (N=323)   |
|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| Congestive heart failure NYHA class III/IV only a | 78 (24.3 %)            | 82 (25.4 %)       |
| Acute respiratory illness only a                  | 63 (19.6 %)            | 73 (22.6 %)       |
| Acute infectious or inflammatory disease only a   | 77 (24.0 %)            | 88 (27.2 %)       |
| More than one reason for hospitalization          | 103 (32.1 %)           | 80 (24.8 %)       |

<!-- image -->

Regarding secondary  endpoints ,  the  table  shows  that  the  DVT  rate  in  the  fondaparinux  group  was lower than in the placebo group (5.6% vs. 9.1%) but failed to show statistical significance (p=0.097). The rates of proximal DVT and distal only DVT were also lower in the fondaparinux group than in the placebo group, but again were not statistically significant.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Main efficacy results: primary and secondary endpoints

|                        |                                   | Fondaparinux                                     | Placebo                                           |
|------------------------|-----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Patients with VTE      | n / N (%)                         | 18/321 (5.6 %)                                   | 34 /323 (10.5 %)                                  |
| (up to day 15)         | 95% CI                            | [3.4;8.7]                                        | [7.4;14.4]                                        |
| Secondary outcomes     |                                   |                                                  |                                                   |
| Any DVT                |                                   |                                                  |                                                   |
| Either side Both sides | n / N (%) 95% CI n / N (%) 95% CI | 18/321 (5.6 %) [3.4;8.7] 1/345 (0.3 %) [0.0;1.6] | 29/318 (9.1 %) [6.2;12.8] 4/342 (1.2 %) [0.3;3.0] |
| Any proximal DVT       |                                   |                                                  |                                                   |
| Either side            | n / N (%) 95% CI                  | 5/324 (1.5 %) [0.5;3.6] 0/346 (0.0 %)            | 7/324 (2.2 %) [0.9;4.4] 0/348 (0.0 %)             |
| Both sides             | n / N (%)                         |                                                  |                                                   |
|                        | 95% CI                            | [0.0;1.1]                                        | [0.0;1.1]                                         |
| Distal only DVT        |                                   |                                                  |                                                   |
| Either side a          | n / N (%)                         | 14/320 (4.4 %)                                   | 23/320 (7.2 %)                                    |
|                        | 95% CI                            | [2.4;7.2]                                        | [4.6;10.6]                                        |
| Both sides             | n / N (%)                         | 0/348 (0.0 %)                                    | 3/342 (0.9 %)                                     |
|                        | 95% CI                            | [0.0;1.1]                                        | [0.2;2.5]                                         |

|                                | Fondaparinux   | Placebo         | RRR * [95%CI]       |   p-value (Fisher's exact) |
|--------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|---------------------|----------------------------|
| During primary efficacy period | 26/329 (7.9 %) | 40/329 (12.2 %) | 35.0% [-3.6%;59.3%] |                     0.091  |
| Up to Day 32                   | 32/429 (7.5 %) | 57/420 (13.6 %) | 45.0% [17.2%;63.6%] |                     0.0049 |

*

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The primary efficacy outcome did not include 'all-cause mortality', contrary to the recommendations in the CHMP Points to Consider on prophylaxis of VTE (CPMP/EWP/707/98). The MAH claim that this  was  not  prospectively  defined  as  a  component  of  the  primary  endpoint  (VTE)  and  therefore ARTEMIS was not powered in this respect. However, a re-analysis of the primary endpoint with all cause  mortality  included  carried  out  further  to  a  request  from  CHMP,  showed  the  relative  risk reduction (RRR) still exhibited a trend in favour of fondaparinux during the primary efficacy period, which was significant at day 32. ARTEMIS trial - Number (%) of patients with VTE plus all cause mortality during the primary efficacy period or up to Day 32 : exact CI for RRR based on standardised statistic and inverting a 2-sided test When examining the symptomatic VTE , the only statistically significant difference was regarding fatal PE. During the primary efficacy period (i.e. up to Day 15) there were no patients with a fatal PE in the fondaparinux group and 5 in the placebo group (p=0.029, 95% CI [-2.2; -0.2]). The number of patients with symptomatic VTE up to Day 32 was 4 in the fondaparinux group and 11 in the placebo group. Thus, the majority of the symptomatic VTE occurred after the primary efficacy period: 4/4 and 6/11 events in the fondaparinux and placebo groups, respectively. For the 5 additional events in the followup  period  adjudicated  as  fatal  PE  (3  in  the  fondaparinux  group  and  2  in  the  placebo  group),  death occurred suddenly without another plausible cause.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Number (%) of patients with symptomatic VTE up to Day 15 and 32 - All Randomised Patients

| Patients With Symptomatic VTE up to day 15                | Patients With Symptomatic VTE up to day 15                | Fondaparinux (N=429)   | Placebo (N=420)   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------|
| VTE                                                       | n (%)                                                     | 0 (0.0 %)              | 5 (1.2 %)         |
| DVT                                                       | n (%)                                                     | 0 (0.0 %)              | 0 (0.0 %)         |
| Non-fatal PE                                              | n (%)                                                     | 0 (0.0 %)              | 0 (0.0 %)         |
| Fatal PE                                                  | n (%)                                                     | 0 (0.0 %)              | 5 (1.2 %)         |
| Patients With                                             | Patients With                                             | Fondaparinux           | Placebo           |
| Symptomatic VTE up to day 32                              | Symptomatic VTE up to day 32                              | (N=429)                | (N=420)           |
| VTE                                                       | n (%)                                                     | 4 (0.9 %)              | 11 (2.6 %)        |
| DVT                                                       | n (%)                                                     | 0 (0.0 %)              | 0 (0.0 %)         |
| Non-fatal PE                                              | n (%)                                                     | 1 (0.2 %)              | 4 (1.0 %)         |
| Fatal PE                                                  | n (%)                                                     | 3 (0.7 %)              | 7 (1.7 %)         |
| Patients With Symptomatic VTE + all deaths up to day 32 1 | Patients With Symptomatic VTE + all deaths up to day 32 1 | 15/429 (3.5%)          | 29/420 (6.9%)     |
| 1 Post-hoc analysis                                       | 1 Post-hoc analysis                                       | 1 Post-hoc analysis    |                   |

| Clinical trial                  | Active (No. Of events/No. of patients)   | Placebo (No. Of events/No. of patients)   | RR [nominal 95% CI], p value   |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| ARTEMIS 1 (fondaparinux 2.5mg)  | 18/321(5.6%)                             | 34/323 (10.5%)                            | 0.53 [0.31, 0.92], p=0.029     |
| MEDENOX 1 ( enoxaparin 40mg)    | 16/291(5.5%)                             | 43/288 (14.9%)                            | 0.37 [0.22, 0.63], p=0.002     |
| PREVENT 1 ( dalteparin, 5000IU) | 42/1518 (2.8%)                           | 73/1473 (5%)                              | 0.55, [0.38, 0.80] p=0.0015    |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised A secondary analysis  performed  further  to  a  request  from  CHMP  shows  that,  when  mortality  rates (irrespective  of  cause)  at  Day  32  were  examined  retrospectively,  a  non-significant  RRR  of  45% favouring  fondaparinux  was  observed  (14/429  and  25/420  in  the  fondaparinux  and  placebo  groups, respectively). Importantly, when the combined endpoint of symptomatic VTE + all cause mortality at Day 32 was assessed, the  beneficial  effect  of  fondaparinux  was  clearly  evident,  with  a  statistically significant 49% RRR in symptomatic VTE + all deaths. Based on the point estimates the MAH has provided a number needed to treat analysis (NNT=60 for patients with symptomatic VTE up to day 32, and NNT=30 for patients with symptomatic VTE + all deaths up to day 32). The percentage of patients who received antithrombotic curative treatment based on the investigator's decision after the qualifying VTE assessment used in the primary efficacy analysis was higher in the placebo group compared to the fondaparinux group (p=0.078), which is consistent with the -46.7% relative risk reduction observed for the primary efficacy outcome. In order to put the main efficacy results of Artemis into clinical perspective, it is worth recalling the results of the pivotal trials carried out with enoxaparin and dalteparin to support a similar indication. Primary endpoint 1 In ARTEMIS and MEDENOX, the primary efficacy endpoint was a composite of the incidence of VTE (including venogram positive for DVT, symptomatic DVT, non-fatal PE and fatal PE), whereas in PREVENT, the primary endpoint was a composite of symptomatic DVT, fatal or non-fatal PE, sudden death and asymptomatic proximal DVT detected by venous Doppler ultrasonography. The primary endpoint was assessed up to Day 15,  Day 14,  or Day 21, or up to the first venogram (which ever came first) in ARTEMIS, MEDENOX and PREVENT, respectively.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Clinical trial                  | Active (No. Of events/No. of patients)   | Placebo (No. Of events/No. of patients)   | RR            |
|---------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------|
| ARTEMIS 1 (fondaparinux 2.5mg)  | 5/324 (1.5%)                             | 7/324 (2.2%)                              | 0.71, p=0.77  |
| MEDENOX 1 ( enoxaparin 40mg)    | 5/291(1.7%)                              | 14/288 (4.9%)                             | 0.35, p=0.037 |
| PREVENT 1 ( dalteparin, 5000IU) | 27/1507(1.8%)                            | 53/1453(3.7%)                             | 0.48, p=0.002 |

|                                                   | Fondaparinux (N=321)                              | Fondaparinux (N=321)                              | Fondaparinux (N=321)                              | Fondaparinux (N=321)                              | longer Placebo (N=323)                            | longer Placebo (N=323)                            | longer Placebo (N=323)                            | longer Placebo (N=323)                            |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Covariate a                                       |                                                   | VTE                                               | VTE                                               | VTE                                               |                                                   |                                                   | VTE                                               | VTE                                               |
| Subgroup                                          | N                                                 | n                                                 | %                                                 | 95% CI                                            | N n                                               | N n                                               | %                                                 | 95% CI                                            |
| Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            | Gender                                            |
| Male                                              | 129                                               | 8                                                 | 6.2                                               | [2.7;11.9]                                        | 144                                               | 10                                                | 6.9                                               | [3.4;12.4]                                        |
| Female                                            | 192                                               | 10                                                | 5.2                                               | [2.5;9.4]                                         | 179                                               | 24                                                | 13.4                                              | [8.8;19.3]                                        |
| no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    | no Weight (kg)                                    |
| < 50                                              | 25                                                | 2                                                 | 8.0                                               | [1.0;26.0]                                        | 33                                                | 3                                                 | 9.1                                               | [1.9;24.3]                                        |
| ≥ 50 - <100                                       | 284                                               | 15                                                | 5.3                                               | [3.0;8.6]                                         | 272                                               | 30                                                | 11.0                                              | [7.6;15.4]                                        |
| ≥ 100                                             | 9                                                 | 1                                                 | 11.1                                              | [0.3;48.2]                                        | 15                                                | 1                                                 | 6.7                                               | [0.2;31.9]                                        |
| History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    | History of VTE                                    |
| Yes                                               | 8                                                 | 0                                                 | 0.0                                               | [0.0;36.9]                                        | 20                                                | 3                                                 | 15.0                                              | [3.2;37.9]                                        |
| No                                                | 313                                               | 18                                                | 5.8                                               | [3.4;8.9]                                         | 303                                               | 31                                                | 10.2                                              | [7.1;14.2]                                        |
| Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) | Product Creatinine clearance at baseline (ml/min) |
| < 30                                              | 22                                                | 2                                                 | 9.1                                               | [1.1;29.2]                                        | 21                                                | 1                                                 | 4.8                                               | [0.1;23.8]                                        |
| ≥ 30 - <50                                        | 105                                               | 8                                                 | 7.6                                               | [3.3;14.5]                                        | 107                                               | 13                                                | 12.1                                              | [6.6;19.9]                                        |
| ≥ 50 - <80                                        | 144                                               | 5                                                 | 3.5                                               | [1.1;7.9]                                         | 140                                               | 15                                                | 10.7                                              | [6.1;17.1]                                        |
| ≥ 80                                              | 47                                                | 3                                                 | 6.4                                               | [1.3;17.5]                                        | 49                                                | 4                                                 | 8.2                                               | [2.3;19.6]                                        |
| Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            | Cancer                                            |
| Yes                                               | 47                                                | 8                                                 | 17.0                                              | [7.6;30.8]                                        | 51                                                | 2                                                 | 3.9                                               | [0.5;13.5]                                        |
| No                                                | 274                                               | 10                                                | 3.6                                               | [1.8;6.6]                                         | 272                                               | 32                                                | 11.8                                              | [8.2;16.2]                                        |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised 1 In PREVENT, DVT was assessed by venous Doppler ultrasonography, whereas bilateral venography was used in ARTEMIS and MEDENOX.  The endpoint was assessed up to Day 15,  Day 14,  or Day 21, or up to the first venogram (which ever came first) in ARTEMIS, MEDENOX and PREVENT, respectively. Regarding ancillary analyses carried out to test for heterogeneity ,  the  primary efficacy outcome was analysed  using  a  number  of  baseline  covariates  and  the  reason  for  hospitalisation  to  examine  if treatment effect varied with subgroups or covariates between the 2 groups (Table 6). No  statistically  significant  heterogeneity  of  treatment  effect  was  demonstrated  for  any  covariate analysed  except  for  cancer  (p=0.0003).  No  medical  reasons  were  found  for  this  imbalance.  The difference in number of patients with VTE was less pronounced in favour of fondaparinux in males as compared  to  females.  However,  no  statistically  significant  interaction  of  gender  and  treatment  was found (Breslow-Day: p=0.14), and the treatment effect in males is not inconsistent with the gender variation  observed  in  the  5  previous  MOSLL  studies.  The  VTE  outcome  per  subgroup  of  renal function, as expressed by creatinine clearance, is consistent with previous fondaparinux studies.

Further  to  a  request  from  CHMP,  the  MAH  has  further  analysed  the  consequences  on  the  overall results of the imbalance in the proportion of patients with a history of VTE in the primary efficacy population. Importantly, the subgroup of patients with no history of VTE showed a comparable RRR

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

with fondaparinux to the overall population (see table below). Therefore, the treatment imbalance in patients with a history of VTE did not make a major contribution to the primary efficacy result.

Number (%) of patients with VTE during the primary efficacy period according to history of VTE Primary efficacy population

|                    | Fondaparinux (N=321)   | Placebo (N=323)   | RRR * [95%CI]           |
|--------------------|------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------|
| Overall population | 18/321 (5.6%)          | 34/323 (10.5%)    | 46.7% [7.7%;69%]        |
| History of VTE     | 0/8 (0.0%)             | 3/20 (15.0%)      | 100.0% [-175.9%;100.0%] |
| No history of VTE  | 18/313 (5.8%)          | 31/303 (10.2%)    | 43.8% [2.5%;67.7%]      |

*

Medicinal Product no longer authorised : exact CI for RRR based on standardised statistic and inverting a 2-sided test However,  a  markedly  heterogeneous  efficacy  response  across  various  countries  was  observed  i.e. positive response in the UK (n=87), Czech Republic (n=221) and Denmark (n=42); negative in Poland (n=232) and Australia  (n=37). Most notably, the results in the UK are surprising as compared to the other countries: 2.5% of patients in the fondaparinux group experienced VTE events versus 23.4% for placebo. Of note, 4 out of the 5 fatal PE occurred in the UK. In Poland there results are unfavourable despite the largest patient enrolment. However,  the  sensitivity  analyses  performed  by  the  MAH  further  to  a  request  from  CHMP  would appear to show that the overall results are valid. e.g. after exclusion of the 2 centres with the most positive and negative results, respectively, the results are still significant. When analysing the results  based  on  the  reason  for  hospitalisation,  the  VTE  rate  was  lower  in  the fondaparinux group than in the placebo group for each of the reasons for hospitalisation and also for patients  admitted  for  more  than  one  reason,  although  none  of  the  differences  was  statistically significant. Safety results The  extent  of  exposure  to  study  drug  for  the  'as  treated'  patients  population  was  similar  to  that observed for the primary efficacy population. Serious adverse events and deaths Up to two days after the last injection, 4 (0.9%) patients had died in the fondaparinux group and 7 (1.7%) in the placebo group. By Day 32, the incidences were 14 (3.3%) and 25 (6.0%), respectively.

| Countries      | Fondaparinux   | Placebo         | Difference, IC95%          |
|----------------|----------------|-----------------|----------------------------|
| Poland         | 8/117 (6.8 %)  | 7/115 (6.1 %)   | 0.8 %, [-5.6 %; 7.1 %]     |
| Czech Republic | 6/106 (5.7 %)  | 14/115 (12.2 %) | -6.5 %, [-13.9 %; 0.9 %]   |
| UK             | 1/40 (2.5 %)   | 11/47 (23.4 %)  | -20.9 %, [-33.9 %; -7.9 %] |
| Denmark        | 0/23 (0 %)     | 1/19 (5.3 %)    | -5.3 %, [-15.3 %; 4.8 %]   |
| Australia      | 2/22 (9.1 %)   | no 1/15 (6.7 %) | 2.4 %, [-15 %; 19.8 %]     |
| Sweden         | 0/7 (0 %)      | 0/10 (0 %)      | 0%                         |
| Mexico         | 1/5 (20 %)     | 0/2 (0 %)       | 20 %, [-15.1 %; 55.1 %]    |
| Netherlands    | 0/1 (0 %)      | 0/0 (0 %)       |                            |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Number (%) of deaths from first injection up to Day 32

|                                                                 | Artemis                                                         | Artemis                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Patients With:                                                  | Fondaparinux (N=425)                                            | Placebo (N=414)                                                 |
| SAE starting during the randomised treatment period             | SAE starting during the randomised treatment period             | SAE starting during the randomised treatment period             |
| Leading to death during the treatment period                    | 4 (0.9 %)                                                       | 7 (1.7 %)                                                       |
| Leading to death after the treatment period up to Day 32        | 3 (0.7 %)                                                       | 4 (1.0 %)                                                       |
| Leading to death after Day 32                                   | 1 (0.2 %)                                                       | 0 (0.0 %)                                                       |
| SAE starting after the randomised treatment period up to Day 32 | SAE starting after the randomised treatment period up to Day 32 | SAE starting after the randomised treatment period up to Day 32 |
| Leading to death after the treatment period up to Day 32        | 7 (1.6 %)                                                       | 14 (3.4 %)                                                      |
| Leading to death after Day 32                                   | 3 (0.7 %)                                                       | 0 (0.0 %)                                                       |
| Total deaths during the randomised treatment period             | 4 (0.9 %)                                                       | 7 (1.7 %)                                                       |
| Total deaths between first injection and Day 32                 | 14 (3.3 %)                                                      | 25 (6.0 %)                                                      |
| Total deaths reported a                                         | 18 (4.2 %)                                                      | 25 (6.0 %)                                                      |

| Patients With                       |                                     | Fondaparinux (N=425)                | Placebo (N=414)                     |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Up to two days after last injection | Up to two days after last injection | Up to two days after last injection | Up to two days after last injection |
| Major bleeding event                | n (%) 95% CI                        | 1 (0.2 %) [0.0;1.3]                 | 1 (0.2 %) [0.0;1.3]                 |
| Minor bleeding event only           | n (%) 95% CI                        | 11 (2.6 %) [1.3;4.6]                | 4 (1.0 %) [0.3;2.5]                 |
| Any bleeding event                  | n (%) 95% CI                        | 12 (2.8 %) [1.5;4.9]                | 5 (1.2 %) [0.4;2.8]                 |
| Up to day 32                        | Up to day 32                        | Up to day 32                        | Up to day 32                        |
| Major bleeding event                | n (%) 95% CI                        | 2 (0.5 %) [0.1;1.7]                 | 4 (1.0 %) [0.3;2.5]                 |
| Minor bleeding event only           | n (%) 95% CI                        | 13 (3.1 %) [1.6;5.2]                | 12 (2.9 %) [1.5;5.0]                |
| Any bleeding event                  | n (%) 95% CI                        | 15 (3.5 %) [2.0;5.8]                | 16 (3.9 %) [2.2;6.2]                |

Medicinal Product no longer authorised a Deaths due to AEs which started after Day 32  were not counted in this table. The  overall  percentage  of  patients  with  SAEs  during  the  treatment  period  was  similar  between treatment  groups  (4.7%  for  fondaparinux  and  5.1%  for  placebo).  There  was  also  no  apparent difference in the SAE incidence for any WHO organ-class. Incidence of bleeding There were numerical differences in any bleeding occurring up to 2 days after the last injection (Table 8).  However,  the  number  of  minor  bleedings  only  drove  this  difference.  The  main  safety  outcome, incidence of major bleeding between first injection and 2 calendar days after the last injection, was low  and  identical  (n=1,  0.2%)  in  each  group.  Both  major  bleeding  cases  were  associated  with  a haemoglobin fall, one due to hemoptysis (fondaparinux group), and one due to rectal bleeding related to  radiation  induced  colitis  (placebo  group).  By  Day 32,  the  incidences  of  major  or  minor  bleeding became similar between the 2 treatment groups, suggesting an absence of a relationship to the study treatment but rather to the underlying diseases of the patients. Table 8 Number (%) of patients with bleeding events - As Treated Patients population

The number of patients transfused as well as the number of transfusions given during study treatment was  low  and  similar  between  treatment  groups.  Paradoxically,  there  was  a  higher  percentage  of patients with a haemoglobin value &lt; 8 g/dl after the first study drug injection in the placebo group

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

compared to the fondaparinux group, while there were no statistically significant differences between treatment groups in the change from baseline to last value on treatment.

Due  to  the  very  low  incidence  of  events,  covariate  analysis  on  major  bleeding  alone  was  not meaningful.  Consistent  with  historical  observations,  the  risk  of  any  (major  or  minor)  bleeding increases  with  decreasing  renal  function  across  treatment  groups.  The  difference  between  treatment groups in any bleeding was consistent across the four categories of renal function.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised For  events  other  than  those  related  to  bleeding,  overall  there  was  no  evidence  for  any  differences between patients who received fondaparinux and those who received placebo. Consequently, no other adverse reactions were identified. Laboratory findings There  was  no  difference  in  platelet  count  drops  between  the  2  treatment  groups.  There  was  no statistically  significant  difference  between  the  treatment  groups  in  the  change  from  baseline  to  last value on treatment for either creatinine concentration or creatinine clearance. Liver enzymes were not assayed.  No  cases  of  heparin-induced  thrombocytopenia  (HIT)  were  observed  after  fondaparinux treatment. Discussion Efficacy The  ARTEMIS  study,  pivotal  to  this  application,  has  demonstrated  a  reduction  of  the  composite primary end-point in medical patients who are at high risk for VTE and who are immobilised due to acute illness such as cardiac insufficiency and/or acute respiratory disorders, and/or acute infectious or inflammatory disease. The study is of limited size; it demonstrates that fondaparinux is  moderately superior to placebo for the prevention of VTE in medical patients under the premises of the protocol but there is no difference for overall symptomatic VTE during the primary efficacy period. In addition, some weaknesses of the ARTEMIS study have been noted by CHMP with respect to the CHMP Points to Consider (PtC) on applications with one pivotal study (CPMP/EWP/2330/99): · The robustness of the study results is questionable. CPMP/EWP/2330/99 states that the single pivotal trial  should  show a statistically convincing benefit (i.e. substantially higher than the usual  significance  level  of  p&lt;0.05)  of  clinical  relevance  and  that  none  of  the  study  centres should  dominate  the  overall  result,  neither  in  terms  of  number  of  subjects  nor  in  terms  of magnitude of effect. These requirements are not fulfilled in the present application, where the demonstrated  effect  is  of  less  convincing  statistical  significance  (p=0.027)  and  clinical relevance.  In  addition,  the  results  show  heterogeneity  in  efficacy  across  different  countries (positive effect in the UK, where the magnitude of the positive response is surprisingly strong despite a low recruitment, and unfavourable results in Poland, despite a very high recruitment). · An  important  objective  [in  the  efficacy  evaluation  in  VTE  prophylaxis  studies]  is  to demonstrate that the medicinal product decreases the number of patients developing DVT's during the prophylactic treatment period'. The DVT rate in the fondaparinux group was lower than in the placebo group (5.6% vs. 9.1%) but was not statistically significant (p=0.097), thus failing to meet one of the major clinically relevant efficacy criteria. · The unusual treatment response in cancer patients and the apparent lack of treatment effect in male  patients  would  appear  to  reflect  an  internal  inconsistency  in  the  study  results,  thus constituting another deviation from CPMP/EWP/2330/99. · When  put  into  clinical  perspective,  the  results  of  the  Artemis  trial  appear  less  robust  and convincing than the corresponding results for enoxaparin and dalteparin in the Medenox and Prevent trials, respectively.

The efficacy results of Artemis are thus not fully reassuring regarding either statistical significance or clinical  relevance.  Nonetheless,  the  outcome  is  consistent  and  in  line  with  what  could  be  expected considering  its  limited  size  and  the  expected  magnitude  of  risk  for  clinical  VTE  in  the  target population.  Different  sensitivity  analyses  provide  some  support  for  the  validity  of  the  primary  end-

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

point results. Given the limited size of the study it cannot be expected that significant effects on the individual  components  of  the  composite  end-point  be  demonstrated.  Indeed,  demonstrating  in  this medical  setting  a  convincing  reduction  in  clinical  events  is  probably  almost  impossible  due  to  the expected low event rates, since high-risk patients would have to be excluded in a placebo-controlled trial  for  ethical  reasons.  The  design  and  evaluation  of  an  actively  controlled  non-inferiority  study would also offer major difficulties. In addition, it should be reminded that the efficacy of fondaparinux with  regard  to  antithrombotic  activity  has  been  convincingly  demonstrated,  with  experience  of fondaparinux  in  over  4000  patients  in  orthopaedic  surgery  demonstrating  superior  efficacy  over enoxaparin in prevention of VTE in this population. Thus, the CHMP PtC on applications with one pivotal study (CPMP/EWP/2330/99) may may not be fully applicable in the context of this variation.

Finally,  the  current  submission  does  not  provide  any  separate  data  on  the  1.5  mg  dose  regimen  in medical  patients  as  it  is  bridged  to  previous  studies  in  MOSLL  patients.  Based  on  past  population pharmacokinetic  modelling,  the  MAH  proposes  to  maintain  the  same  dosing  recommendations  for medical and surgical patients with renal impairment, namely to recommend 1.5mg for patients with severe renal impairment (Clcr 20- 30 ml/min) and its possible use as an alternative in patients with moderate renal impairment (Clcr 30-50 ml). Whilst the CHMP agree with this proposal, it should be emphasised  that  the  posology  currently  provided  for  MOSLL  patients  with  Clcr  30-50  ml/min, recommending 2 different doses for the same patient population, gives poor guidance to the prescriber. Bearing in mind that this point cannot be resolved within this variation procedure the MAH should commit to provide an overview of the clinical experience in these patients, including experience from clinical studies and from spontaneous reporting, as part of the next PSUR.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised The variability in efficacy results in the different countries is not easily explained by chance alone and, as proposed by the MAH, other factors may have contributed (e.g. a population with a higher VTE risk in the UK patients). The sensivity analyses performed seem to provide support for the conclusion that the overall results are valid. Active  malignant  disease  is  an  important  risk  factor  for  VTE  during  immobilisation;  therefore  the results for this subgroup appear surprising. However, the low event rates, and low numbers of patients with active malignant disease could explain the findings of an apparent lack of effect in this subgroup. External support for the efficacy of fondaparinux in patients with malignant disease may be derived not  only  from  the  MOSLL  studies,  but  also  from  the  abdominal  surgery  prophylaxis  study  where fondaparinux appeared effective also in the large subpopulation with malignant disease. In  ARTEMIS,  the  difference  in  number  of  patients  with  VTE  was  less  pronounced  in  favour  of fondaparinux  in  males  as  compared  to  females.  The  apparent  lower  efficacy  in  males  observed  for primary efficacy outcome  was  not observed across the key secondary efficacy endpoints -symptomatic VTEs and all deaths were slightly lower in men than in women. The treatment effect in males on the primary efficacy endpoint is not inconsistent with the gender variation observed in the 5 previously  reviewed  MOSLL  studies,  most  notably  in  the  PENTIFHRA  Plus  study  (a  study  in extended  prophylaxis  with  key  similarities  in  terms  of  dosage,  patient  population  and  comparator), where fondaparinux was efficacious in both males and females. The gender results in ARTEMIS are thus most likely to be chance findings. The MAH has proposed a broad indication; ARTEMIS was designed to show a clinically relevant and statistically  significant  effect  of  fondaparinux  in  the  overall  medical  patient  population  where  the common  characteristic  of  the  patients  enrolled  was  immobilisation.  The  efficacy  and  safety  of fondaparinux has been confirmed across patient groups reflecting the spectrum of VTE risk; indeed, significant  effects  in  all  medical  subgroups  cannot  be  requested  or  expected  from  such  a  study. However, it is acknowledged that prophylaxis is not appropriate in all acutely ill patients. Whilst there is  no  generally  accepted  consensus  regarding  the  criteria  for  selecting  patients  for  prophylaxis,  the need for an individual risk assessment is widely recognised in international treatment guidelines. The details of such criteria obviously have to be determined by treating physicians taking local and general clinical guidelines into account. Therefore, the CHMP believe the indication should be restricted to the treatment of high-risk medical patients based on an individual risk assessment. This has been reflected in sections 4.1 and 4.2 of the SPC and is in line with current treatment guidelines.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Safety

The  safety  observations  made  in  the  present  study  in  medical  patients  are  similar  to  those  in  the previously  submitted  MOSLL  studies.  As  expected  in  this  medical  setting,  fondaparinux  was  well tolerated with only an excess of minor bleedings compared to placebo. The rates of major bleedings were  low  in  the  two  groups  and  comparable.  The  effect  of  renal  function  was  consistent  with  the previous fondaparinux experience in MOSLL patients; the risk of bleeding is higher in patients with impaired renal function. However, there are insufficient patients with severe renal impairment (Clcr &lt;30 ml/min) to draw any final conclusion on the benefit/risk ratio for this patient sub-group in the medical indication. The overall bleeding rate is also higher in patients over 75 years old compared to patients under the age of 65 years old.

Medicinal Product no longer authorised It  is  agreed  that  the  overall  risk  for  bleedings  probably  is  lower  during  short-time  prophylaxis  in medical patients than in patients with recent orthopaedic surgery. However, the risks associated with prolonged treatment in this heterogeneous target population, which can be expected to include a large proportion of elderly patients with multiple diseases and physiologically impaired renal function, have not  been  assessed  in  the  current  clinical  trial.  This  is  reflected  in  section  4.2  of  the  SPC,  which mentions that experience from prophylactic treatment in medical patients is restricted to 14 days and that the target population should be identified based on an individual risk assessment. Finally, the Applicant is requesting a label change allowing the use of fondaparinux in patients with heparin-induced  thrombocytopaenia  (HIT),  quoting  4  publications  on  the  successful  clinical  use  of fondaparinux  in  HIT  patients. These  publications correspond  to anecdotal reports of limited experience in a total of 7 patients with HIT. These data and the post-marketing surveillance data are insufficient to support the requested change. Conclusions and Benefit/Risk Assessment Several  weaknesses  of  the  ARTEMIS  study  have  been  identified,  as  detailed  in  the  efficacy discussion.  However,  extensive  clinical  evidence  for  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  fondaparinux  for prophylaxis  in  connection  with  orthopaedic  surgery  is  available,  including  data  on  the  prolonged prophylaxis up to an additional 24 days documented in the Pentifhra plus study. There are no scientific indications  that  VTE  in  medical  patients  should  be  prevented  or  treated  differently  from  VTE  in surgical patients. Further experience can be derived from prophylactic treatment in abdominal surgery (on-going procedure) and the approved indication for treatment of VTE. In addition, the pharmacodynamic  and  pharmacokinetic  properties  of  fondaparinux  have  been  well  characterised. Thus, for fondaparinux and for the dose regimen proposed, extensive external evidence is available supporting efficacy and safety in the currently targeted population. Therefore, the results of the pivotal Artemis trial, despite its obvious shortcomings, together with the the  overall  experience  with  fondaparinux  in  similar  clinical  settings,  are  deemed  sufficient  for  a prophylaxis  indication  in  high  VTE  risk  medical  patients  based  on  an  assessment  of  the  individual VTE risk.