---
document_datetime: 2023-11-15 10:11:39
document_pages: 19
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/rebetol-h-c-246-x-0016-epar-scientific-discussion-extension_en.pdf
document_name: rebetol-h-c-246-x-0016-epar-scientific-discussion-extension_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 5.4513954
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-30 02:29:18.833771
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

1 SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION 1.1 Introduction Chronic hepatitis C is a major health issue in adults. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) accounts for 70% of the cases of chronic hepatitis in industrialised countries. The  public  health  problem  is  the  progression  towards  cirrhosis  and  hepatocellular  carcinoma. In adults, HCV is incriminated in 40% of decompensated cirrhosis, 60% of hepatocellular carcinoma and 30% cases where hepatic transplantation is indicated. 6 different genotypes have been identified. The most frequently encountered are genotype 1 and genotypes 2/3 in Europe. Genotype 1 has been shown to be associated with a more severe disease. Neither the epidemiology of chronic hepatitis C in children, nor the clinical features and course are super imposable to the adult pathology. As  evidenced  in  adults,  the  mode  of  contamination  plays  a  key  role  in  the  history  of  the  disease. In industrialised  countries,  transfusion-acquired  CHC  has  almost  completely  disappeared,  and perinatally-acquired  disease  accounts  for  almost  all  the  reported  incidence [Bortolotti  &amp;  al.  J  Ped Gastroenterol  Nut  2001;33:562-66] .,  this  means  a  few  amount  of  a  unique  inoculum,  hence  a relatively mild disease, infrequently associated with severe liver damage.. This mode of contamination, the fact that the fibrosis progression is slower when contamination occur in  the  younger  age [Poynard &amp; al., Lancet 1997;349:825-32] ,  and  the  low  rate  of  alcoholism  may account  for  the  less  severe  features  of  chronic  hepatitis  C  in  children  when  compared  to  adults. Nevertheless,  the  'wait  and  see'  strategy  that  prevailed  up  to  now  tends  to  be  re-considered  in  the scientific community (AALSD Practice Guideline. Hepatology vol 39, n°34, 2004) There is to date no international clear consensus for the treatment of children with rapidly progressive disease (most often polytransfused, receiving chemotherapy or HIV/HBV co-infected). Overall treatment strategy is assessed on a case by case basis . Three  dossiers  have  been  submitted  by  Schering-Plough  to  support  the  paediatric  extension  of indication of hepatitis C treatment (interferon α -2b (INF) + ribavirin): · an Application for an extension of indication for Rebetol 200 mg, capsules (ribavirin) · an Application for an extension of indication for Introna/Viraferon (interferon α -2b) · an Application for a Marketing Authorisation for a syrup formulation of ribavirin, especially developed to be administered to children weighing &lt; 47kg. 3.2 Quality aspects Introduction Rebetol  is  formulated  as  a  multidose  oral  solution  containing  40  mg/ml  of  ribavirin  as  active substance. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

The other ingredients include sucrose, glycerol, sorbitol liquid crystallising, propylene glycol, sodium citrate, citric acid anhydrous, natural and artificial bubble gum flavour, sodium benzoate and purified water.

It is presented in an amber glass bottle with a child-resistant polypropylene/low-density polyethylene closure. An oral syringe, graduated in increments of 0.5 ml in a scale ranging from 1.5 to 10 ml, is provided.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Drug Substance

No change has been made to the active substance already authorised for Rebetol 200 mg hard capsules (EU/1/99/107/01-03).

<!-- image -->

Drug Product ● Pharmaceutical Development This new oral formulation has been mainly developed for paediatric patients. All  the  excipients  selected  are  commonly  used  for  this  kind  of  formulation  and  they  have  been selected  based  on  compatibility  studies  with  the  drug  substance.  Regarding  the  TSE  risk,  the  oral solution does not include any components of ruminant origin. The amber glass bottle and the low-density polyethylene closure liner coming in contact with the drug product are of PhEur quality and they are in compliance with European regulation on foodstuffs. The oral syringe comprising a natural low-density polyethylene barrel fitted with a white polystyrene plunger  is  CE  marked  and  it  has  been  approved  for  its  intended  use.  The  accuracy  of  the  dose delivered by this medical device has been demonstrated according to PhEur. ● Manufacture of the Product The  finished product is produced  using a standard process comprising  the following steps: compounding, mixing, filtration and filling. Satisfactory validation data have been provided for three full-scale batches. ● Product Specification Batch analysis data provided meet the specification at the time of release and confirm the robustness and reproducibility of the manufacturing process. ● Stability of the Product Stability of the Product before reconstitution Under conditions (25ºC/60%R.H.), data are available data under accelerated conditions are available (40ºC/75% R.H.). A photostability study has shown that the finished product is not light-sensitive. In-use stability of the reconstituted solution In use stability of the solution was tested. The solution showed to be stable during the proposed in-use shelf life and under the storage conditions defined in the SPC. Discussion on chemical, pharmaceutical and biological aspects No change has been made to the active substance already authorised for Rebetol 200 mg hard capsules (EU/1/99/107/01-03). The pharmaceutical form selected is adequate taking into account the properties and stability of the active substance. The excipients are commonly used in this kind of formulation and the  packaging  material  is  well  documented.  The  manufacturing  processes  was  developed  and optimized  to  obtain  reproducible  finished  product  batches.  Stability  tests  under  ICH  conditions indicate that the products are stable for the proposed shelf life. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 1.3 Non-clinical aspects

(see overall discussion)

## 3.4 Clinical aspects

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pharmacokinetics

Introduction As above explained, pharmacokinetic data collected in children derive from the 4 submitted studies The corresponding clinical development submitted was the same for the 3 Applications pertaining to Rebetol and Intron A (i.e. new application for Rebetol syrup, type II variations for Rebetol 200 mg capsule and IntronA) and consisted of 4 open studies with only one phase III study: · phase  I  open  uncontrolled  study  P00392  aimed  at  assessing  the  bioavailability  of  the  syrup formulation of ribavirin. · phase  I  open  study  P00018  part  1  (cohort  1)  was  a  dose-ranging  PK/PD  study  aiming  at selecting the optimal dosage of ribavirin capsule in the paediatric population, based on safety, kinetic and antiviral PD criteria, respectively primary, secondary and tertiary endpoints. · phase I open study P00018 part 2 (cohort 2) was a clinical pharmacology PK/PD study set up to assess the safety (primary objective) and antiviral efficacy (secondary objective) of the selected 15 mg/kg ribavirin capsule dosage in combination with interferon α -2b. · phase  III  open  uncontrolled  study  P00321  assessed  the  efficacy  of  the  combination  of  the 15  mg/kg/day  dosage  of  ribavirin  (administered  either  as  capsule  or  syrup  formulation, depending on the weight) in combination with interferon α -2b in the treatment of hepatitis C in children, based on virological and biochemical criterion. Comparative 'bioavailability' of 200mg capsules and oral solution Study 00392 was set up to assess the bioavailability of the syrup formulation of ribavirin. Study design : Phase I, open-label, uncontrolled, single dose bioavailability study with no ribavirin capsule control group  conducted  in  healthy  adult  volunteers  The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  the pharmacokinetics of ribavirin following a single dose of ribavirin syrup (40 mg/ml) in healthy adult subjects prior using this oral solution in the P00321 study. Results : The  absorption  of  ribavirin  was  shorter  for  syrup  formulation  (Tmax ≈ 1  h)  than  for  capsule formulation  (Tmax ≈ 1.5  to  2  h).  The  mean  ribavirin  concentration  profile  resulting  from  the administration of syrup was within 10 % of concentration-time data collected in four studies (C96 214,  C96  -  398,  C95  -  165  and  C95  -  155)  previously  conducted  with  capsule  administration. The Cmax and AUC values were comparable to values obtained in previous studies with capsule in healthy adults In the clinical study  00321 the mean trough ribavirin concentrations at weeks 12, 24, 40 and 48 were similar following administration with the oral solution (40mg/ml)  and the 200mg  capsules. Study P00018 cohorts 1 and 2 Open-label, uncontrolled, randomized, parallel-group multiple-dose (cohort 1) or fixed-dose (cohort 2) study for a 48-week period with a subsequent follow-up of 24-week. PK characteristics derive from the same patients in both studies and are presented below as an integrated PK summary. Study Participants Medicinal product no longer authorised

Main Inclusion criteria: patients aged 5-16 with histologically-proven chronic hepatitis C and HCVRNA positive by PCR.Naïve with regard to ribavirin treatment.Naïve or relapse post response to prior INF therapy.Stratification by age group (5-11 yrs and 12-16yrs).

## Treatments

All patients received Intron A 3MIU/m 2 SC three times per week.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Cohort 1

| Ribavirin dose (daily in 2 divided doses)   | C max (ng/mL)   | AUC 0-12 (ng.hr/mL)   | T max (hr)   | CL/F (L/hr/kg)   |
|---------------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------------|--------------|------------------|
| 8 mg/kg/day                                 |                 |                       |              |                  |
| mean                                        | 2249            | 18527                 | 3.00         | 0.23             |
| %CV                                         | 43              | 28                    | 134          | 26               |
| n                                           | 19              | 19                    | 19           | 19               |
| 12 mg/kg/day                                |                 |                       |              |                  |
| mean                                        | 2747            | 25364                 | 1.36         | 0.24             |
| %CV                                         | 16              | 16                    | 63           | 15               |
| n                                           | 18              | 18                    | 18           | 18               |
| 15 mg/kg/day                                |                 |                       |              |                  |
| mean                                        | 3275            | 29774                 | 1.94         | 0.27             |
| %CV                                         | 25              | 26                    | 83           | 27               |
| n                                           | 17              | 17                    | 17           | 17               |

61 patients were enroled in 17 sites and were randomly assigned in parallel (stratified by age: 5-11 years or ≥ 12-16 years) to 1 of the following treatment groups: Rebetol 8 mg/kg/day po (5 - 11 years n = 13, ≥ 12 - 16 years n = 18) Rebetol 12 mg/kg/day po (5 - 11 years n = 12, ≥ 12 - 16 years n = 8) Rebetol 15 mg/kg/day po (5 - 11 years n = 11, ≥ 12 - 16 years n = 9) The daily ribavirin dose was administered in two divided doses as 50 mg capsules. Dose levels are fixed for 12 weeks. Patients assigned to the 8 and 12 mg/kg/day group could receive a dose escalation if they have not achieved a 2 log decrease in their HCV-RNA levels. Patients with an HCV-RNA positive at 24 weeks were withdrawn. Cohort 2 The 55 patients enrolled received the 15 mg/kg daily dose selected based on data obtained in cohort 1, including 20 having received the 15 mg/kg dose during part 1 (5-11 years n=16; ≥ 12-16 years n=19). Objectives: The  primary  objective  shared  by  both  parts  of  study  0018  was  the  assessment  of  the  safety  and tolerability of the combination of Intron A plus Rebetol in paediatric subjects with CHC assessed by adverse events and clinical laboratory evaluations through week 12. The specific secondary objective of part 1 study were to measure the multiple-dose PK of IntronA plus Rebetol in paediatric subjects with CHC assessed by a week 4 PK assessments.. The tertiary objective was to assess the efficacy of IntronA plus Rebetol assessed by serum ALT levels and HCV-RNA levels at week 4 and 12 in paediatric subjects with CHC. The specific objective of part 2 study was as secondary objective to assess the efficacy of IntronA plus Rebetol at the optimal dose on antiviral PD (HCV-RNA levels, ALT levels) in paediatric subjects with CHC. Results for cohort 1 PK results Table 1 shows the PK results for ribavirin and table 2 those for interferon alfa-2b Table 1 Protocol 00018: PK parameters of ribavirin Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2 Protocol 00018: PK parameters of interferon alfa-2b

| Interferon alfa-2b dose                                        | C max (IU/mL)   | AUC 0-24 (IU.hr/mL)   | T max (hr)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------------|--------------|
| 3 million international units/m 2 three times a week. mean %CV | 50.5 48         | 622 48                | 5.93 36      |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Study P00321

Determination of 'optimum dose' A greater  that  2-log  10  reduction  in  serum  HCV-RNA  levels  at  week  12  was  noted  with  all  three doses, with the largest log reduction (3 log) occurring with the 15mg/kg/day dose.  15mg/kg/day was selected as the optimal dose for further evaluation. Comparison of PK data between cohort 1 and cohort 2 The  mean  trough  ribavirin  concentrations  between  weeks  12  and  48  were  similar  for  those  taking 15 mg/kg/day in cohort 1 (n=17) and those in cohort 2 (n=25). Pharmacokinetic results / ribavirin Mean Ribavirin Profiles after 4 Weeks of Treatment : Paediatric  pharmacokinetic  parameters  were  compared  with  those  obtained  from  previous  studies conducted  in adults receiving both ribavirin and interferon alfa 2b or pegylated interferon. At week 4 paediatric pharmacokinetic parameters at 8, 12 and 15 mg/kg/day corresponded to adult pharmacokinetic parameters at doses 800, 1000 and 1200 mg/day respectively as shown above. The mean trough ribavirin concentration between week 12 and week 48 after 15 mg/kg/day were very similar in cohort 1 and 2. Medicinal product no longer authorised

Study P00321 investigating the efficacy and safety of the combination of interferon alfa-2b 3MIU/m2 three  times  weekly  plus  ribavirin  15  mg/kg/day  (in  two  divided  doses)  for  48  weeks  in  paediatric subjects  with  either  syrup  or  capsule  formulation,  depending  on  the  weight  (&lt;  or ≥ 47kg)  (3  -  11 years,  n  =  38; ≥ 12  -  16  years,  n  =  17  for  syrup/3-11  years,  n  =  3; ≥ 12  -  16  years,  n  =  12  for capsules) with chronic hepatitis C.

EMEA/CHMP/238/04

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Trough ribavirin and interferon alfa-2b concentrations were measured

Results: The mean trough ribavirin concentration following syrup and capsule were similar and close to the values measured in cohort 2 of study P00018. Conclusions on Pharmacokinetics: Study 00392 was set up to assess the bioavailability of the syrup formulation of ribavirin. Individual and mean  values overlapped between the capsule and oral solution formulations indicating that similar exposure was achieved with both formulations. The validation reports for ribavirin in human plasma and  for  interferon  alfa-2b in human serum were satisfactorily  provided. Clinical efficacy Study Phase III P00321 The objective  of  the  study  was  to  assess  the  efficacy,  safety  and  tolerability  of  the  combination  of Intron A plus Rebetol with syrup and capsule formulations for 48 weeks in paediatric subjects with chronic hepatitis C. Methods:Open-label,  fixed  dose,  single  arm  phase  3  study  for  a  48-week  period  with  a  subsequent follow-up of 24-week.The inclusion criteria were: Age 3-16 years male or female, HCV-RNA positive by PCR, liver biopsy compatible with a diagnosis of chronic hepatitis, obtained within 1 year prior to enrolment, no previous interferon, ribavirin or combination interferon + ribavirin treatment, HIV and HBV negative. The exclusion criteria were previous interferon, ribavirin or combination interferon + ribavirin treatment, parenteral antiviral or immunomodulatory therapy within the previous 2 years. Treatments Intron A 3MIU/m2 SC three times a week in combination with Rebetol 15 mg/kg/day po in 2 divided doses.  Rebetol  was  administered  either  as  capsule  or  as  syrup  formulation,  based  on  the  patient's weight at study entry : capsule for subjects 9-16 years weighing ≥ 47 kg, syrup for others (3-8 yrs and 9-16 weighing &lt;47 kg). Endpoints :There are two endpoints: sustained loss of detectable serum HCV-RNA ( &lt; 100 copies/ml) at the end of the 24-week and follow-up period, normalisation of ALT levels. Demography and baseline characteristics. Participant flow 43 patients completed the follow-up period, 7/15 in the capsule group and 36/55 in the syrup group (discontinuations mainly due to treatment failure). Baseline  data  : Overall,  78.5%  patients  (55/70)  received  the  syrup  formulation,  As  in  study 00018, 3/4 of patients (74%) were genotype 1 (n=52), 17 patients were genotype 2 or 3. The source of exposure  rate  seems  to  have  changed  in  the  last  few  years  with  now  a  predominantly  perinatallyacquired disease (35% in cohort 1 P00018, 45% in cohort 2 P00018 and 60% in P00321). Primary efficacy variable results Virological  response : Overall,  the  sustained  virological  response  obtained  with  the  recommended 15  mg/kg  daily  dose  was  49%  (34/70).  The  rate  of  sustained  virological  response  was  higher  for subjects  infected  with  Genotype  2/3  (82%)  than  for  subjects  infected  with  Genotype  1  (38%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Sustained virologic response by baseline demographic data and disease characteristics

16/30 (53)

| Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number (%) of subjects a                                                                        | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                        | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                        | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                        |
|                                                                                                 | I/R (8)                                                                                         | I/R (12)                                                                                        | I/R (15)                                                                                        |
| Weeks                                                                                           | Without Site 10 (n=20)                                                                          | Without Site 10 (n=19)                                                                          | Without Site 10 (n=17)                                                                          |
| End of Follow-Up                                                                                | 7(35)                                                                                           | 7(37)                                                                                           | 8(47)                                                                                           |

This lower than expected response for I/R (12) could reflect the higher proportion of the more difficult to treat genotype 1 subjects . However there is a definite dose-dependant response.

Protocol P00321 : Sustained virologic response by demographic data and baseline disease characteristics Number (%) of subjects INTRON A 3 MIU/m 2 TIW and REBETOL All subjects (n = 70) Genotype and baseline HCV-RNA (copies/ml) Gen.1 and ≤ 2 million Gen.1 and &gt; 2 million Gen.2/3 and ≤ 2 million Gen.2/3 &gt; and 2 million 4/22 (18) 6/8 (75) 8/9 (89) As expected, the genotype 1 and a viral load &gt; 2 million copies / ml seem to be predictive of a less sustained response rate. Normalization of ALT level results - secondary efficacy variable: ALT  levels  normalised  at  the  end  of  follow-up  period  in  23/24  (96%)  of  sustained  responders. Among non responders, 24 had abnormal ALT levels at baseline; only 7/24 (29%) had normal ALT levels at the end of follow-Up. Dose response study P00018 This Phase I open study P00018 was divided into 2 parts : part 1 (cohort 1) was a dose-ranging PK/PD study aiming at selecting the optimal dosage of ribavirin capsule in the paediatric population, based on safety, kinetic and antiviral PD criteria Part 2 (cohort 2) assessed the safety, PK characteristics and PD effects of the selected 15 mg/kg daily dose, in 55 patients including 20 having received the 15 mg/kg dose during part 1. The design of Study 00018 (cohorts 1 and 2) is detailed in the Pharmacokinetics section. Efficacy results Study 00018 cohort 1 Demography  and  baseline  characteristics  :  The  great  majority  of  patients  included  had  genotype  1 (65 to 95%, depending on the treatment arm, 77% in the 15 mg/kg group), and a high baseline viral load (68 to 75%, 71% in the 15 mg/kg group had a viral load &gt; 2 millions copies/ml). · Virological response Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA &lt; 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes I/R (8)=INTRON A + REBETOL 8 mg/kg/day; I/R (12)=INTRON A + REBETOL 12 mg/kg/day; I/R (15)=INTRON A + REBETOL 15 mg/kg/day. a:  Subjects  with  positive  HCV-RNA  or  missing  data  at  48  Weeks  of  Treatment  counted  as  non responders. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

| Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 1   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 1   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 1   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 1   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     |
|                                                                                              | I/R (8)                                                                                      | I/R (12)                                                                                     | I/R (15)                                                                                     |
| Weeks                                                                                        | Without Site 10 (n=13)                                                                       | Without Site 10 (n=18)                                                                       | Without Site 10 (n=13)                                                                       |
| End of Follow-Up                                                                             | 3(23)                                                                                        | 6(33)                                                                                        | 5(38)                                                                                        |

| Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 2   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 2   | Protocol 00018 cohort 1 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in genotype 2   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     | Number (%) of subjects a                                                                     |
|                                                                                              | I/R (8) b                                                                                    | I/R (12) I/R (15)                                                                            |
| Weeks                                                                                        | Without Site 10 (n=5)                                                                        | Without Site 10 (n=1) Without Site 10 (n=4)                                                  |
| End of Follow-Up                                                                             | 4(80)                                                                                        | 1(100) 3(75)                                                                                 |

| Protocol 00018 cohort 2 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes, genotype 1 and 2/3   | Protocol 00018 cohort 2 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes, genotype 1 and 2/3   | Protocol 00018 cohort 2 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes, genotype 1 and 2/3   | Protocol 00018 cohort 2 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA < 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes, genotype 1 and 2/3   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number (%) of subjects                                                                                              | Number (%) of subjects                                                                                              | Number (%) of subjects                                                                                              | Number (%) of subjects                                                                                              |
| I/R (15)                                                                                                            | I/R (15)                                                                                                            | I/R (15)                                                                                                            | I/R (15)                                                                                                            |
| Week                                                                                                                | All genotypes (n = 31)                                                                                              | Genotype 1 (n = 27)                                                                                                 | Genotype 2/3 (n = 4)                                                                                                |
| FU 24                                                                                                               | 12 (39)                                                                                                             | 8 (30)                                                                                                              | 4 (100)                                                                                                             |

| Protocol P00018 cohort 2: Sustained virologic response for all subjects and subjects with genotype 1 by viral level   | Protocol P00018 cohort 2: Sustained virologic response for all subjects and subjects with genotype 1 by viral level   | Protocol P00018 cohort 2: Sustained virologic response for all subjects and subjects with genotype 1 by viral level   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number (%) of subjects                                                                                                | Number (%) of subjects                                                                                                | Number (%) of subjects                                                                                                |
| I/R (15) a,b                                                                                                          | I/R (15) a,b                                                                                                          | I/R (15) a,b                                                                                                          |
| HCV-RNA at baseline (copies/ml of serum)                                                                              | All (n = 31)                                                                                                          | Genotype 1 (n = 27)                                                                                                   |
| ≤ 2 million                                                                                                           | 5/10 (50)                                                                                                             | 3/8 (36)                                                                                                              |
| > 2 million                                                                                                           | 7/21 (33)                                                                                                             | 5/19 (26)                                                                                                             |

<!-- image -->

I/R (8)=INTRON A + REBETOL 8 mg/kg/day; I/R (12)=INTRON A + REBETOL 12 mg/kg/day; I/R (15)=INTRON A + REBETOL 15 mg/kg/day. a:  Subjects  with  positive  HCV-RNA  or  missing  data  at  48  Weeks  of  Treatment  counted  as  non responders. I/R (8)=INTRON A + REBETOL 8 mg/kg/day; I/R (12)=INTRON A + REBETOL 12 mg/kg/day; I/R (15)=INTRON A + REBETOL 15 mg/kg/day. a:  Subjects  with  positive  HCV-RNA  or  missing  data  at  48  Weeks  of  Treatment  counted  as  non responders. b: One subject in the I/R (8) group was HCV genotype 4; this subject was a non responder at End of Follow-Up. · Biochemical response Among the sustained responders, 13 subjects had abnormal ALT levels at baseline; ALT normalised in 11/13  (85%)  at  Follow-Up  week  24.  None  of  the  sustained  responders  with  normal  baseline  ALT levels had abnormal ALTs during Follow-Up Among  non  responders,  22  subjects  had  abnormal  ALT  levels  at  baseline;  ALT  normalised  in 8/22  (36%)  during  Follow-Up.  2/16  (13%)  of  the  non  responders  with  normal  baseline  ALTs  had abnormal ALTs during Follow-Up.The time-course of ALT levels parallels the virological response. As has been observed in adult subjects, the decrease in viral level was more rapid in cohort 1 subjects infected with HCV genotypes 2 and 3. Efficacy Results  Study 00018 Cohort 2 Demography  and  baseline  characteristics:  The  great  majority  of  patients  included  had  genotype  1 (87%) compared to 13% with genotype 2 or 3, and a high baseline viral load (68% had a viral load &gt; 2 millions  copies/ml).  The  source  of  HCV  exposure  (transfusion  or  perinatally-acquired  hepatitis  C) seems to be well-balanced within the included subjects. · Virological response Protocol 00018 cohort 2 : Virologic response (serum HCV-RNA &lt; 100 copies/ml) in all genotypes, genotype 1 and 2/3 Number (%) of subjects Protocol P00018 cohort 2: Sustained virologic response for all subjects and subjects with genotype 1 by viral level Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

a  :  all  5  subjects  with  genotype  2/3  had  a  sustained  virologic  response  (2  of  the  5  had ≤ 2  million copies/ml at baseline and 3 had &gt; 2 million copies/ml at baseline.b : sustained response = serum HCVRNA &lt; 100 copies/ml at FU week 24.

Overall  the  virological  as  well  as  the  biochemical  data  obtained  in  cohort  2  confirms  the  cohort  1 results . Discussion on Clinical Efficacy During the assessment process several issues were considered: o Efficacy results : In the genotype 1 subgroup of this open uncontrolled study, the reported rate of sustained virological response (38%) does not appear significantly superior to the response rates reported in the literature with  INF  monotherapy  in  the  paediatric  population [Di  Ciommo  &amp;  al.  Interferon  alpha  in  the treatment of chronic hepatitis C in children : a meta-analysis. J Viral Hepat 2003;10:210-214] and [Jacobson &amp; al. An analysis of published trials of interferon monotherapy in children with chronic hepatitis C. J pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2002;34:52-58]. In the genotypes 2/3 population, the rate of sustained  virological  response  (82%)  is  high,  as  expected.  In  view  of  this  high  response  rate,  the genotypes 2/3 population could represent a legitimate target population. However, the study included &lt;25% genotype 2/3, and the corresponding sample size (n=17, 4 received capsules and 13 the syrup) is very limited needed to be further substantiated.  The 100% reported rate observed in 17 genotype 2/3 patients in an open uncontrolled study compensates the relatively low % observed  in  the  52  genotype  1  patients.  Therefore,  very  few  patients  increase  to  a  great  extent  the overall population response rate. · Target population the  protocols  for  the  studies  required  that  the  patient  have  an  elevated  ALT  or  evidence  of inflammation  and/or  fibrosis  on  liver  biopsy.  In  the  P00321  study,  pretreatment  liver  biopsy  was available for 65 of 70 patients and all of these patients had evidence of inflammation, the majority of which was of mild to moderate severity. Nearly all patients were observed to have hepatic fibrosis (60/65)  of  whom 56  had  grade  1 and  4  had  grade  3.  Although  chronic  hepatitis  C  is  a  slowly progressive disease, it is reasonable to expect that in patients of the young age in this study, nearly all of  whom had evidence of fibrosis, that a substantial proportion will have further progression in the face of ongoing inflammation. · Histology the final decision  to  treat  a  pediatric patient  must be made by the treating physician weighing all aspects of the benefit and risk for each child.  It can be anticipated that the physician will take into account the age of  the  child, severity of hepatic inflammation and  histologic evidence of disease progression as well other factors when making a decision to treat a pediatric patient. As  requested, the liver histology data from  the Phase III study (P00321) is presented.   Moreover, The MAH recommends adding  the following  statement  to Section 4.1 Therapeutic  Indications of the  SPC:  'Evidence  of  disease  progression,  such  as  hepatic  inflammation  and  fibrosis,  as  well  as prognostic factors for response, HCV genotype and viral load, should  be considered  when  deciding to  treat  a  pediatric patient. The benefits of  treatment  should  be weighed  against  the safety finding observed for pediatric subjects in the clinical trials. The  CHMP  noted  that  only  4  patients  had  bridging  fibrosis. Therefore  the  overall  population enrolled  in  the  pivotal  clinical  study  obviously  consists  in  patients  with  mild  to  moderate hepatitis C .  As a matter of fact in this population, up to now the general consensus recommended a 'wait and see' attitude. It was generally admitted that the treatment should be considered on a case by case basis. Of note HIV co-infection was part of the exclusion criteria. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## · Optimal dose of interferon á-2b

The CHMP requested more information on the determination of the optimal dose of interferon á-2b. The 3 MIU/m2 dose used in combination with Rebetol provided a twice as high plasma concentration as  in  adults.  This  was  particularly  critical  with  regard  to  the  poor  safety  profile  of  interferon  á-2b. The MAH replied that the dose selected, 3 MIU/m 2 TIW, was based on a pilot study in 12 pediatric

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients with HCV  that showed  the  3 MIU/m 2 TIW dose was safe, well tolerated, and had antiviral activity. The tolerability of a dose of 6 MIU/m 2 TIW  has  also  been  previously  demonstrated  in 72 pediatric patients with chronic hepatitis B for up to a total of 24 weeks (after  a  1-week  lead-in  period  of  3  MIU/m 2 TIW).  Also  Mean  AUCtf  and  Cmax  for  interferon  in pediatric  patients  were  approximately  double  the  corresponding    adult    values.  This  finding  is consistent  with    the  difference  in  dose  administered  to  children  compared  to  that  administered  to adults. The pediatric dose (3 MIU/m 2 ) was approximately double that of the dose per  body  surface area administered to adults in the study from which this data was taken. However,  when  dose-normalized  ,  calculated  AUC    and  Cmax    values  for  pediatric  patients    are similar to those of adults.

The  CHMP requested  further  information    on  the  week    24  response.  The  early  viral  kinetic  data, although limited, suggest that the response at week 12 of treatment could be used to predict treatment outcome. However, the MAH proposes that week 24 response be used  for  recommending treatment interruption in non-responders. As suggested by the CPMP, the MAH has assessed for  all  pediatric patients  receiving  IntronA  3MIU/m2  plus  Rebetol 15 mg/kg  the positive predictive value (PPV) and the negative predictive value (NPV) of a patient achieving a sustained virologic  response  based

The  CHMP  noted  that    the  dose  justification  is  only  based  on  limited  data  in  children  and extrapolation from adult patients. · Combination of ribavirin and peginterferoná-2b The CHMP also noted that  in adults, the combination of ribavirin and peginterferoná-2b has become the  state  of  the  art  in  the  treatment  of  CHC,  and  is  the  treatment  strategy  recommended  for  the treatment of genotype 1 patients in the NIH consensus conference on the management of hepatitis C (2002). This  combination  was  demonstrated  to  provide  a  much  better  efficacy  than  the  combination  of ribavirin  and  interferon α -2b  (54%  versus  47%),  especially  in  genotype  1  patients,  who  were  very predominantly included in this clinical program. With optimised doses of Rebetol in combination with peginterferon α -2b, adjusted on body weight, the sustained virological response rate was 61% versus 47% in combination with interferon α -2b. Therefore  the  MAH  was  asked  to  specify  if  a  clinical  development  is  ongoing/planned  with  the combination of peginterferoná-2b and ribavirin in the paediatric population The MAH replied that the  clinical  program  in  pediatric  patients  was  initiated  in  1998,  prior  to the availability of data on the safety and efficacy of  PegIntron plus ribavirin in adults. A clinical trial in pediatric patients with CHC of PegIntron plus ribavirin is currently being initiated. Until the  results of this study are available, the only  available  therapy which  has demonstrated efficacy  in pediatric patients with CHC is the combination of 3 MIU/m2 IntronA plus 15 mg/kg/day ribavirin. · Missing data The CHMP also noted that  there is too much  missing  data  in  children  aged  12  and  above  to enable  comparison    between  data  obtained  with  the  capsule  and  the  syrup  formulations.  The  MAH replied that missing  follow-up  virology  data  (HCV-RNA  at  24  week  follow-up)  for  the ITT analysis  presents  a  particular  problem  in  patients  that  are  HCV-RNA negative  at  the  end  of treatment    since    most    of    these    patients    become  sustained    responders.    For    patients    in    these studies  who  were  negative  at end of treatment and who had the 24 week follow-up assessment the relapse rate was low, 15%. To address the issue of patients with a negative HCV-RNA at the end of treatment and a missing value at the end of  follow-up,  the  MAH  performed  a  further  assessment  to  estimate  the likelihood of a sustained response given a negative HCV-RNA at the end of treatment. Then,  the  Sponsor  estimated that the adjusted sustained response rate for capsules (51%) was comparable to the sustained response rate  for  solution (53%).  The CHMP noted that such estimations should be considered with caution with regard to their inherent limitations (hypothesis of similar response between patient with missing and non-missing data). · Week 24 Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

on  the  response  at  week 12 or 24  of treatment. HCV-RNA negativity and multiple log10  decreases at  these  time points were assessed.

<!-- image -->

| Treatment emergent adverse events with at least one SAE in Protocol Nos. P00018 Cohort 1, P00018 Cohort 2 and P00321   | Treatment emergent adverse events with at least one SAE in Protocol Nos. P00018 Cohort 1, P00018 Cohort 2 and P00321   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                        | All Subjects (n=118)                                                                                                   |
|                                                                                                                        | All Grades Severe (23) no                                                                                              |
| Total Reporting Any AE a                                                                                               | 100% (118)) 19%                                                                                                        |
| Body as a Whole                                                                                                        | 98% (116) 3% (4)                                                                                                       |
| Influenza-like symptoms                                                                                                | 31% (6) <1% (1)                                                                                                        |
| Central/Periph Nerv Syst product                                                                                       | 31% (37) <1% (1)                                                                                                       |
| Endocrine                                                                                                              | 6% (7) <1% (1)                                                                                                         |
| Hypothyroidism 4%                                                                                                      | (5) <1% (1)                                                                                                            |
| Gastrointestinal                                                                                                       | 84% (99) 2% (2)                                                                                                        |
| Musculoskeletal                                                                                                        | 53% (62) 3% (3)                                                                                                        |
| Psychiatric a                                                                                                          | 51% (60) 3% (4)                                                                                                        |
| Behavior disorder                                                                                                      | 5% (6) <1% (1)                                                                                                         |
| Depression                                                                                                             | 13% (15) <1% (1)                                                                                                       |

Based on the Intron A/Rebetol data for adults which showed that 24 and 48 weeks of therapy  for HCV  2  and  3  patients  were  equally  effective,  the  MAH recommends that the SPC specify that children with HCV genotypes 2 and 3 should be treated for 24 weeks. This predictive value is even more difficult to establish in children since the available clinical data are currently very limited. Therefore, it appeared reasonable to draw the same recommendation in term of treatment duration and stopping rules as for adults. Clinical safety Patient exposure: A total of 118 received interferon alfa-2b 3 MIU TIW/m 2 plus ribavirin 15 mg/kg/day. Approximately one-half (58%) of the subjects completed the 48 treatment period. Adverse events a: There  was  1  life-threatening  adverse  event,  a  suicide  attempt  in  subject  P00018-17/0227, who  received  capsules.  This  subject  was  discontinued  from  the  study,  and  psychiatric evaluation and antidepressants were initiated, with resolution of the suicidal ideation. All patients reported at least one adverse event. The most commonly reported AE were consistent with a  flu-like  syndrome,  or  were  gastrointestinal  (84%),  psychiatric  (51%),  musculoskeletal  (53%), neurological (31%).Almost half of the overall included subjects (51%) experienced a 'psychiatric' AE during the study with 13% of them being depression cases. This incidence is similar between the two formulation groups while the incidence rate of non-specific psychiatric AEs is higher in subjects receiving oral solution (67%) compared to those receiving capsules (37%). Medicinal product no longer authorised

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Serious adverse events and deaths

No deaths were reported during the paediatric clinical development.

<!-- image -->

The  risk  of  depression  and  suicide  is  of  particular  relevance  in  the  adolescent  population.  Data  on suicide have shown conclusively that adolescents are one of the most 'at risk' populations studied, as reported  in  the  2000  report  from  the  Committee  on  Adolescence/American  Academy  of  Pediatrics titled  'Suicide  and  Suicide  Attempts  in  Adolescents'.  The  presence  of  chronic  illness  is  also associated with an increase in the risk of suicide in both the adolescent and adult subject.

a: Determined by the investigator. b: Additional therapy and dose reduction for depression. Two  additional  patients  belonging  to  study  P00018,  cohort  1  experienced  suicidal  ideation  in  the treatment or FU period. The corresponding incidence is 2.4% (4/overall 166 patients) which has to be compared to the 1% observed in adults. Three of the 4 subjects who had suicidal ideation or a suicidal attempt were adolescents; the other one was  a  child  aged  9  without  any  prior  history  of  psychiatric  disorders.Although  the  incidence  of depression  was  lower  than  in  adults  (13%  vs  31%),  it  is  of  particular  relevance  in  this  fragile population, as attested by the high 2.4% rate of suicidal ideation/attempt. Medicinal product no longer authorised

This should be taken into account in the assessment of the Benefit/risk ratio.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

One  child  aged  8  experienced  a  severe  depression  with  suicide  attempt,  which  illustrates  that  the psychiatric risk is not confined to the adolescent age group.

Other Adverse events of specific relevance in children · Weight loss / Growth retardation 25%  patient  experienced  weight  loss.  Mean  -9.1  changes  in  height  percentile  and  -12.6  in  weight percentile were observed during treatment. At the end of follow-up, there remained only a -2 change in percentile for weight. A question  remained regarding the height evolution. · Other Moreover, it  was  underlined  that  growth  inhibition,  hypothyroidism  (4%)  and  alopecia  (23%)  were particularly critical events in children. Laboratory findings As expected, laboratory findings evidence anemia (27%, only grade 1 and 2) and neutropenia (71%). It is important to note that 39% patients in the capsule group experienced anemia, when compared to 13% in the syrup group. As the hematological tolerance in children seems to be better than in adults (- 1.5 g/dl vs - 2.6 g/dl), this effect may be related to older age of the subjects. · Discontinuations for Adverse Events Seven subjects discontinued treatment due to AE, 4 of them were severe or life-threatening. Two SAE occurs in the I/R (15) group and the two other with the solution formulation. Two neutropenia cases, one with each formulation, occurs in two females aged 14 and 15, respectively 174 and 65 days after treatment  onset.  The  case  of  suicide  attempt  occurs  in  a  13-years  old  female  with  psychiatric antecedents  who  received  the  capsule  formulation  two  months  after  treatment  start.  The  depression and behavior disorder occurs in a 9-years old male without any depression risk factors and received the solution. With  regard  to  these  results,  the  SAE  incidence  is  similar  with  both  formulations  with  no  better hematological or psychiatric tolerance with the solution formulation. When including all ribavirin treatment groups, there were 3 suicidal ideation and 1 attempted suicide among a total of 166 treated children. Of note,3/4 of these cases were adolescents . · Dose modifications with Interferon alfa-2b and ribavirin 15 mg/kg Two third of required dose modification occurred for interferon alfa-2b and not ribavirin. One third of subjects required dose modification (5% in the I/R (8) group, 35% in the I/R (12) group and 47% in the I/R (15) group due to AEs) which seems to be dose-related. There were 13% of ribavirin dose modification, mainly with the capsule formulation. Anemia and neutropenia are the most common reasons for dose modification. There was 'only' 3% incidence of dose adjustment for psychiatric adverse events . Discussion on Clinical Safety Medicinal product no longer authorised

The  risk  was  not  considered  as  completely  elucidated  and  raised  concerns  specific  to  the  intended paediatric  populationThe  observed  tolerance  profile  of  ribavirin  in  children  grossly  matches  the tolerance profile of the combination in adults, with even a better tolerance to anemia (less frequent and milder), which is not surprising in young children, and less frequent depression (13% versus 31% in naïve adults), but with growth inhibition characterized by a decrease in height (mean percentile decrease of growth velocity of 9 %) and weight (mean percentile decrease of 13%) and a higher rate of suicidal attempt/ideation (2.4% versus 1%).

Particularly, the  higher  rate  of  suicidal  ideation/attempt    confirms  that  the  risk  of  depression  and suicide  is  of  particular  relevance  in  the  adolescent  population.  Data  on  suicide  have  shown conclusively that adolescents are one of the most 'at risk' populations studied, as reported in the 2000

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

report  from  the  Committee  on  Adolescence/American  Academy  of  Pediatrics  titled  'Suicide  and Suicide Attempts in Adolescents'.

The presence of chronic illness is also associated with an increase in the risk of suicide in both the adolescent and adult subjects. The severe depression in a young boy (&lt;10 yrs)  further attests that the psychiatric risk is not confined to the adolescent age group. Moreover,  it  is  to  be  underlined  that  depression  (13%),  anorexia  (51%),  hypothyroidism  (4%)  and alopecia (23%) are particularly critical events in children. Overall,  the  CHMP stated that the safety profile of the combination is of particular concern in this paediatric  population    (suicidal    ideation/attempt    and    depression,    anorexia,    growth  inhibition, hypothyroidism and alopecia). This has to be assessed in the light of the low need to treat and lack of demonstration children with severe evolution of the disease. . The  MAH agrees  that  the  benefits  of  treatment  should  be  carefully weighed  against  the  safety findings  observed  for  pediatric  subjects  in  the interferon alfa-2b/ribavirin trials; It was agreed that the final  decision  to  treat  a  pediatric  patient  would have to be made on a case by case basis by  the treating  physician  taking  into  account  several  critical  factors  to  characterize  the  disease  status  and carefully weighing and the  potential risk for the child. In this field, it was  anticipated that the physician will take into account the age of the child, severity of    hepatic    inflammation,    histologic    evidence    of    disease  progression  and    other    factors    when making  a  decision  to  treat  a  pediatric  subject; however,   the  exact  requirements  to  make  this decision    was  considered  difficult  to      be  mandated  in  the  product  label.  Therefore,    the    MAH proposes  adding  the  following  statement  to Section 4.1 Therapeutic Indications of the SPC: 'Evidence  of  disease  progression, such as hepatic inflammation and fibrosis, as well as prognostic factors for response, HCV genotype and viral load, should be considered when deciding  to  treat a pediatric patient. The benefits of  treatment should be  weighed  against  the safety finding observed for  pediatric  subjects  in  the  clinical  trials. ' The  CHMP  agreed  upon  the  particular  difficulties  in straightforwardly defining the target population and underlines the need of a careful case by case basis assessment of the potential benefit  and  risk.  The  proposal  of  the  applicant  to  introduce a  statement warranting  attention  of  prescribers  on  the  factors  to  be  considered  in  this  careful  assessment  was considered reasonable. · Weight loss The CHMP noted that 25% patients experienced weight loss. Mean -9.1 changes in height percentile and  -12.6  in  weight  percentile  were  observed  during  treatment.  At  the  end  of  follow-up,  there remained only a -2 change in percentile for weight. The  MAH was requested to provide complete available  information  concerning  the  effect  on  growth.  The    MAH  replied  that  the  mean change  in height percentiles in all subjects for the Treatment period was -9.11.  The mean change in percentiles in  all  subjects  for  the  Follow-Up  period  was  +1.96.    In  the  capsule  and  solution  groups,  mean decreases  during  Treatment  were  partially  compensated  for  by  mean  increases  during  Follow-Up (+2.00  and  +1.92,  respectively).  Generally,  the  mean  data  indicate  that  linear  growth  inhibition observed during treatment is not permanent, and partially compensatory increase in linear growth rate is observed during post-treatment Follow-Up period. The mean change in weight percentile in all subjects was -12.6 during Treatment and +10.52 during Follow-Up.  A  similar  pattern  was  observed  at  End  of  Treatment  and  at  End  of  Follow-Up  in  the capsule and solution groups (-12.5 and +8.58; -12.7 and +12.76, respectively). This suggests that there is a nearly compensatory \"catch-up\" weight gain for affected subjects after treatment has ended. Medicinal product no longer authorised

However, the CHMP noted that the data provided were open to criticism and did not allow to draw definite  conclusion  with  regard  to  the  potential  impact  of  treatment  on  the  growth.  Indeed,  the company only  provided pooled data, precluding a proper assessment of the incidence and seriousness of  the  growth  delay  in  children.  Even  if  the  mean  data  suggest  that  there  might  be  a  compensatory 'catch up' weight and height gain after treatment has ended, one can not exclude that some children may  experience  a  significant  and/or  long-standing  growth  delay.  A  falloff  from  the  pre-treatment

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

growth  curve  for  some  children  can  not  be  excluded  due  to  the  lack  of    individual  data  regarding growth development.

Consequently, it was considered that the SmPC should point out the impairment of growth velocity observed in the paediatric population during treatment. Moreover, the MAH was strongly encouraged to collect substantiated data on this issue from the ongoing clinical trial in paediatric patients treated with the combination of Peginterferon-alpha 2b and ribavirin. Finally, the precise mechanism behind such effect would deserve to be explored by the MAH. · Psychiatric disorders The CHMP noted that 37% patients in the capsule group and 67% in the syrup experienced psychiatric disorders, but an identical 13% of depression was observed in both groups. Conversely, 39% in the capsule group experienced anaemia, compared with 13% in the syrup group.  The MAH commented in the Clinical Expert Report on the difference in the reporting of psychiatric adverse events between the capsule and the oral solution groups. There was no clear explanation other than the observation that the difference appears to be due to a higher incidence of the non-specific psychiatric events such as somnolence,  behaviour  disorder  and  insomnia.  It  could  be  speculated  that  the  difference  could  be related  to  the  differences  in  reporting  of  adverse  events,  i.e.,  parents  reporting  observations  for younger children and self-reporting for older children. The CHMP  stated that the MAH's response was very limited and did not help in clarifying the reason for the differences observed in the safety profiles of both Ribavirin formulations. In the perspective of an  ongoing  clinical  development  in  children,  this  issue  would  need  to  be  further  explored  by  the MAH. · Complementary safety data provided during the procedure : In order to further the safety profile of the drug, the applicant was requested to provide long term safety data and data on the thyroid function : 1. long term safety data especially regarding the effect on (neuro) endocrine function including  the  impact  on  growth  and  sexual  development.  Special  attention  were also to be given to psychiatric and behavioural reactions. In  response,  the  MAH  provided  data  on  patients  enrolled  in  the  study  P01906,  which  is  a  5-year follow-up study of the children treated in the pivotal IntronA/Rebetol studies. 2. Additional data with regard to the thyroid disorders and the need for monitoring of thyroid functions. Moreover, the applicant was requested to substantiate the impact of the use of the combination on the thyroid  function.  In  response  the  applicant  provided  the  results  derived  from  a  cohort  of  children followed by Pr Wirth a paediatrician in Germany. The MAH recommendation for evaluation of thyroid abnormalities every 3 months seems appropriate. However, the  assessment  of  thyroid  function prior  to  initiation currently  recommended  for  adults should also apply for children. Further  data  on  this  issue  should  be  available  from  the  ongoing  study  in  paediatric  patients  treated with  the  combination  of  Peginterferon-alpha  2b  and  ribavirin.  The  MAH  is  strongly  encouraged  to collect any informative data on thyroid disorder from the five-year follow-up study P01906. Medicinal product no longer authorised

## 3. Post-marketing data

The safety of interferon+Rebetol was only documented in a limited number of children. Interferon alfa-2b has been licensed in the US for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B in children at a higher dosage (6 MIU/m 2 TIW) than that applied for in the indication chronic hepatitis C (3 MIU/m 2 TIW).   The CHMP requested all available post-marketing data on the safety of this dose in children to give a more complete picture of the safety profile of interferon. The MAH provided a report which summarized  post-marketing  surveillance  data  in  patients ≤ 17  years  of  age  with  chronic  hepatitis

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

treated  with  IntronA  (with  or  without  ribavirin).  A  total  of  115  spontaneously  reported  cases  were identified. The overall pattern of adverse events was consistent with either underlying disease or the known adverse effects of interferon  alpha.  No  new  safety  concerns  were  identified  upon  review  of these cases.

The  clinical  development  performed  by  the  MAH  has  mainly  enrolled  children with  mild  to moderate hepatitis C . However, up to known, in this population the current consensus recommended a 'wait and see' attitude. Indeed, contrarily to adults hepatitis C is most often a mild disease with a slow and delayed fibrosis progression. Chronic infection in children is asymptomatic in most cases, with minimal histological lesions in the large majority of cases. No hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has  been  reported  up  to  now  in  children  with  chronic  HCV  hepatitis.  Such  an  attitude  appears especially  reasonable  in  the  light  of  the  safety  profile  of  the  ribavirin+interferon  combination particularly  worrying  for  the  paediatric  population  (risk  of  suicidal  attempt  especially  critical  in adolescents, potential deleterious impact on growth). Nevertheless, it was admitted that the 'wait and

A total of 115 cases, of which 34 serious were presented. Among the serious cases reported, 14 were considered to be related to  the treatment.  Among these 14 cases, 3 did not appeared to be labelled (Kawasaki  syndrome  vs  hypersensibility  reaction,  lymphoma,  septic  arthritis).  Confounding  factors are present in the three cases. Globally, no new safety concerned emerged from the data presented. The company states that there was no apparent correlation between any reported adverse event and interferon  dose.  However,  such  a  correlation  seems  to  exist  for  granulopenia  and  is  suggested  for seizure and alopecia. No  estimation  of  the  exposed  population  is  provided.  Consequently,  the  frequency  of  the  adverse events reported cannot be assessed. Six cases with a fatal outcome were reported. None was attributable to the treatment according to the company.  All  cases  presented  with  risk  factors  and  significant  alternative  aetiology.  However,  a contributory role of the drug can be totally excluded in two cases. The first one concerned a 16 y.o male  with  chronic  atypical  hepatitis  B  who  discontinued  treatment  with  INTRONA  after  1  week because of decreasing WBC and platelets. No improvement was noticed after drug withdrawal and the patient was diagnosed with panmyelophtisis 19 days after cessation of therapy. He did not response to corrective  therapy  and  died  of  a  suspected  pulmonary  haemorrhage  4  months  after  cessation  of interferon  treatment.  The  second  case  involved  an  HIV-positive  12  y.o  male  with  hepatitis  B, tuberculosis  and  nephritic  syndrome,  who  presented  pancreatitis  12  days  after  starting  IntronA. Interferon therapy was discontinued but the patient subsequently developed an important worsening of HIV and died about 7 weeks after stopping interferon. Furthermore, 8 cases of psychiatric disorders, of which 3 serious, were reported. Among them, 2 cases of depression, of which 1 serious, were reported. One of the case is reported in a 9 y.o girl patient who has  already  experienced  depression  during  a  previous  course  of  therapy  with  VIRAFERON. The two cases of attempted suicide, of which only 1 is serious, presented with confounding factors. OVERALL DISCUSSION With regard to non clinical data : The MAH  accepted to perform the requested juvenile animal study. Overall, the non clinical investigation is proposed to consist of one Dose range-finding study and one Juvenile toxicity study to assess effects on growth, skeletal formation, and reproductive development and function. The results of these studies will be available by the end of 2005. With regard to clinical data The CHMP agreed that although the PK data collected so far could be considered as reassuring the MAH  is  committed  to  further  substantiate  the  comparability  of  exposures  between  both  ribavirin formulations through the collection of samples from children enrolled in a planned phase Ib/III study with ribavirin and pegylated interferon,. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

see' strategy that prevailed up to now in children tends to be re-considered in the scientific community (AALSD Practice Guideline. Hepatology vol 39, n°34, 2004). Therefore, it was agreed that the use of ribavirin+interferon could be considered in children provided that the decision to treat was subsequent to  a  careful  case  by  case  basis  assessment  taking  into  account  in  particular,  the  disease  status  as evidenced  by  the  virological,  biochemical  and  histological  features  and  carefully  weighing  the potential safety adverse effects associated with the ribavirin+interferon combination. These considerations were to be translated into the indication.

Growth and Development :  During  a  1-year  course  of  therapy  there  was  a  decrease  in  the  rate  of linear  growth  (mean  percentile  decrease  of  9 %)  and  a  decrease  in  the  rate  of  weight  gain  (mean percentile  decrease  of  13 %)..  A  general  reversal  of  these  trends  was  noted  during  the  6 months follow-up  post  treatment.  However,  based  on  interim  data  from  a  long-term  follow-up  study, 12 (14 %)  of  84 children  had  a  &gt;15 percentile  decrease  in  rate  of  linear  growth,  of  whom  5 (6 %) children had a &gt;30 percentile decrease despite being off treatment for more than 1 year. There are no data on long term effects on growth and development and on sexual maturation. The MAH agreed.

Therefore the CHMP proposed the following text in section 4.1 Therapeutic indications. Children and adolescents: Rebetol  is  intended  for  use,  in  a  combination  regimen  with  interferon  alfa-2b,  for  the  treatment  of children  and  adolescents  3 years  of  age  and  older,  who  have  chronic  hepatitis  C,  not  previously treated, without liver decompensation, and who are positive for serum HCV-RNA. The decision to treat should be made on a case by case basis, taking into account any evidence of disease  progression  such  as  hepatic  inflammation  and  fibrosis,  as  well  as  prognostic  factors  for response, HCV genotype and viral load. The expected benefit of treatment should be weighed against the safety findings observed for paediatric subjects in the clinical trials (see sections 4.4, 4.8 and 5.1). The MAH agreed. The  paediatric  development  programme  with  the  pegylated  interferon  combined  with  ribavirin  is ongoing. It is anticipated, that the complete study data, including the complete pharmacokinetic analyses, will be available and provided by first quarter 2008. Conversely  to  adults,  the  recent  deletion  of  the  strict  contra-indication  in  case  of  existence  of  ,  or history of severe psychiatric condition (down-graded as a warning) was not considered appropriate at this stage for children (considering the particular concern about a higher rate of suicidal attempt/ideation (2.4% versus 1% in adults). This was to be re-considered later on in the light of the clinical  experience  to  be  accumulated  in  adults  in  this  difficult-to-treat  population.  The  CHMP proposed the following contraindication section 4.3 Children and adolescents: Existence of, or history of severe psychiatric condition, particularly severe depression, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempt . The MAH agreed. The CHMP also requested long-term safety data . The MAH  proposed  a  five year follow-up of the patients treated in the ongoing pivotal IntronA/Rebetol studies in children (P00018 and P00321) and presented  an interim assessment of the follow-up  for  children's  growth  and  the  occurrence  of  Serious  Adverse  Events  to  assess  long-term disturbances, including those mentioned to be of interest by CHMP. . It  is  anticipated  the  complete  study data for the  long-term follow-up protocol will be available and provided to the CHMP in 2007. The CHMP proposed the following text in Section 4.4 Special  warnings  and  special  precautions for user  considering that attention of prescribers should be warranted (specific warning) on a potential irreversible effect on growth in some patients. Medicinal product no longer authorised

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The MAH is committed to provide safety data from post-marketing experience and to complete the case reports by specific information allowing to appreciate the virological, biochemical, histological and clinical status of the children.

…

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

However, the final wording of the proposed CHMP indication, was aimed at discouraging a wide use of this combination in children and to incite to a careful case by case balance of the benefit and risk before deciding to treat children.

These information will be reported within the forthcoming PSURs. The CHMP also requested  additional safety data from Pr Wirth studies. The CHMP requested that the  information on the higher incidence of thyroid abnormalities (increase TSH)  reported  in  paediatric  population  compared  to  the  adult  patients  should    be  added  in  SmPC (Section 4.4 and 4.8). In  line  with  the  CHMP  request,  the  MAH  has  made  a  proposal  in  term  of  thyroid  monitoring  in Section 4.4 Special warnings and special precautions for user: Supplemental monitoring specific for children and adolescents Thyroid  Monitoring:  Approximately  12%  of  children  treated  with  interferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin developed increase in TSH during interferon alfa-2b treatment. Another 4% had a transient decrease below the lower limit of normal. Prior to initiation of IntronA therapy , TSH levels must be evaluated and any thyroid abnormality detected at that time must be treated with conventional therapy. IntronA therapy may be initiated if TSH levels can be maintained in the normal range by medication. Thyroid dysfunction  during  treatment  with  interferon  alfa-2b  and  ribavirin  has  been  observed.  If  thyroid abnormalities  are  detected,  the  patient's  thyroid  status  should  be  evaluated  and  treated  as  clinically appropriate. Paediatric  patients  should  be  monitored  every  3 months  for  evidence  of  thyroid dysfunction (e.g. TSH). The MAH's recommendation for evaluation of thyroid abnormalities every 3 months was  appropriate for the CHMP.Overall, further data on thyroid disorder should be available from the ongoing study in paediatric patients treated with the combination of Peginterferon-alpha 2b and ribavirin. The MAH is strongly encouraged to collect any informative data on thyroid disorder from the five-year follow-up study P01906. 3.5 Overall conclusions, benefit/risk assessment and recommendation Quality No change has been made to the active substance already authorised for Rebetol 200 mg hard capsules (EU/1/99/107/01-03). The product is formulated, manufactured and controlled in a way that is characteristic for an oral solution. Batch analysis data indicate a consistent product from batch to batch. Some minor outstanding quality issues, which could be clarified on an ongoing basis, remained at the time of the opinion. Clinical and pharmacology and toxicology Benefit/risk assessment The CHMP comes to a positive conclusion with regard to the combined use of ribavirin+interferon alpha 2b in children from 3 years with chronic hepatitis C. Medicinal product no longer authorised

This was especially critical since the safety profile of the combination was regarded as concerning in the  target  population  (impact  on  growth,  psychiatric  adverse  events  including  suicidal  attempt  and ideation).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

The CHMP considers that a preclinical study was of critical importance to clearly and quickly better appreciate the potential overall impact of the ribavirin safety profile in children and, in particular, to assess  the  potential  of  ribavirin  to  affect  growth  and  development.  Also  in  ongoing  and  planned studies  (especially  the  study  with  ribavirin  and  pegylated  intereferon),  the  MAH  should  further substantiate the impact of ribavirin + interferon on growth and sexual development, psychiatric and behavioural reactions, endocrine functions. Overall, the benefit/risk  of  the  use  of  ribavirin+interferon  in  children  from  3  years  of  age  could  be considered favourable, with a wording of indication discouraging a wide use of this combination of concerning safety profile and with post-approval commitments  mainly aiming at further substantiating the potential impact of the safety profile of this treatment in children and closely following the use of this treatment in this new target population Recommendation Based on the CHMP review of data on quality, safety and efficacy, the CHMP considered that the benefit/risk ratio of Rebetol 40 mg/ml oral solution in the treatment of 'Rebetol is intended for use, in a combination regimen with interferon alfa-2b, for the treatment of children and adolescents 3 years of age and older, who have chronic hepatitis C, not previously treated, without liver decompensation, and who are positive for serum HCV-RNA. The decision to treat should be made on a case by case basis, taking into account evidence of disease progression such as hepatic inflammation and fibrosis, as well as prognostic factors for response, HCV genotype and viral load. The expected benefit of treatment should be weighed against the safety findings observed for paediatric subjects in the clinical trials (See sections 4.4 , 4.8 and 5.1 ). Rebetol monotherapy must not be used. There is no safety or efficacy information in children or adolescents on the use of Rebetol with pegylated or other forms of interferon (i.e., not alfa-2b).' was favourable and therefore recommended the granting of the marketing authorisation for this new pharmaceutical form. Medicinal product no longer authorised