---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:55:10
document_pages: 11
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/remicade-h-c-240-ii-0100-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: remicade-h-c-240-ii-0100-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 10.7607135
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-24 23:05:47.122111
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
<!-- image -->

London, 18 October 2007 Product name: Remicade Procedure number: EMEA/H/C/240/II/100

## SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Introduction

Infliximab is a chimeric human-murine IgG1 κ monoclonal antibody, which binds to both soluble and transmembrane forms of the human tumour necrosis factor (TNF) α and inhibits the functional activity of TNF α .

Remicade (infliximab) is currently approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), adult and paediatric Crohn's disease (CD), ankylosing spondylitis (AS), psoriatic arthritis (PsA), psoriasis and ulcerative colitis (UC).

PsA  is  a  chronic,  inflammatory,  usually  rheumatoid  factor  (RF)-negative  arthritis  associated  with psoriasis.  According  to  EU  guidance  for  treating  PsA,  psoriasis  is  prevalent  in  1%  to  3%  of  the population. Estimates of those psoriasis patients who develop PsA vary widely (6%-42%). Affecting men and women equally, PsA typically appears between the ages of 30 and 50 years. PsA usually involves multiple peripheral joints, the axial skeleton, sacroiliac joints, fingernails, and entheses. The presentation  of  PsA  has  been  categorised  into  5  overlapping  clinical  patterns,  which  include oligoarthritis,  polyarthritis,  arthritis  of  distal  interphalangeal  (DIP)  joints,  spondylitis,  and  arthritis mutilans. More than one-half of the patients with PsA may have evidence of erosions on X-rays, and up to 40% of the patients may develop severe, erosive arthropathy.

The  MAH  (marketing  authorisation  holder)  applied  to  change  the  PsA  indication,  adding  that infliximab  has  been  shown  to  improve  physical  function  and  inhibit  the  progression  of  structural damage of active arthritis, as measured by X-ray.

The  current  approved  dose  of  infliximab  for  treating  active  and  progressive  PsA  is  5  mg/kg, administered at weeks 0, 2, and 6, followed by a maintenance regimen q8 (every 8) weeks. Infliximab may be administered in combination with methotrexate (MTX) or as monotherapy in patients who are intolerant  to  MTX  or  have  a  contraindication  to  the  use  of  MTX.  The  same  dosing  regimen  is supported by additional data demonstrating inhibition of structural damage.

## Clinical aspects

The clinical development program for infliximab for the treatment of PsA consisted of 2 controlled clinical trials, IMPACT (study P02114) and IMPACT II (study C0168T50).

## Study P02114 (IMPACT)

Design: An investigator-initiated, multicentre study in subjects with PsA and peripheral polyarticular arthritis  who had failed at least 1 disease modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD). This study was conducted at 9 study centres in Austria, Canada, England, Germany, and the US. The study design included a 16-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled treatment (Stage I), followed by a 34-week, open-label treatment period (Stage II).

Objectives:  The  primary  objective  was  to  study  efficacy  (ACR20 1 )  of  infliximab  compared  with placebo  at  week  16  and  to  determine  safety  of  infliximab.  Secondary  objectives  were  to  follow response  of  skin  involvement,  percentage  ACR20  over  time,  and  ACR50  and  70,  Disease  activity score  (DAS),  Psoriatic  arthritis  response  criteria  (PsARC),  AUC  percentage,  ACR  improvement (ACRn), and change in joint scores at week 16 and week 50.

Diagnosis and Main Criteria for Inclusion: Subjects had to be 18 years of age or older with a diagnosis of  active  PsA  with  peripheral  polyarticular  involvement  and  at  least  one  of  the  following:  Distal phalangeal  (DIP)  involvement,  polyarticular  arthritis,  with  absence  of  rheumatoid  nodules  and

1 ACR,  American  College  of  Rheumatology  response  criteria.  The  ACR  response  criteria  were  developed  for  RA.  The ACR20 criteria is defined as a ≥ 20% reduction in the tender joint count, a ≥ 20% reduction in the swollen joint count and a

≥

20% reduction in 3 of 5 additional measures: a) patient assessment of pain, b) patient global assessment of disease activity,

c) physician global assessment of disease activity, d) disability index of the health assessment questionnaire (HAQ) and, e) acute phase reactant.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

presence of psoriasis, arthritis mutilans or asymmetric peripheral arthritis, negative RA-factor, at least 6 months since diagnosis. Subjects should have had at least 1 DMARD failure. If on a DMARD, the dose must had been stable since 4 weeks. Corticosteroids were allowed if stable &lt;10mg/day.

Number of Subjects: The study initially enrolled 104 subjects, of whom 87 completed year 1. Seventy eight (78) subjects continued treatment in year 2.

## Treatment:

Stage I: subjects were randomly assigned to receive 5 mg/kg infliximab or placebo infusions at weeks 0, 2, 6, and 14.

Stage  II: subjects  on  placebo  initially  and  at  weeks  16,  18,  were  crossed  over  to  receive  5  mg/kg infliximab at weeks, 22, 30, 38, and 46. Subjects who had been receiving infliximab received infusions of placebo at weeks 16 and 18 (to maintain the blind) and infusions of infliximab at weeks 22, 30, 38, and 46. All subjects were followed until week 50. Thereafter subjects joined the open label long-term extension to 2 years.

## Study C0168T50 (IMPACT 2)

Design: A multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for 24 weeks, with 2 parallel treatment groups (placebo and infliximab 5 mg/kg) of subjects with active polyarticular PsA. After week 24, placebo patients were switched to infliximab, although they could enter early escape already at week 16. Subjects could dose escalate at week 38. All subjects received treatment up to week 46.

Objectives: The primary objective was to evaluate the efficacy of infliximab in subjects with active PsA by assessing reduction in signs and symptoms of arthritis and prevention of structural damage. The major secondary objectives were to evaluate the efficacy of infliximab in: 1) achieving ACR 20 sustained  response,  2)  achieving  the  PsARC,  3)  clearing  psoriatic  skin  lesions,  and  4)  improving quality of life in subjects with PsA.

Number of Subjects: Two hundred subjects (planned) were randomised in a 1:1 ratio to infliximab 5 mg/kg (n = 100) or placebo (n = 100).

Diagnosis and Main Criteria for Inclusion: Subjects had to be 18 years of age or older with a diagnosis of active, polyarticular (5 or more joints involved) peripheral PsA for at least 6 months prior to the first  infusion,  and  with  an  inadequate  response  to  current  or  previous  DMARD  or  NSAID  (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug) therapy. Diagnosis of PsA must have included the presence of active psoriasis. Concomitant MTX at stable doses was permitted, but not required.

Mode of Administration Infliximab 5 mg/kg was infused at weeks 0, 2, 6, 14, 22, 30, 38, and 46; at weeks 16, 18, 22, 30, 38, and 46 for placebo subjects who entered early escape, and at weeks 24, 26, 30, 38, and 46 for placebo subjects who crossed over to infliximab. Infliximab 10 mg/kg was infused at weeks 38 and 46 for subjects who dose escalated.

Efficacy: The primary endpoints were the proportion of subjects with ACR 20 response at week 14 (not  further  addressed  within  the  current  assessment  as  not  relevant  to  the  claimed  extension  of indication) and the change from baseline in the total modified van der Heijde modified Sharp (vdH-S) 2 score  at  week  24.  In  addition,  other  secondary  endpoints  and  exploratory  endpoints  related  to structural  damage  were  evaluated.  Maintenance  of  responses  for  signs  and  symptoms  of  arthritis, physical function, skin disease, and quality of life endpoints were summarised through week 54.

2 The vDH-S score is a detailed scoring method evaluating erosions, joint space narrowing, (sub)luxation, ankylosis, gross osteolysis, and pencil in cup phenomena.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Clinical efficacy

## Radiographic assessments

In IMPACT, radiographic images of the hands and feet were taken at baseline, week 50 and week 98 in the long-term extension. The radiographs of all subjects were scored by 2 independent readers for joint erosion and joint space narrowing (JSN) based on the vdH-S score ( van der Heijde et al , 1992) modified by the addition of hand DIP joints. In addition, the readers assessed the radiographs for PC (\"pencil in cup\" deformity) and GO (gross osteolysis), radiographic features characteristic of PsA. The erosion scores for the hand region and the foot region were a summation of the erosion scores in 40 joints of the hands and 12 joints of the feet. Erosions for each hand joint were scored from 0 to 7, and in the feet from were scored 1 to 10 (0 = no erosion in both case). The JSN scores (from 0 to 4, where 0  indicated  no/normal  JSN)  for  the  hand  region  and  the  foot  region  were  a  summation  of  the  JSN scores in 40 joints of the hands and 12 joints of the feet. The total PsA-modified vdH-S score was calculated as the sum of erosion and JSN scores from the hand and foot regions averaged by the 2 readers; ranging from 0-528.

In IMPACT 2, s tructural damage was assessed by the change from baseline in the total modified vdHS score at weeks 24, 54 and at the time of study termination if the study termination occurred more than 8 weeks from the last radiograph. Erosions for each hand joint were scored from 0 to 7, and in feet from 0-12 (0 = no erosion). JSN was scored from 0 to 4 (0 indicates no/normal JSN. The total modified vdH-S score was calculated as the sum from the hand and foot regions, ranging from 0-528.

## Radiographic analyses

## Smallest detectable difference (SDD) and smallest detectable change (SDC)

In IMPACT 2, radiographic progression at week 24 was defined as a worsening from baseline in the modified  vdH-S  score  that  was  greater  than  the  smallest  detectable  difference  (SDD)  based  on  the limits  of  agreement  ( Lassere  et  al ,  1999),  defined  as  the  95%  confidence  limits  of  the  difference between  the  2 observed  changes  for  the  same  subject  and  was  calculated  as  2.77  x  within  subject standard deviation of the change score ( Bland and Altman ,  1996). Change from baseline at week 24 was used to calculate the SDD. SDD is related to repeatability. SDC is the 95% confidence limits of the difference between a subject's observed change and true change ( Bland and Altman ,  1996). The SDC  is  SDD  divided  by  square  root  of  2  ( van  der  Heijde  et  al ,  2005)  and  was  calculated  as 1.96 × within subject standard deviation of the change score. Change from baseline at week 24 was used to calculate the SDC.

The CHMP considered that use of the  modified  vdH-S  score  for  the  evaluation  of  the  X-rays  was acceptable. It was noted that there is less knowledge about the 'natural' progression rate in PsA, but that  it  appears  to  be  more  variable  than  in  RA.  Thus,  the  CHMP  considered  it  to  be  even  more important in this indication to have a placebo group which progresses, to demonstrate reduced rate of structural damage.

## Estimates of progression rate before start of treatments

For IMPACT, the MAH estimated the average annual progression rate in radiographic damage before treatment with the study agent, based on calculations considering the duration of PsA symptoms in years. The MAH claimed that estimating progression from the start of symptoms rather than the date of diagnosis is a conservative approach and takes into account radiographic progression that may have occurred prior to diagnosis. Table 1 presents a summary of the average annual progression rates in total  modified  vdH-S  score  prior  to  the  study  and  during  the  study  (to  week  98)  and  shows  the difference between the prestudy progression rate and the progression rate observed during the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 1 Summary of average annual progression rate in total modified vdH-S score prior to and during study; evaluable subjects

|                                              | Group I        | Group II        | Total           |
|----------------------------------------------|----------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| Subjects randomized                          | 52             | 52              | 104             |
| Subjects evaluable                           | 23             | 20              | 43              |
| Average annual progression rate              |                |                 |                 |
| Prior to study                               | 23             | 20              | 43              |
| Mean ± SD                                    | 3.15 ± 3.62    | 8.72 ± 23.00    | 5.74 ± 15.94    |
| Median                                       | 1.65           | 2.24            | 2.00            |
| IQ range                                     | (0.89, 3.81)   | (0.29, 6.25)    | (0.40, 5.15)    |
| Range                                        | (0.00, 14.29)  | (0.00,104.00)   | (0.00, 104.00)  |
| 95% confidence interval                      | (1.27, 4.25)   | (1.24, 6.7)     | (1.58, 4.07)    |
| During study                                 | 23             | 20              | 43              |
| Mean ± SD                                    | 0.02 ± 3.89    | 1.38 ± 5.40     | 0.65 ± 4.65     |
| Median                                       | 0.00           | 0.00            | 0.00            |
| IQ range                                     | (-1.29, 0.26)  | (-0.53, 1.25)   | (-0.81, 0.28)   |
| Range                                        | (-8.52, 10.27) | (-4.60, 18.64)  | (-8.52, 18.64)  |
| 95% confidence interval                      | (-0.91, 0.43)  | (-0.8, 1.08)    | (-0.55, 0.5)    |
| Difference between Prior to and During study | 23             | 20              | 43              |
| Mean ± SD                                    | 3.13 ± 6.10    | 7.34 ± 20.84    | 5.09 ± 14.85    |
| Median                                       | 1.21           | 1.49            | 1.47            |
| IQ range                                     | (0.14, 8.27)   | (0.12, 6.56)    | (0.13, 8.02)    |
| Range                                        | (-7.90, 15.65) | (-18.64, 89.93) | (-18.64, 89.93) |
| 95% confidence interval                      | (0.53, 5.8)    | (0.71, 7.31)    | (0.98, 4.93)    |

The CHMP noted that there is limited insufficient knowledge on the relation between progression rate, and  duration  of  disease  (occurrence  of  symptoms  and/or  diagnosis),  and  if  the  progression  rate  is linear. There was a clear difference in the estimated average annual progression rate prior to the study in  the  two  groups  (e.g.  mean  3.1  +  3.6  and  8.7  +  23),  despite  the  fact  that  groups  were  fairly  well balanced at study start. The MAH justified the chosen starting point and the CHMP reiterated that to analyse the estimated annual progression rate before and at the end of infliximab treatment by dividing baseline PsA modified vdH-S score by the number of years of PsA symptom duration does not seem very reliable but rather a limited comparator.

## Results

## IMPACT

Radiographs were obtained from 90 of the 104 subjects enrolled in IMPACT. Of the 90 subjects who had  radiographs  obtained,  71  subjects  had  evaluable  radiographs  of  both  hands  and  feet  at  both baseline  and  week  50.  Group  I  was  the  placebo/infliximab  group,  Group  II  received  infliximab throughout the study. The Tables 2 to 4 below show main results from this study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 2 modified Sharp score at baseline and Week 50; randomized subjects (excluding Subject 505)

|                            | Group I    | Group II   | Combined   |
|----------------------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Subjects randomized        | 51         | 52         | 103        |
| Total modified vdH-S score |            |            |            |
| 11                         | 33         | 37         | 70         |
| Subjects with no worsening | 28 (84.8%) | 31 (83.8%) | 59 (84.3%) |
| p-value                    |            | 0.903      |            |
| Erosion score              |            |            |            |
| 11                         | 33         | 37         | 70         |
| Subjects with no worsening | 30 (90.9%) | 31 (83.8%) | 61 (87.1%) |
| p-value                    |            | 0.374      |            |
| JSN score                  |            |            |            |
| 11                         | 33         | 37         | 70         |
| Subjects with no worsening | 28 (84.8%) | 35 (94.6%) | 63 (90.0%) |
| p-value                    |            | 0.175      |            |

Table 3 Summary of change from baseline in total modified vdH-S score to Week 98,by anatomic region; evaluable subjects

|                                  | Group I            | Group II           | Total              |
|----------------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Subjectsrandomized               | 52                 | 52                 | 104                |
| Subjects evaluable               | 23                 | 20                 | 43                 |
| C'hange from baseline at Week 98 |                    |                    |                    |
| Hands total score                |                    |                    |                    |
| Median (95% CI)                  | 0.00 (-1.50, 0.25) | 0.00 (-1.25, 1.50) | 0.00 (-1.11, 0.25) |
| Mean ± SD                        | -1.05 ± 4.21       | 2.17 ± 8.71        | 0.45 ± 6.80        |
| Feet total score                 |                    |                    |                    |
| Median (95% CI)                  | 0.00 (-0.50, 0.50) | 0.00 (0.00, 0.50)  | 0.00 (-0.25, 0.25) |
| Mean ± SD                        | 0.93 ± 4.51        | 0.43 ± 1.70        | 0.70 ± 3.47        |
| Bothhandsand feet total score    |                    |                    |                    |
| Median (95% CI)                  | 0.00 (-1.75, 1.00) | 0.00 (-1.50, 2.00) | 0.00 (-1.00, 1.00) |
| Mean ± SD                        | 0.03 ± 7.30        | 2.60 ± 10.04       | 1.23 ± 8.67        |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 4 Number of subjects with no worsening in modified vdH-S score at Week98; evaluable subjects

|                               | Group I    | Group II   | Total      |
|-------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|
| Subjects randomized           | 52         | 52         | 104        |
| Subjects evaluable            | 23         | 20         | 43         |
| Subjects with no worsening in |            |            |            |
| Total modified vdH-Sscore     | 19 (82.6%) | 14 (70.0%) | 33 (76.7%) |
| Erosion score                 | 20 (87.0%) | 15 (75.0%) | 35 (81.4%) |
| JSN score                     | 19 (82.6%) | 15 (75.0%) | 34 (79.1%) |

The CHMP considered the value of IMPACT being limited for several reasons. Firstly, X-rays were only available from a limited number of subjects. Secondly the duration of the placebo treatment was short  (16 weeks),  and  there  were  no  X-rays  taken  until  week  52;  thus  when  subjects  had  received infliximab  for  either  52  or  approximately  36  weeks.  Therefore,  it  was  not  possible  to  estimate  the number of patients with no progression during placebo treatment. This is a shortcoming as, at week 50, a very high percentage of the patients, 85% in Group I and 84% in Group II had no progression in the  total  vdH-score.  Finally,  the  reference  to  annual  progression  rate  prior  to  study  start  was considered of a limited value. Nevertheless, the fact that the progression rate during study period was generally small is supportive of an effect. Also the limited numbers of severe X-ray findings and no occurrence of new severe damage were considered reassuring. Still, there is no possibility to, based on these data, assess the magnitude of the effect, or to find out who is responding or progressing. The year 2 data are even more limited (in total 43 subjects on infliximab). X-ray films were missing for a number of subjects, as the study protocol indicated that X-rays were 'possibly taken' at week 98.

## IMPACT 2

The MAH indicated that in IMPACT 2, there was a significant difference in the distribution of change from baseline in total modified vdH-S score at week 24 for the infliximab group compared with the placebo group (see Table 5 below). At Year 1, the infliximab group had significantly less progression of structural damage compared with the placebo group that consisted of subjects who had crossed over to infliximab treatment at 6 months.

The  CHMP  noted  that  the  placebo  controlled  data  at  week  24  indicated  fewer  subjects  with progression  in  the  infliximab  group  (3/100)  compared  with  the  placebo  group  (12/100).  Very  few subjects  appeared  to  progress  in  the  active  treatment  period,  from  week  24  to  week  54  (7/200). However, the CHMP considered that a proper evaluation of IMPACT 2 results was difficult due to the lack of historical data as well as the limited placebo-controlled period of the study.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Table 5 Key radiographic efficacy endpoints -IMPACT 2 and IMPACT

|                                                                           | IMPACT 2                                                                 | IMPACT 2                                                                 | IMPACT Year 1                                                            | IMPACT Year 1                                                            | Year 2              |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
|                                                                           | Placebo                                                                  | Infliximab                                                               | Placebo                                                                  | Infliximab                                                               | Combined Infliximab |
| Subjects randomized                                                       | 100                                                                      | 100                                                                      | 52                                                                       | 52                                                                       | 78                  |
| n                                                                         | 100                                                                      | 100                                                                      | 33                                                                       | 37                                                                       | 43                  |
| Radiographic Outcomes                                                     |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                     |
| Change from baseline in total modified vdH-S score                        |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                     |
| Mean                                                                      | 0.82                                                                     | -0.70                                                                    | NA                                                                       | NA                                                                       | NA                  |
| Median                                                                    | 0.00                                                                     | 0.00                                                                     | NA                                                                       | NA                                                                       | NA                  |
| Year 1/Year 2                                                             |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                     |
| Mean                                                                      | 0.53                                                                     | -0.94                                                                    | -1.95                                                                    | -1.52                                                                    | 1.23                |
| Median                                                                    | 0.00                                                                     | 0.00                                                                     | -0.50                                                                    | -0.50                                                                    | 0.00                |
| Proportion of subjects with radiographic progression greater than the SDC |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                                                                          |                     |
| Week 24                                                                   | 12.0%                                                                    | 3.0%                                                                     | NA                                                                       | NA                                                                       | NA                  |
| Year 1/Year 2                                                             | 4.0%                                                                     | 3.0% a                                                                   | 0%                                                                       | 2.7%                                                                     | 9.3%                |
| * Proportion with radiographic progression from Week 24 through Week 54.  | * Proportion with radiographic progression from Week 24 through Week 54. | * Proportion with radiographic progression from Week 24 through Week 54. | * Proportion with radiographic progression from Week 24 through Week 54. | * Proportion with radiographic progression from Week 24 through Week 54. |                     |

## Subgroup Analyses in IMPACT2 related to Structural Damage

The CHMP noted that there was a tendency towards less effect in the asymmetric arthritis group, i.e. the more typical PsA patients. A thorough subgroup analysis (including symmetric versus asymmetric arthritis) in relation to radiographic results was requested. The subgroup analyses were submitted for IMPACT 2, as no data were collected in IMPACT on PsA subtypes (see table 6 below). Based on the data presented, the placebo group progressed least in the asymmetric subgroup, while a slightly higher rate of progression was seen in the other subgroups. In the infliximab groups, there was no progression in any subgroup. However, this period is too short to adequately assess the effects of infliximab on progression of joint damage, since the progression rate in the placebo group is uncertain, and there is insufficient  data  on  the  natural  progression  rate  in  PsA.  On  the  other  hand,  some  support  may  be gained from RA, where more convincing data are available, from 2 years treatment with infliximab. Given  that  the  symmetric  PsA  shows  greatest  resemblance  with  RA,  and  the  PsA  data  are  more convincing in the symmetric patients, it may be accepted to include reduction of rate of progression into section 4.1 of the summary of product characteristics (SPC).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Table 6

|                                 | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   | Change from baseline in total PsA mvdH-S score Median of the differences between treatment groups of the change from baseline in modified vdH-score at week 24 and week 54 and   |
|---------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                 | Placebo n                                                                                                                                                                        | Placebo mean                                                                                                                                                                     | Placebo median                                                                                                                                                                   | Placebo minimum                                                                                                                                                                  | Placebo maximum                                                                                                                                                                  | Infliximab n                                                                                                                                                                     | Infliximab mean                                                                                                                                                                  | Infliximab median                                                                                                                                                                | Infliximab minimum                                                                                                                                                               | Infliximab maximum                                                                                                                                                               | Median Difference                                                                                                                                                                | Lower                                                                                                                                                                            | Upper                                                                                                                                                                            | pval                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Week 24                         |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| All subjects                    | 100                                                                                                                                                                              | 0.82                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -4.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 12.68                                                                                                                                                                            | 100                                                                                                                                                                              | -0.70                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -15.00                                                                                                                                                                           | 4.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.50                                                                                                                                                                             | < 0.001                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Arthritis involving DIPs        | 22                                                                                                                                                                               | 1.97                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -2.00                                                                                                                                                                            | 12.68                                                                                                                                                                            | 26                                                                                                                                                                               | -0.40                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -4.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 3.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 2.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.017                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Asymmetric peripheral arthritis | 22                                                                                                                                                                               | 0.30                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -4.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 5.57                                                                                                                                                                             | 18                                                                                                                                                                               | -0.86                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -8.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 1.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 1.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.052                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Polyarticular arthritis         | 48                                                                                                                                                                               | 0.72                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -1.08                                                                                                                                                                            | 9.77                                                                                                                                                                             | 53                                                                                                                                                                               | -0.77                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -15.00                                                                                                                                                                           | 4.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.005                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Week 54                         |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| All subjects                    | 100                                                                                                                                                                              | 0.53                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -6.13                                                                                                                                                                            | 12.12                                                                                                                                                                            | 100                                                                                                                                                                              | -0.94                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -29.00                                                                                                                                                                           | 3.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.49                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.001                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Arthritis involving DIPs        | 22                                                                                                                                                                               | 1.22                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -6.13                                                                                                                                                                            | 10.00                                                                                                                                                                            | 26                                                                                                                                                                               | -0.66                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -4.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 1.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.50                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 1.83                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.057                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Asymmetric peripheral arthritis | 22                                                                                                                                                                               | 0.64                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -1.00                                                                                                                                                                            | 9.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 18                                                                                                                                                                               | -0.41                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -3.00                                                                                                                                                                            | 1.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 1.01                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.109                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Polyarticular arthritis         | 48                                                                                                                                                                               | 0.32                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -3.50                                                                                                                                                                            | 12.12                                                                                                                                                                            | 53                                                                                                                                                                               | -1.31                                                                                                                                                                            | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | -29.00                                                                                                                                                                           | 3.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.00                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.11                                                                                                                                                                             | 0.045                                                                                                                                                                            |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Pencil-in-cup Deformity (PC) and Gross Osteolysis (GO) (both studies)

The modified vdH-S scoring method incorporates separate assessments for 2 types of severe erosive processes associated with PsA: PC deformity, in which an osseous surface on the proximal bone of a joint protrudes into the expanded surface of the distal bone, and GO, which is characterized by gross destruction of the bone.

In IMPACT 2, few subjects had evidence of these severe erosive processes at baseline and there was little  change  in  the  number  of  joints  with  or  without  PC  and  GO  at  week  24  or  week  54.  Also  in IMPACT, there was little change in the number of joints with or without PC and GO from baseline at week  98  in  either  group.  None  of  the  subjects  without  PC  or  GO  at  baseline  were  found  to  have developed these conditions at the week 98 follow-up. Overall, these data support slow progression in all subjects

## Conclusion on efficacy:

Documentation  to  support  the  sought  indication  included  data  from  two  studies,  IMPACT  and IMPACT 2. The value of IMPACT was considered limited for several reasons. Firstly, X-rays were only  available  from  a  limited  number  of  subjects.  Secondly,  in  IMPACT,  no  X-ray  evaluation  was performed at the end of the placebo period of 16 weeks. Therefore, it was not possible to estimate the number of patients with no progression during placebo treatment. This is a shortcoming as at week 50, a very high percentage of the patients, 85% in Group I and 84% in Group II had no progression in the total  vdH-score.  Furthermore,  the  estimated  annual  progression  rate  prior  to  study  start  was  very uncertain.

IMPACT 2 provided placebo controlled data at week 24. This period is too short to adequately assess the  effects  of  infliximab  on  progression  of  joint  damage,  since  the  progression  rate  in  the  placebo group is uncertain, and there is insufficient data on the natural progression rate in PsA. Nevertheless, available data indicated that there were fewer subjects who progressed in the infliximab group (3/100) compared  with  the  placebo  group  (12/100)  at  week  24.  Very  few  appear  to  progress  in  the  active treatment period, from week 24 to week 54 (7/200). Subgroup analyses were provided. At week 24, it appears that the placebo group progressed least in the asymmetric subgroup, while a slightly higher rate of progression was seen in the other subgroups. In the infliximab groups, there was no progression in  any  subgroup.  Given  that  the  symmetric  PsA  shows  greatest  resemblance  with  RA,  where  more convincing data are available, and the PsA data are more convincing in the symmetric patients, the CHMP accepted the inclusion of wording into section 4.1.

## Clinical safety

The safety in the performed studies had been assessed within previous variation procedures, and in assessments of PSURs. There were no new data that altered previously adopted conclusions.

## Risk management plan

The  MAH  argued  that  there  was  no  need  for  a  RMP  to  be  provided  for  the  current  variation application. The CHMP agreed with this approach, and noted that t he MAH is currently working on a RMP for infliximab, which will be submitted later this year.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Overall conclusion and benefit/risk assessment

Remicade  has  previously  been  approved  for  the  treatment  of  RA,  AS  and  PsA/psoriasis.  These inflammatory  conditions  are  to  some  extent  similar  with  joint  involvement  and  development  of structural  damage  of  varying  severity  and  degree.  Besides  inflammatory  control,  reduction  of  the structural damage is one of the main goals of treatment.

## Benefit

Documentation  to  support  the  sought  indication  included  data  from  two  studies,  IMPACT  and IMPACT 2. The value of IMPACT was considered limited and considered of insufficient value  to warrant inclusion in the SPC.

IMPACT 2 provided placebo controlled data at week 24, indicating fewer subjects with progression in the infliximab group (3/100) compared with the placebo group (12/100). Very few appear to progress in the active treatment period, from week 24 to week 54 (7/200). However, as historical data as well as placebo-controlled data are limited, a proper evaluation of IMPACT 2 results was considered difficult.

Subgroup analyses were submitted for three groups; arthritis involving DIPs, asymmetrical peripheral arthritis,  and  polyarticular  arthritis.  Data  were  collected  in  the  study  specifically  for  'polyarticular arthritis' and 'asymmetrical peripheral arthritis', which correspond to 'symmetric polyarthritis' and 'oligoarticular arthritis', respectively. Consequently, it is assumed that patients not having asymmetric disease, had symmetric disease.

Looking  at  the  X-ray  data  at  weeks  24,  it  appears  that  the  placebo  group  progressed  least  in  the asymmetric subgroup, while a slightly higher rate of progression was seen in the other subgroups. In the infliximab groups, there was no progression in any subgroup. However, this period was considered too  short  to  adequately  assess  the  effects  of  infliximab  on  progression  of  joint  damage,  since  the progression  rate  in  the  placebo  group  is  uncertain,  and  there  is  insufficient  data  on  the  natural progression  rate  in  PsA.  On  the  other  hand,  some  support  may  be  gained  from  RA,  where  more convincing data are available, from 2 years treatment with infliximab. Given that the symmetric PsA shows greatest resemblance with RA, and the PsA data are more convincing in the symmetric patients, it was accepted to include some wording into section 4.1.

Data on physical function were assessed within variation II-73, which resulted in wording in section 5.1 of the SPC. The application to include 'improvement of physical function' also in section 4.1 was therefore agreed.

## Risk

No new safety data were submitted in this application.

## Benefit-Risk Balance

Overall, the benefit /risk balance for the treatment of PsA remains positive.

## CONCLUSION

On 18 October 2007 the CHMP considered this Type II variation to be acceptable and agreed on the amendments to be introduced in the SPC and package leaflet.