---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:11:30
document_pages: 14
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/xigris-h-c-396-s-21-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: xigris-h-c-396-s-21-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.9225389
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-29 21:29:46.383626
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.66.0
  docling-core: 2.57.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 22 February 2007 Product name: XIGRIS Procedure No : EMEA/H/C/000396/S/0021

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

| SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER         | SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER         | SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER         | 3   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| 1.1                                                                    | 1.1                                                                    | Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects                                    | 3   |
| 1.2                                                                    | 1.2                                                                    | Preclinical aspects                                                    | 3   |
| 1.3                                                                    | 1.3                                                                    | Clinical aspects                                                       | 3   |
| 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past 12 months              | 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past 12 months              | 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past 12 months              | 3   |
| 1.3.2 Update on planned Phase II Protein C Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND) | 1.3.2 Update on planned Phase II Protein C Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND) | 1.3.2 Update on planned Phase II Protein C Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND) | 3   |
| 1.3.3 Update on the PROGRESS registry                                  | 1.3.3 Update on the PROGRESS registry                                  | 1.3.3 Update on the PROGRESS registry                                  | 4   |
| 1.3.4 Publications                                                     | 1.3.4 Publications                                                     | 1.3.4 Publications                                                     | 5   |
| 1.3.5 Update on post-marketing Spontaneous Safety Data                 | 1.3.5 Update on post-marketing Spontaneous Safety Data                 | 1.3.5 Update on post-marketing Spontaneous Safety Data                 | 6   |
| authorised II DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS             | authorised II DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS             | authorised II DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS             | 8   |
| 2.1                                                                    | Discussion on clinical aspects                                         | Discussion on clinical aspects                                         | 8   |
| 2.2 Conclusion on clinical aspects                                     | 2.2 Conclusion on clinical aspects                                     | 2.2 Conclusion on clinical aspects                                     | 10  |
| 2.3 Changes to the Product Information                                 | 2.3 Changes to the Product Information                                 | 2.3 Changes to the Product Information                                 | 10  |
| longer III OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED                         | longer III OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED                         | longer III OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED                         | 11  |
| 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)                                         | 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)                                         | 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)                                         | 11  |
| 3.2 Follow-up Measures (FUMs)                                          | 3.2 Follow-up Measures (FUMs)                                          | 3.2 Follow-up Measures (FUMs)                                          | 11  |
| IV BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT                                             | IV BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT                                             | IV BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT                                             | 12  |
| no V OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                             | no V OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                             | no V OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION                             | 12  |
| VI REFERENCES                                                          | VI REFERENCES                                                          | VI REFERENCES                                                          | 13  |
| Medicinal product                                                      | Medicinal product                                                      | Medicinal product                                                      |     |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

## 1.1 Chemical and pharmaceutical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

See  section  III  OBLIGATIONS  PENDING  TO  BE  FULFILLED  related  to  pharmaceutical  follow-up measures.

## 1.2 Preclinical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

## 1.3 Clinical aspects

Medicinal product no longer authorised The Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH) has submitted the following documents to support the 4 th annual re-assessment of Xigris: -update on clinical trials during the past 12 months; -update on planned Phase II Protein C Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND); -update on the PROGRESS registry (observational study); -publications; -update on Spontaneous Safety Data from the market during the past 12 months. 1.3.1 Update on clinical trials during the past 12 months As of 21 August 2006, a total of up to 6,894 adult patients have been exposed to Xigris in completed and ongoing clinical trials. The  preliminary  final  report  on  the  RESOLVE  (paediatric)  study  was  assessed  by  the  CHMP  in  the framework of the Type II variation EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0016 (opinion adopted at the October 2005 CHMP plenary meeting). The interim analysis of the RESOLVE study did not show a significant difference in the primary endpoint of 'Composite Time to Complete Organ Failure Resolution' in the Xigris and placebo groups (CTCOFR score of 9.8 versus 9.7 mean days, respectively). There was also no difference in 28day mortality in the Xigris and placebo groups (17.1% versus 17.3%, respectively). The CHMP concluded that  the  data  from  the  RESOLVE  study  did  not  establish  the  efficacy  of  Xigris  in  paediatric  patients suffering from severe sepsis, acute infection, systemic inflammation and respiratory and cardiovascular organ dysfunction. Thus, the CHMP concluded that no dosage recommendation could be made and the use of Xigris was not recommended in children below the age of 18. The  final  report  on  the  XPRESS  (heparin  interaction)  study  was  under  assessment  within  the  parallel Type  II  variation  EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0020  (opinion  adopted  at  the  February  2007  CHMP  plenary meeting). For the CHMP's discussion and conclusion on the XPRESS study, refer to section II of this assessment report. 1.3.2 Update on planned Phase II Protein C Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND)

Study F1K-MC-EVDK (RESPOND) is a Phase II exploratory study. The results of this Phase 2 study are intended to give information on the design of a potential randomised, controlled Phase 3 study. CHMP scientific advice would be sought prior to initiating such a Phase 3 study. The ultimate goal of this clinical development program is to establish serial plasma protein C measurements as a biomarker that will aid in the identification of severe sepsis patients most likely to benefit from Xigris, and enable the adjustment of Xigris  therapy  for  individual  patients  to  further  improve  the  benefit/risk  balance  (specifically the possibility to use a higher dose and to provide a shorter or longer infusion duration until protein C levels are normalised).

Previous  studies  have  indicated  a  positive  association  between  normalisation  of  protein  C  levels  and survival. Analysis of data from PROWESS also indicated that Xigris increased the proportion of patients who normalise their protein C levels. Thus, it is hypothesised that by giving higher doses and/or a longer infusion of Xigris more patients will eventually normalise their protein C. If improvements in protein C levels are demonstrated in this study then a subsequent larger study would be required to investigate if

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

this  improvement in protein C is also associated with a further statistically significant improvement in survival.

## 1.3.3 Update on the PROGRESS registry

As  concluded  by  the  CHMP  after  the  3 rd annual  re-assessment,  the  MAH  was  requested  to  provide  a robust  analysis  of  results  of  the  PROGRESS  Severe  Sepsis  Registry  in  the  4 th annual  re-assessment. PROGRESS was an observational study designed to document the following:

- demographic and disease severity characteristics of severe sepsis patients treated in the intensive care unit (ICU);
- patient management;

Medicinal product no longer authorised · ICU and hospital outcomes. Data  collection  was  web-based  and  was  designed  to  also  enable  participating  institutions  to  conduct exploratory  analyses  of  their  severe  sepsis  patient  population  and  compare  this  to  national  and  global data. The PROGRESS study provides descriptive data on a large number of severe sepsis patients from around the world. These data reflect everyday clinical practice and show the variation in treatment and outcome across various countries with different health care systems. The website was available for patient entry between December 2002 and December 2005, during which time 12,570 adult patients with severe sepsis were included, but only 2734 from EU member states, mostly from Germany and Belgium (1855 and 370 patients, respectively). Only 7 EU member states participated in the PROGRESS study: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and The Netherlands. Patient entry was terminated earlier than expected because of low recruitment rates during 2005, and the decision  was  taken  not  to  initiate  a  planned  second  study  (PROGRESS  II)  which  would  have  focused more closely on collection of data related to the timing of the development of organ dysfunction and the delivery of specific therapies. The MAH explained that it did not progress with the second study partly in response  to  a  request  from  members  of  the  Surviving  Sepsis  Campaign,  who  were  concerned  that PROGRESS II may have competed for patients in an initiative that they have now started in collaboration with the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI), which collects similar types of data. Patients  entered  in  the  PROGRESS  study  were  severely  ill  and  at  high  risk  of  death:  nearly  90%  had multiple organ dysfunction (based on the 7 organ dysfunctions recorded in PROGRESS) and 68% had 3 or  more  organ  dysfunctions.  Intensive  care  unit  mortality  was  39%  and  hospital  mortality  was  nearly 50%. There was considerable variation in mortality between countries from 31% in Columbia to 81% in Puerto Rico. Within EU countries mortality varied less, from 36% in The Netherlands to 62% in Slovakia. Because  PROGRESS was an observational study, it  was  not  possible  to  determine  to  what  extent  the observed variations in mortality resulted from differences in the baseline characteristics of the patients entered versus differences in the therapies they received. In addition, other specific characteristics that were not collected in the study, such as the timing of organ dysfunction and the timing of the various treatments received, were also likely to affect patient outcome. All of these factors may also be influenced in  a  systemic  fashion  by  organisational  differences  in  the  general  provision  of  health  care  between countries. Of the supportive and severe sepsis therapies that patients received, nearly all patients received systemic  antibiotics  (99.3%)  and  a  large  majority  of  patients  received  enteral  nutrition  (72.5%),  fluid resuscitation  (86.7%),  or  sedation  (76.0%);  were  on  mechanical  ventilation  (85.4%)  or  received vasopressors (78.7%). The most commonly administered severe sepsis therapies were low-dose steroids (36%), albumin (21%), high-dose steroids (13%), and Xigris (7%).

<!-- image -->

The  analyses  of  hospital  mortality  by  supportive  care  and  severe  sepsis  therapies  received  were  also included in the 4 th annual re-assessment dossier. It is of note that most 'standard' therapies provided in the  ICU  are  associated  with  statistically  higher  mortalities  compared  to  those  who  did  not  receive  the therapy,  with  the  exception  of  antithrombin  infusion,  intravenous  gamma  globulin,  nitric  oxide,  and Xigris.  The  most  likely  explanation  for  this  is  that  more  'acute'  therapies  are  provided  to  the  sickest patients who also have high mortalities even with these interventions.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The patients entered into the study who received Xigris represented 27% of patients entered in the United States and only 5% of patients entered in Germany. Patients who received Xigris were somewhat younger (median age of 59 versus 64 years) and were less likely to have comorbid conditions. However, patients who received Xigris had a greater degree of organ dysfunction (84% versus 67% had 3 or more organ dysfunctions) and higher median APACHE II scores (25 versus 23). Although there was similar mortality between patients who received Xigris and those who did not (49.6% versus 49.7%), when adjusted for age and number of organ dysfunctions, there was a 25% reduction in the odds of death associated with Xigris  treatment.  Age  and  number  of  organ  dysfunctions  have  been  shown  in  previous  analyses  to  be important  factors  in  determining  mortality,  and  in  this  study  number  of  organ  dysfunctions  had  the greatest predictive ability (69.3%) followed by APACHE II score (68.8%). In addition, number of organ dysfunctions had the least amount of missing data compared to the other severity scores. Although such simple  adjusted  analyses  were  useful  in  helping  to  better  understand  the  likely  effect  of  known imbalances, they do not adjust for all known imbalances, and cannot adjust for any unknown imbalances that may also be present.

In  terms  of  clinical  pharmacology,  a  case-controlled  study  at  a  single  site  in  France  concluded  that ' rhAPC (recombinant human activated protein  C)  rapidly  improved  the  vascular  tone  in  septic  shock patients  as  assessed  by  a  decrease  in  the  norepinephrine  dose  required  to  maintain  arterial  pressure ' (Monnet  et  al,  2005).  Also  using  a  case-controlled  design  including  patients  with  severe  sepsis,  De Backer et al (2006) concluded that ' rhAPC administration rapidly improves sepsis-induced microvascular alterations, whereas its cessation is associated with a transient deterioration '.

Medicinal product no longer authorised An examination of Xigris use in the patients entered in the 7 EU countries showed little off-label use in patients with single organ dysfunction or paediatric patients. Of the 212 EU adult patients who received Xigris, only 2 had single organ dysfunction; of the 24 EU paediatric patients entered into the study, only 1 received Xigris. Analyses of patients entered in Germany and Belgium reflect the variability observed across countries. The  majority  of  patients  entered  in  Germany  were  surgical  patients  and  most  had  cardiovascular  and respiratory dysfunction; 71% had 3 or more organ dysfunctions, and the mean APACHE II score was 27. The  majority  of  patients  entered  in  Belgium  were  medical  patients,  49%  had  3  or  more  organ dysfunctions, and the mean APACHE II score was 24. Hospital mortality was 43% in Germany and 53% in Belgium. Forty-three patients (11.9%) entered in Belgium received Xigris, compared to 5.4% in Germany. Similar to the overall population, patients who received Xigris in these EU member states seemed more severely ill  than  patients  who  did  not.  Odds  ratios  adjusted  for  age  and  number  and  type  of  organ  dysfunction favoured treatment with Xigris in Belgium, but were in disfavour of treatment in Germany. However the 95%  confidence  intervals  for  patients  entered  in  Germany  and  Belgium  are  wide  and  reflect  the uncertainty about the estimate in these subgroups based on these small sample sizes. 1.3.4 Publications As  requested  by  the  CHMP  at  the  conclusion  of  the  3 rd annual  re-assessment,  the  MAH  discussed publications related  to  Xigris  within  the  4 th annual  re-assessment,  which  have  been  published  between October 2005 and August 2006. It emerged that a number of nonclinical publications have investigated potential mechanisms of action of APC, as well as its use in various animal models of disease.

A number of  authors  have  published  their  experience  with  Xigris  in  the  form  of  case  reports  or  case series, detailing their experience in specific sepsis conditions, for example, purpura fulminans, malaria, or their general experience with the drug within their hospital, region, or country. The data from 2 formal, country registries have also been published. In Poland, Kübler et al (2006) reported 3233 cases of severe sepsis  (almost  all  had  multiple  organ  dysfunction  (MOD))  in  the  National  Severe  Sepsis  Register, between  April  2003  and  November  2005.  9.3%  of  the  patients  (301)  were  treated  with  Xigris.  In  the

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

patients  treated  with  Xigris,  the  relative  risk  of  death  was  lower  by  31%  than  in  those  who  were  not treated; however, the Xigris group was younger (46.0 v s 53.5 years). In a multivariate logistic regression model, the use of Xigris was, independent of the patient's age, severity of the clinical condition, and type of  organ  dysfunction,  the  most  significant  mortality-reducing  factor  in  severe  sepsis.  Low-molecularweight heparin was also a mortality-reducing factor. The results of the GIVTI Italian Xigris registry have been published (Bollettino d'informazione sui farmaci, 2006). Although the publication covers 351 Xigris cases  (324  with  complete  data)  received  between  June 2005  and  March  2006,  40%  were  backdated, referring  to  treatments  carried  out  during  2003,  2004,  and  the  early  part  of  2005.  The  reported  ICU mortality was 47.2%. The rate of all bleeding events appeared to be less than that seen in clinical trials and the rate of serious bleeds similar or slightly higher. Off-label use was reported in 117 (33%) of users: 44 patients with single or no organ dysfunction, 70 patients with use after 48 hours of organ dysfunction, and 3 children. However, 40% of patients were included before the therapeutic indication was updated in the EU to include that treatment ' should be considered mainly in situations where therapy can be started within  24  hr  after  the  onset  of  organ  failure ',  or  the  addition  of  the  warning  regarding  single  organ dysfunction surgery patients. Also it was not clear if they used a similar definition for the onset of organ dysfunction as was used in PROWESS, that is, the time of onset of the first documented sepsis induced organ dysfunction.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Two manuscripts related to cost effectiveness have been published. Green et al (2006) concluded that in the  UK  ' whereas the therapeutic cost for  Xigris  appears  high  (at  around  £5,000  per  patient)  and  the potential impact on the provider budget is considerable, Xigris is clinically effective, represents a costeffective  use  of  resources,  and  is  a  significant  advance  in  the  treatment  of  severe  sepsis  in  patients requiring intensive care .' Riou Franca et al (2006) concluded that in France ' Xigris is cost-effective in the treatment  of  severe  sepsis  with  multiple  organ  failure  when  added  to  best  standard  care.  The  costeffectiveness  of  the  drug  increases  with  baseline  disease  severity,  but  it  remains  cost-effective  for  all patients when used in compliance with the European approved indication '. During this reporting period a number of editorials and commentaries were published that questioned the efficacy  of  Xigris.  Many  of  these  pursued  common  themes  and  were  most  easily  summarised  by considering the issues raised in the commentaries by Mackenzie (2005) and Friedrich (2006): · There were methodological flaws in the PROWESS study. · The results of the ADDRESS and RESOLVE studies bring into question the efficacy of Xigris as established by the PROWESS study. The MAH noted that data and concerns from the above studies have been extensively discussed by both the CHMP and the FDA before and after the initial approval of Xigris and that the timing of these recent publications reflected that the regulatory authorities were provided with new information sooner than the general scientific community, thus academic debate laged behind discussions with regulatory authorities. For example, the ADDRESS data was published in the New England Journal of Medicine in September 2005, but was first shared with the CHMP a year earlier, when the data was still provisional as part of the 3 rd annual re-assessment, and the preliminary RESOLVE study results had been shared with the CHMP as part  of  the  3 rd annual  re-assessment,  whereas  the  peer  reviewed  manuscript  is  currently  awaiting publication.  Letters  in  response  to  such  publications,  in  support  of  Xigris  have  also  been  published (Agarwal and Nath 2006; Macias 2006; Vincent 2006) or submitted (Williams et al, 2006) as well as other commentaries and reviews supporting the use of the drug (Dellinger 2006).

The  MAH  concluded  that  on  review  of  the  above  publications,  there  did  not  appear  to  be  any  new information  that  would  warrant  additional  changes  to  the  SPC,  or  significantly  affect  the  risk/benefit assessment of Xigris in the indicated patient population.

## 1.3.5 Update on post-marketing Spontaneous Safety Data

The  PSUR  submitted  in  January  2006  (PSUR  n.  6)  covered  the  period  from  22  November  2004  to 31 October 2005. Thus, a safety report was included in this application, which reviews the 10 months safety data from 1 November 2005 to 21 August 2006 ('this reporting period'). This safety report has incorporated feedback received from the CHMP after the review of the PSUR n. 6. On 19 January 2007

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

the  MAH submitted  PSUR  n.  7  covering  the  period  between  1 November  2005  and  31  October  2006 which is under assessment by the CHMP.

As  of  21  August  2006,  it  was  estimated  that  92,023  patients  have  been  exposed  to  marketed  Xigris worldwide, 16,793 within this reporting period (compared to 20,438 in the previous 9-month period).

An  increased  risk  of  bleeding  is  the  only  adverse  event  known  to  be  associated  with  treatment  with Xigris. The reporting rate of spontaneous CNS and non-CNS bleeding events has been fairly stable across the previous PSUR reporting periods, and has remained so in the current reporting period, with bleeding event rates being within the reporting rate fluctuations seen before. Rates were also comparable between EU, North America (NA) and the Non-EU Non-NA region. At the request of the CHMP following the last annual re-assessment, the MAH conducted a cumulative review of all of the spontaneously reported cases of CNS bleeding searching for possible cases of purpura fulminans, meningitis, or meningococcal disease. Seven (7) such cases out of 325 reports of CNS bleeding were identified, which was less than the 7/39 identified in adult patients in the clinical trial publication referenced by the CHMP (Vincent J.L. et al 2005).  This  probably  reflected  more  comprehensive  data  collection  in  the  clinical  trial  database.  More information  may  become  available  in  the  future  (PSUR n.  7)  since  detailed  information  on  bleeding events is now being collected as part of the Modified Serious Bleeding Follow-up Form agreed during the last annual re-assessment.

Medicinal product no longer authorised A cumulative review of the MAH's safety database (from 21 November 2001 to 21 August 2006) was conducted to assess the number of convulsions or seizures reported spontaneously and in clinical trials with Xigris in compliance to a CHMP request following review of PSUR n. 6. The overall reporting rate of  spontaneously  reported  convulsion  reactions  was  2/10,000  based  on  the  total  exposure  from 21 November  2001  to  21  August  2006.  The  adverse  event  rate  reported  in  clinical  trials  was  higher (13/6894 = 19/10,000); however, this probably reflected that convulsions were a recognised complication of  severe  sepsis,  and  the  rate  of  \"possibly  related\"  clinical  trial  events  was  more  similar:  3/10,000 (2/6894).  The  review  of  convulsion  in  critically  ill  patients  with  severe  sepsis  was  confounded  by  the multiple  metabolic  (e.g.,  hypoxia,  glucose  abnormalities,  acidosis,  alkalosis),  electrolyte  (e.g.,  sodium, magnesium) and organic derangements (e.g., CNS bleeding, CNS infections) present in these patients, together with the multiple other medications that may be administered to this critically ill population in the ICU, which may increase the risk of seizures. During the last annual re-assessment the CHMP raised a concern regarding a possible high rate of offlabel  use  of  Xigris  and  the  MAH  noted  that  off-label  use  was  difficult  to  assess  based  on  these spontaneous reports. As a result of this discussion, at the conclusion of the 3 rd annual  re-assessment  a number of action and follow-up measures were agreed between the MAH and the CHMP. Therefore, by the  end  of  March 2006 the MAH circulated a Dear Health Care Professional Letter to intensivists and paediatric intensivists highlighting that in adults Xigris should be used mainly if treatment can start within 24 hours of organ failure onset and that Xigris was not indicated for children. Additionally, in May 2006 the  MAH reported on follow-up with the most frequent Xigris  users  verifying  their  hospital  protocols were  in  compliance  with  the  SPC,  specifically  regarding  the  points  outlined  in  the  communication strategy (Follow-up Measure 047). Although the communication plan was completed successfully, it was noted that only just over 1/3 of sites provided treatment protocols, with many refusing to share or discuss their protocols with a pharmaceutical company. However, review of the protocols received demonstrated a  high  level  of  concordance  with  the  SPC  in  the  areas  of  the  indicated  population,  presence  of  a  time window for treatment, and advise not to administer within 12 hours of major surgery. Because most of the ICUs contacted were exclusively treating adults, it was understandable that not every hospital protocol contained a statement about the non-treatment of children.

To  better  identify  potential  off-label  use  in  spontaneously  reported  events,  the  MAH  proposed  the development  of  a  bleeding  event  form  to  help  collect  such  information:  therefore  a  Modified  Serious Bleeding Follow-up Form was implemented in February 2006. Analysis of the return rate of this form has demonstrated both a difficulty in the ability to make contact with the reporting health care professionals and,  where  contact  was  possible,  a  low  completion  rate  despite  repeated  attempts  to  collect  this information. The data currently obtained did not provide much additional insight to the potential for offlabel  use;  however,  it  was  premature  to  fully  assess  the  value  of  this  process.  The  MAH  will  explore

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

options to see if this response rate can be improved, and include an updated assessment in PSUR n. 7, which is currently under assessment by the CHMP. The activities were also included as components of a Risk Management Plan (Follow-up Measure 045) that was submitted in April 2006 as requested by the CHMP at the conclusion of the 3 rd annual re-assessment. This FUM is still ongoing.

## II DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION ON CLINICAL SPECTS

## 2.1 Discussion on clinical aspects

Medicinal product no longer authorised With regard to the update on clinical trials, the CHMP assessed the results of the RESOLVE study (Type II variationEMEA/H/C/000396/II/0016)  and  concluded  that  they  did  not  establish  efficacy  of  Xigris  in paediatric  patients  suffering  from  severe  sepsis,  acute  infection,  systemic  inflammation  and  respiratory and  cardiovascular  organ  dysfunction.  Nevertheless,  considering  that  severe  sepsis  was  significantly different in adults and children, the CHMP concluded that the results of the RESOLVE study in children did not directly influence the benefit/risk balance of Xigris in adults. Additionally, in the framework of the 3 rd annual re-assessment the CHMP requested the MAH to update the SPC to include that Xigris should not be recommended in children and to inform accordingly the Health Care Professionals through an appropriate communication  campaign.  Thus,  by  the  end  of  March  2006  the  MAH  distributed  a  Dear  Health  Care Professional Letter to paediatric intensivists highlighting that Xigris was not indicated for children. On  17  May  2006  the  MAH  submitted  the  XPRESS  study  within  the  framework  of  Type  II  variation EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0020 which was reviewed in parallel with the 4 th annual re-assessment by the CHMP (opinion adopted at the February 2007 CHMP plenary meeting). Having assessed the results of the XPRESS study, the CHMP noted that the numerically lower mortality rate observed in the overall heparin group (heparin 28.3% vs placebo 31.9%, respectively) must be tempered by the opposite results in sub analyses of patients in European centres (heparin 27.8% vs placebo 24.4%) and the post hoc analysis of patients in the  EU  indicated  population  (patients  with  multiple  organ  dysfunction  treated  within  24  hours  of  their first  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction:  heparin  30.3% vs placebo  26.9%).  Thus,  these  results  of  the XPRESS study cannot be translated into useful recommendations for the use of Xigris in the EU indicated population. The CHMP noted that the clinical results of XPRESS, taken in conjunction with results from other recent studies, raised concerns on the overall benefit/risk balance of Xigris. The CHMP concluded that the XPRESS study had not brought a response to the question whether there is a pharmacodynamic  interaction  between  heparin  and  Xigris;  on  the  contrary  uncertainties  related  to  the interactions  between heparin and Xigris remain. Thus, as the XPRESS results  did not further clarify the benefit/risk  balance  of  Xigris,  the  CHMP  concluded  that  a  revised  Specific  Obligation  was  necessary  to clarify the benefit/risk balance of Xigris. The MAH informed the CHMP about the status of the Phase 2 RESPOND study, which had just started and could extend into a Phase 3 study. The RESPOND study is aimed to refine dose and duration of therapy in the current indicated population, based on protein C monitoring. The CHMP requested that at the time of the 5-year renewal the MAH should confirm that the planned Phase 2 study RESPOND will include a sufficient number of patients with MOD who will start treatment within 24 h of the first sepsis-induced organ failure. Additionally, considering that if a Phase 3 study follows Phase 2, its results will likely not be available before 2012, the CHMP noted that the RESPOND study is unlikely to influence the benefit/risk balance of Xigris in a significant way in the near future.

The  MAH informed the  CHMP about  the  status  of  the  Phase  4  EXTEND  study  which  was  designed  to examine a potential extension of the duration of therapy if patients remain in shock at the end of the 96-h Xigris infusion. The CHMP noted that this study is unlikely to influence the benefit/risk balance of Xigris in a significant way in the near future.

The MAH informed the CHMP about the status of the PROGRESS Registry. The CHMP noted that only few significant  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  the  completed  collection  of  data  on  12,570  adult  patients  with severe  sepsis,  which  include  only  2734  patients  from  EU  member  states.  Most  EU  data  originate  from Germany (where 5% of potentially indicated patients received Xigris) and Belgium (where 12% of patients

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

received  Xigris)  and  may  not  be  representative  of  the  overall  EU  trend  in  Xigris  usage.  Although  the comparative efficacy of Xigris cannot be deduced from the provided data, the CHMP noted that odds ratios adjusted  for  age  and  number  and  type  of  organ  dysfunction  were  in  disfavour  of  Xigris  in  Germany,  the country with the highest number of patients (1,855) entered into the PROGRESS registry in the EU. From the PROGRESS registry it  emerged  that  the  proportion  of  severe  sepsis  patients  meeting  the  EU  criteria  for Xigris indication and effectively treated with Xigris was low, probably between 10% and 20%, leading to the assumption  that  Xigris  was  not  considered  standard  care  for  severe  sepsis  patients  with  multiple  organ dysfunction in the EU as it also appeared from the recent publications. Importantly, due to low recruitment in 2005 during the first phase of the PROGRESS study, the MAH had decided not to initiate the planned second phase of the study (PROGRESS II) which would have focused more closely on collection of data related to the  timing  of  the  development  of  organ  dysfunction  and  the  delivery  of  specific  therapies.  The  CHMP considered that these data would have been more helpful in supporting the benefit/risk of Xigris in its current indication than the completed PROGRESS data.

From the update on post-marketing Spontaneous Safety Data it emerged that the worldwide use of Xigris seemed to 'plateau' (an estimated 17,000 patients have been exposed during this 10-month reporting period compared  to  20,500  during  the  previous  9-month  period),  which  was  a  further  sign  that  Xigris  was  not considered  a  universal  standard  of  care  in  severe  sepsis.  There  was  no  new  signal  from  the  spontaneous reporting system and bleeding rates were stable. However, the CHMP highlighted that these events were only acceptable  if  Xigris  has  a  sufficient  benefit.  Therefore,  every  effort  should  be  made  to  restrict  its  use  to patients that are most likely to benefit. As requested by the CHMP at the conclusion of the 3 rd annual reassessment, the MAH introduced a focused Risk Management Plan to proactively communicate the recent SPC changes to the most frequent Xigris users and paediatric intensivists, and in the context of off-label use, to introduce a Modified Serious Bleeding Follow-up Form to be completed for every bleeding event in the spontaneous reporting system. Nevertheless, the real impact of this measure was still difficult to assess since only  about  a  third  of  the  hospital  protocols  for  Xigris  use  could  be  examined,  the  change  in  physicians' behaviour has not been evaluated yet, the outcome of the Modified Bleeding Event Follow-up Form remains unknown, and data confirming that Xigris is not used in children remained scarce. Therefore, the real impact of the communication strategy and the use of Modified Bleeding Event Follow-up Form on the benefit/risk will be re-evaluated in the framework of the on-going Follow-up Measures 045 and 047 for which additional data will be provided by the MAH by June 2007.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The CHMP was informed that a third of patients included in the Italian GIVTI Registry between 2003 and 2005  were  treated  off-label  (mostly  for  single  organ  dysfunction),  versus  almost  none  in  registries  from Germany,  Belgium  and  Poland.  Nevertheless,  based  on  spontaneous  reports,  overall  the  off-label  use  of Xigris  in  the  EU  seemed  rather  limited.  Further  information  on  the  use  of  Xigris  in  the  hospitals  will  be provided by the MAH by June 2007 in the framework of the on-going Follow-up Measures 045 and 047. A review of 2005-2006 scientific publications on Xigris showed that no new comparative study has been performed. Several independent editorials have highlighted not only the limited evidence for the efficacy of Xigris  in  its  current  indication,  which  was  well  known  at  the  time  of  approval  under  exceptional circumstances,  but  especially  the  lack  of  confirmation  from  further  comparative  studies.  The  Eli  Lillysupported Surviving Sepsis Campaign, which strongly defends Xigris use, has been severely criticised by Eichacker et al. in a recent New England Journal of Medicine perspective report (October 2006) for having ' usurped guideline  development  for  commercial  purposes,  possibly  compromising  highly  regarded,  thirdparty arbiters of medical quality in the process. ' For instance, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign has awarded Xigris  a  highly  favourable  rating  (grade  B),  whereas  established  therapies  for  sepsis  (such  as  antibiotics, fluids, and vasopressors) received lower ratings (grade D or E) because most had not undergone randomised, controlled trials. A recent Eli Lilly-funded retrospective analysis of ~4500 clinical trial patients by J.L. Vincent et al. (2006) has confirmed that earlier treatment with Xigris, within 24 hours of organ dysfunction (OD), was associated with lower risk-adjusted mortality than later treatment (more than 24 hours after OD). The CHMP noted that this information was already included in the SPC during the 2 nd annual re-assessment.

At the conclusion of the 3 rd annual re-assessment, the MAH was requested to provide summary data of 5 bleeding  categories  in  surgical vs non-surgical  (=medical)  patients  (Follow-up  Measure  048)  from  5

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

major  studies  (PROWESS,  ENHANCE,  ADDRESS,  RESOLVE,  XPRESS).  At  the  November  2006 CHMP plenary meeting the CHMP concluded that these data revealed a consistent overall increased risk of serious bleeding events in surgical patients (within 30 days) receiving Xigris as compared to medical patients (i.e. non-surgical patients) receiving Xigris (4.3% vs 2.5% during the infusion period, and 6.7% vs 4.3 % during Days 0 through 28, respectively, in a total population of 4534 patients). Therefore, on 18 January 2007 the MAH submitted Type II Variation EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0022 to update sections 4.4 'Special  warnings  and  special  precautions  for  use'  and  4.8  'Undesirable  effects'  of  the  SPC  with information  on  increased  risk  of  serious  bleeding  events  in  surgical  patients  compared  with  medical patients. The CHMP adopted a positive opinion for this Type II variation at the February 2007 CHMP plenary meeting.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2.2 Conclusion on clinical aspects The results of the XPRESS study (type II variation EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0020) did not clarify whether there was  a  pharmacodynamic  interaction  between  heparin  and  Xigris  and  did  not  contribute  to  clarify  the benefit/risk  balance  for  Xigris.  The  CHMP  noted  that  no  further  study  of  the  effectiveness  of  Xigris  is ongoing or planned, besides a specific Phase IV study (EXTEND) designed to examine a potential extension of the duration of therapy and a planned Phase II study (RESPOND) on the role of protein C as a biomarker, which could lead to a further Phase III study. The CHMP concluded that more targeted studies were needed to strengthen the positive benefit/risk balance of Xigris. The CHMP had noted that the initial efficacy results of the PROWESS study could not be reproduced in further  studies.  Furthermore,  the  CHMP  noted  that  there  was  an  increasing  list  of  warnings  and restrictions  to  the  use  of  Xigris.  In  particular,  at  the  time  of  its  3 rd annual  re-assessment  the  CHMP concluded that a warning should be included in section 4.4 of the SPC to emphasise that Xigris should not be  used  in  children  below  the  age  of  18.  Especially,  the  CHMP  recommended  that  the  MAH  should reinforce the message that Xigris should not be used off-label and especially should not be used in children, through a communication strategy to be addressed to intensive care units. Additionally,  the  CHMP  had  concerns  related  to  the  delay  in  obtaining  meaningful  biomarker  data regarding  protein  C  levels,  the  need  for  further  caution  in  post-surgical  patients  and  the  need  to  treat within 24 h to obtain potential benefit of Xigris. Furthermore, Xigris has not become a universal standard of care in patients with severe sepsis and MOD and post-marketing data confirmed that the use of Xigris has  reached  a  'plateau'.  The  CHMP  concluded  that  the  results  of  the  XPRESS  study  did  not  further clarify the interaction between heparin and Xigris; on the contrary uncertainties related to this interaction remain. Thus,  as  the  XPRESS  results  did  not  further  clarify  the  benefit/risk  balance  of  Xigris,  the  CHMP concluded that the concerns which motivated the current Specific Obligation have not been satisfactorily addressed  and  the  Marketing  Authorisation  for  Xigris  should  remain  under  exceptional  circumstances. Taking  all  the  available  data  together,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  benefit/risk  balance  of  Xigris required additional clarification and that there was a need for another clinical trial to further prove the efficacy of Xigris in the target population.

Therefore, the MAH committed to perform an additional placebo-controlled study in patients (who were either on low-dose prophylactic heparin or not receiving any thrombosis prophylaxis) with severe sepsis and documented organ failure (e.g. MOD or vasopressor dependent septic shock) when treated within a strictly defined time window. The study will be a placebo-controlled study with a primary endpoint of 28day all cause mortality and a 20% relative risk reduction in all cause mortality at 28-days would be the basis for the sample size calculation. The draft study protocol along with a time schedule was submitted by  the  MAH  on  9 th of  February  2007  and  is  under  evaluation  by  the  CHMP.  This  placebo-controlled clinical trial is required to fulfil the revised Specific Obligation to be reviewed annually by the CHMP.

## 2.3 Changes to the Product Information

The Annex II of the Product Information has been amended to reflect the revised Specific Obligation.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The Product Information includes the changes adopted in the framework of type II variations EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0020 and EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0022 at the February 2007 CHMP plenary meeting. These changes contribute to the assessment of the overall benefit/risk balance of Xigris, and are necessary for the safe and the effective use of Xigris.

## III OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED

## 3.1 Specific Obligations (SOs)

## ƒ SPECIFIC OBLIGATION

On 20 April 2006 the MAH submit the Risk Management Plan. Following the assessment of the Risk Management  Plan,  at  its  November  2006  CHMP  plenary  meeting,  the  CHMP  concluded  that  further information should be provided by the MAH (namely an analysis of all adverse events and all serious bleeding events in children over time and an update on publications of studies with Xigris and its impact on the use of Xigris). Thus, this FUM is still on-going.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Further  to  uncertain  conclusions  of  the  XPRESS  study  investigating  the  possible  interaction  between Xigris and heparin, additional clarifications on the benefit/risk balance of Xigris are required. Therefore a placebo-controlled study in patients (who were either on low-dose prophylactic heparin or not receiving any thrombosis prophylaxis) with severe sepsis and documented organ failure (e.g. MOD or vasopressor dependent  septic  shock)  when  treated  within  a  strictly  defined  time  window,  should  be  performed  to assert the benefit/risk profile of Xigris. 3.2 Follow-up Measures (FUMs) PHARMACEUTICAL FUM 043 (from Type II variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/11) The MAH committed to notify the CHMP if any of the stability indicating analytical properties at any of the time points is outside the specifications. In addition the CHMP would be notified if a trend would become obvious in any of the analytical properties and upon finishing the 36 month period the stability data for the 3 rd lot will be provided (by Q2 2008). FUM 049 (from Type II EMEA/H/C/396/II/19) The MAH committed to put two additional lots of each strength in the new container/closure system into stability program and to report any out of specification results to the EMEA when applicable. CLINICAL EMEA FUM 017 (Final study report on RESOLVE study) A further clinical study has been conducted in children with severe sepsis, including patients with purpura fulminans  (RESOLVE  study).  The  MAH  submitted  the  final  study  report  on  8 November 2005.  The assessment of this FUM is on-going. Nevertheless, based on the preliminary analysis of this study, on 2 August  2005  the  MAH  submitted  Type  II  variation  EMEA/H/C/396/II/0016  to  update  the  SPC  with relevant data from the the study F1K-MC-EVBP in paediatric patients with severe sepsis, indicating that efficacy has not been established in the paediatric population. On 13 October 2005 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation. FUM 045 (from 3 rd annual re-assessment)

## EMEA FUM 047 (from 3 rd annual re-assessment)

On 25 May 2006 the MAH submitted the information on follow-up with the most frequent Xigris users verifying  their  hospital  protocols  were  in  compliance  with  the  SPC,  specifically  regarding  the  points outlined  in  the  communication.  Following  the  assessment  of  this  information,  at  its  November 2006 CHMP plenary meeting, the CHMP concluded that the MAH should re-contact 300 hospitals to check

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

regarding appropriate changes in their protocol treatment (non-recommendation in children, 24-h optimal time window for starting Xigris) and re-contact EU paediatric intensivists to check for compliance with the SPC as related to the special warnings and precautions for paediatric patients (by April 2007). Thus, this FUM is still on-going.

## EMEA FUM 048 (from 3 rd annual re-assessment)

On 20 April 2006 the MAH submitted summary data of 5 bleeding categories in surgical vs non-surgical (=medical) patients from 5 major studies (PROWESS, ENHANCE, ADDRESS, RESOLVE, XPRESS). Following  the  conclusions  of  this  FUM,  on 15  January  2007  the  MAH  submitted  Type  II  variation EMEA/H/396/II/0022 to update sections 4.4 'Special warnings and special precautions for use' and 4.8 'Undesirable effects' of the SPC with information on increased risk of serious bleeding events in surgical patients. On 22 February 2007, the CHMP adopted a positive opinion on this Type II variation.

Medicinal product no longer authorised IV BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT The CHMP concluded that the initial efficacy results of the PROWESS study could not be reproduced in further studies. Additionally, the CHMP noted that there was an increasing list of warnings and restrictions to the use of Xigris. These include the contra-indication in children, the concerns about off-label use recommendation in  hospital  protocols,  the  delay  in  obtaining  meaningful  biomarker data regarding protein C levels, the need  for  further  caution  in  post-surgical  patients  and  the  need  to  treat  within  24  h  to  obtain  potential benefit of Xigris. Furthermore, with regard to the results of the XPRESS study, the CHMP noted that the numerically lower mortality rate observed in the overall heparin group (heparin 28.3% vs placebo 31.9%, respectively) must be tempered by the opposite results in sub analyses of patients in European centres (heparin 27.8% vs placebo  24.4%)  and  the  post  hoc  analysis  of  patients  in  the  EU  indicated  population  (patients  with multiple organ dysfunction treated within 24 hours of their first sepsis-induced organ dysfunction: heparin 30.3% vs placebo 26.9%). The results of the XPRESS  study  cannot be translated into useful recommendations  for  the  use  of  Xigris  in  the  EU  indicated  population.  The  CHMP  concluded  that  the XPRESS study had not brought a response to the question whether there is a pharmacodynamic interaction between heparin  and  Xigris;  on  the  contrary  uncertainties  related  to  the  interactions  between  heparin  and Xigris remain. The clinical results of the XPRESS study, taken in conjunction with the results from other recent studies, raised concerns on the overall benefit/risk balance of Xigris. Thus, as the XPRESS results did not further clarify the benefit/risk balance of Xigris, the CHMP concluded that the concerns which motivated the current Specific Obligation have not been satisfactorily addressed and the Marketing Authorisation for Xigris should remain under exceptional circumstances. Taking all the  available  data  together,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  benefit/risk  balance  of  Xigris  required additional clarification and that there was a need for another clinical trial to further prove the efficacy of Xigris in the target population.

## V OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

On the basis of the data submitted since the 3 rd annual re-assessment, the benefit/risk balance for Xigris in the  ' treatment  of  adult  patients  with  severe  sepsis  with  multiple  organ  failure  when  added  to  best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure ' remains positive. However, the CHMP concluded that a revised  Specific  Obligation  remained  to  be  fulfilled.  The  assessment  of  the  pending  commitment  will form the basis of the next annual re-assessment. Therefore, the Marketing Authorisation for Xigris will remain under exceptional circumstances.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The CHMP recommended the updating of the Annexes II of the Community Marketing Authorisation for Xigris.

On 22 February 2007 the CHMP adopted an Opinion on the 4 th annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk balance of Xigris.

A  revised  Letter  of  Undertaking  dated  21  February  2007  including  the  amended  list  of  Specific Obligation and Follow-up Measures has been adopted accordingly by the CHMP.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised VI REFERENCES Monnet  X,  Lamia  B,  Anguel  N,  Richard  C,  Bonmarchand  G,  Teboul  JL.  2005.  Rapid  and  beneficial hemodynamic effects  of  activate  protein  C  in  septic  shock  patients.  Intensive  Care  med  31(11):15731576. De Backer D, Verdant C, Chierego M, Koch M, Gullo A, Vincent JL. 2006. Effects of drotrecogin alfa activated on microcirculatory alterations in patients with severe sepsis. Crit Care Med 34(7):1918-1924. Kubler A, Mayzner-Zawadzka E, Durek G, Gaszynski W, Karpel E, Mikaszewska-Sokolewicz M. 2006. Results of severe sepsis treatment program using recombinant human activated protein C in Poland. Med Sci Monit. 2006 Mar;12(3):CR107-12. Epub 2006 Feb 23. Bollettino  d'informazione  sui  farmaci.  2006.  Monitoraggio  dell'uso  di  Xigris  nelle  terapie  intensive Italiane. Risultati della seconda fase di raccolta dati. 2:70-75. Green  C,  Dinnes  J,  Takeda  AL,  Cuthbertson  BH.  2006.  Evaluation  of  the  cost-effectiveness  of drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  for  the  treatment  of  severe  sepsis  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Int  J  Technol Assess Health Care 22(1):90-100. Riou  Franca  L,  Launois  R,  Le  Lay  K,  Aegerter  P,  Bouhassira  M,  Meshaka  P,  Guidet  B.  2006.  Costeffectiveness of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in the treatment of severe sepsis with multiple organ failure. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 22(1):101-108. Mackenzie AF. 2005. Activated protein C: do more survive? Intensive Care Med 31(12):1624-1626. Friedrich JO, Adhikari NK, Meade MO. 2006. Drotrecogin alfa (activated): does current evidence support treatment for any patients with severe sepsis? Crit Care 10(3):145. Available at http://ccforum.com/content/10/3/145 Agarwal  R,  Nath  A.  2006.  Activated  protein  C in sepsis: down  but  not  out, yet. Crit Care. 2006;10(4):416. Available at http://ccforum.com/content/10/4/416.

Macias W. 2006. Activated protein C: do more survive? Intensive Care Med 32(4):605-607.

Vincent JL. 2006. Sepsis in the ICU: who needs progress? Intensive Care Med 32(4):609.

Vincent JL, Habib AM, Verdant C, Bruhn A. 2006. Sepsis diagnosis and management: work in progress. Minerva Anestesiol 72(3):87-96.

Williams MD, Janes JM, Nelson DR. Drotrecogin alfa (activated): current evidence supports treatment for severe sepsis patients with a high risk of death. (Crit Care, submitted for publication.)

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Dellinger RP. 2006. Recombinant activated protein C: the key is clinical assessment of risk of death, not subset analysis. Crit Care 10(1):114.

Vincent JL, Nadel S, Kutsogiannis DJ, Gibney RT, Yan SB, Wyss VL, Bailey JE, Mitchell CL, Sarwat S, Shinall  SM,  Janes  JM.  Drotrecogin  alfa  (activated)  in  patients  with  severe  sepsis  presenting  with purpura  fulminans,  meningitis,  or  meningococcal  disease:  a  retrospective  analysis  of  patients enrolled in recent clinical studies. Crit Care. 2005 Aug;9(4):R331-43. Epub 2005 May 17.

Eichacker PQ, Natanson C, Danner RL. Surviving sepsis--practice guidelines, marketing campaigns, and Eli Lilly. N Engl J Med. 2006 Oct 19;355(16):1640-2.

<!-- image -->