---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 18:06:30
document_pages: 20
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/xigris-h-c-396-s-13-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: xigris-h-c-396-s-13-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 4.605213
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-20 13:00:30.805725
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.2-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
London, 21 April 2005 Product name: XIGRIS Procedure No. EMEA/H/C/396/S/0013

## Medicinal product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

TABLE OF CONTENTS

- I SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING UTHORISATION HOLDER page 3
1. Chemical and Pharmaceutical aspects page 3
2. Preclinical aspects page 3

3.

Clinical aspects page 3

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3.1   Efficacy aspects page 3 3.2   Safety and Pharmacovigilance aspects page 10 4. Change of the product information page 13 II OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED page 14 1. Specific Obligations (SO) page 14 2. Follow-up Measure (FUM) page 17 III BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT page 19 IV OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION page 20

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## I SCIENTIFIC DATA PROVIDED BY THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER

## 1. Chemical and Pharmaceutical aspects

No additional data have been provided with this submission.

See section II OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED for Follow-up Measures related to pharmaceutical aspects.

<!-- image -->

According  to  the  MAH,  the  study  supported  the  efficacy  associated  with  drotrecogin  alfa  that  was observed  in  PROWESS.  The  Kaplan-Meier  survival  curves  were  nearly  identical  and  showed  similar pattern  of  survival  throughout  the  28-day  study  period.  In  clinically  relevant  subgroups,  including multiple organ dysfunction, the observed mortality rates in ENHANCE were similar to those observed in PROWESS. There appeared to be an association between mortality and duration of organ dysfunction that might  have  important  implications  on  the  use  of  drotrecogin  alfa  in  clinical  practice.  This  finding suggested that earlier treatment with drotrecogin alfa (within 24h of the onset of organ dysfunction) may be  associated  with  more  favourable  outcome  (23.0%  mortality  vs  27.4%,  p=0.014).  New  wording  to reflect this information has been proposed in the SPC with the Type II variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/0014 for which the CHMP gave a positive opinion on 15 December 2004. Namely, section 4.2 'Posology and  method of administration' in the  SPC  was  amended to  specify that ' treatment  should  be  started within 48 hours, and preferably within 24 hours, of onset of the first documented sepsis-induced organ dysfunction'.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 2. Preclinical aspects No additional data have been provided with this submission. 3. Clinical aspects 3.1 Efficacy aspects An  update  on  clinical  trials  (ENHANCE  and  ADDRESS  studies)  during  the  past  12  months  was presented by the MAH. As of 21 May 2004, a total of up to 5814 adult patients have been exposed to drotrecogin alfa (activated) in completed and ongoing clinical trials, 3695 of which were included in the ENHANCE and ADDRESS studies. ENHANCE study (Studies F1K-MC-EVBE, F1K-MC-EVBF, and F1K-MC-EVBG) ENHANCE was a multi-country, single-arm, open-label study of drotrecogin alfa in adult and paediatric patients with severe sepsis. A total of 2378 adult patients received part or all of the 96-hour drotrecogin alfa infusion. Follow-up at study day 28 was available for 2375 adult patients. The primary purpose of the study was to gather additional safety and 28-day all-cause mortality data using PROWESS as a historical control.  The study completed enrolment in early 2003, and datalock occurred in April 2003. At the time of the first annual licence reassessment, the final clinical study report had not been completed; however, provisional data was included in the risk/benefit assessment of the last expert report. The final clinical study report was completed and submitted in December 2003.  Responses  to  CPMP  questions  (including  labeling  proposals)  were  submitted  on 25 May  2004,  and  responses  to  outstanding  issues  were  submitted  on  October  1 st 2004.  All  the questions raised by the CHMP have been adequately answered. Following the evaluation of the final report of ENHANCE, the MAH submitted a Type II variation (EMEA/H/C/396/II/0014) for which the CHMP adopted a positive opinion on 15 December 2004. Efficacy in ENHANCE study

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

In  the  assessment  report  on  efficacy,  the  CHMP  agreed  that  results  on  mortality  in  adults  (25.3%) supported  those  of  PROWESS  (24.7%),  but  this  was  not  surprising  as  the  inclusion  and  exclusion criteria  were  similar  in  the  two  studies.    It  was  also  stated  that  the  ENHANCE  study  provided additional information regarding the association between mortality, protein C activity levels at the end of the infusion and the change in protein C activity levels between baseline and end of infusion.

## CHMP's conclusions

The final study report for ENHANCE has been submitted and examined by the CHMP. The MAH has answered all outstanding questions and the Type II variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/0014 has been submitted to amend the SPC especially with regard to the need for early onset of treatment: ' Treatment should be started within 48 hours, and preferably within 24 hours, of onset of the first documented sepsis-induced organ dysfunction' . On 15 December 2004 the CHMP adopted a positive opinion for Type II variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/0014. The choice of the baseline population appears an extremely important factor in determining the benefit/risk balance of Xigris.

Medicinal product no longer authorised ADDRESS study (Studies F1K-MC-EVCL and F1K-MC-EVCM) ADDRESS was an international multicentre, randomised, double-blind, parallel, placebo-controlled study that was conducted as two separate sub-studies and investigated the efficacy and safety of drotrecogin alfa (activated)  in  adult  patients  with  early  stage  severe  sepsis  (i.e.  a  lower  risk  of  death).  The  primary objective was to investigate the differences in all-cause  mortality. Additional safety objectives were to determine the rate for formation of anti-activated protein C (anti-APC) antibodies and to demonstrate that drotrecogin alfa (activated) has an acceptable safety profile in this patient population. One-third of the patients had multiple organ dysfunction (MOD), as compared with three quarters in PROWESS. Enrolment  of  new  patients  was  suspended  based  on  a  recommendation  from  the  independent  Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) on 9 February 2004. Upon review of an interim analysis report of 1500 patients  enrolled  in  the  trial,  the  DMC  recommended  discontinuation  of  enrolment  based  on  a  low likelihood of detecting statistically significant reduction in the 28-day mortality in patients at low risk of death  from  severe  sepsis  (i.e.,  stopping  for  futility).  At  the  time  of  the  second  annual  licence reassessment, the final clinical study report had not been completed; however, provisional data was included in the risk/benefit assessment of the expert report. On 15 December 2004 the MAH submitted the  clinical  study  report  for  ADDRESS  as  part  of  the  responses  to  the  request  for  supplementary information that was adopted at the CHMP plenary meeting in November 2004. At the time the study was stopped, 2640 patients had been enrolled (1333 drotrecogin alfa, 1307 placebo). Efficacy in ADDRESS study Following the assessment of the preliminary data provided by the MAH, during its plenary meeting in November 2004, the CHMP concluded that further supplementary information on the ADDRESS study should be submitted by the MAH together with the final study report for ADDRESS before an agreement on the annual re-assessment could be reached. The request of supplementary information included also a list of questions on heparin-Xigris interaction to be addressed by the MAH (section 'Scientific discussion on specific obligation 1'). On 15 December 2004 the MAH submitted the clinical study report for ADDRESS study as part of the responses to request for supplementary information.

Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when  added  to  best  standard  care.  Since  the  results  of  the  ADDRESS  study  indicated  that  the benefit/risk  balance  of  Xigris  may  not  be  positive  the  MAH  was  requested  to  justify  the  current indication or propose a more restricted indication. In the ADDRESS study, there was no statistically significant beneficial effect of Xigris in a placebo-controlled subgroup of 455 evaluable patients (vs 407 placebo) meeting the inclusion criteria of severe sepsis with multiple organ failure. On the other hand safety was not improved over similar PROWESS patients.

Although,  the  CHMP  acknowledged  that  the  power  to  detect  a  significant  difference  in  mortality within the subgroup of patients with MOD (multiple organ dysfunction) was insufficient, the CHMP

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

noted that the gain in outcome of sepsis patients with MOD receiving Xigris was minor: mortality was 20.7% versus 21.9%, i.e. an improvement of 1.2%, or a relative improvement of 5.5%. In PROWESS, the subgroup of patients with at least 2 acute organ dysfunctions at baseline benefited more clearly from Xigris: the mortality was 26.5% in the Xigris group (168 out of 634) and 33.9% in the placebo group (216 out of 637), i.e. an absolute improvement of 7.4% and a relative improvement of 22%.

The CHMP acknowledged that the absence of an obvious effect of Xigris in ADDRESS-MOD may be due  to  a  selected  population  with  a  less  severe  status,  and  certainly  with  a  lesser  risk  of  death compared to PROWESS-MOD. Therefore the CHMP highlighted that it is crucial that intensive care unit  physicians  are  able  to  discern,  at  baseline,  which  patients  will  benefit  from  Xigris  based  on clinical parameters. The presence of a suspected or known infection and two failing organs may be an insufficient combination of parameters.

Medicinal product no longer authorised In summary, it has to be admitted that there was an apparent lack of effect of Xigris in the ADDRESSMOD  subgroup,  (the  EU-indicated  population),  compared  to  the  PROWESS-MOD  group,  which formed the very basis for this indication. This apparent lack of effect in ADDRESS-MOD is probably multifactorial: · The  major  factor  is  a  ' sequence  effect '  phenomenon  that  was  much  more  apparent  in ADDRESS than in PROWESS due to the large number of centers with low recruitment (due to  more  heterogeneous  trial  and  premature  stopping).  The  statistical  guidelines  for  futility provided to the Data Monitoring Committee of ADDRESS may have been inadequate as they did not account for a potential learning curve that might be observed in a clinical trial. · For every level of OD (from 1 to 5 failing organs), patients were less sick in ADDRESS , as revealed  by  several  parameters,  in  particular  APACHE  II  or  acute  physiology  scores, metabolic  acidosis/shock,  or  the  mere  placebo  mortality  rates.  Therefore  the  question  to  be addressed  by  the  MAH  was:  among  patients  with  severe  sepsis  and  MOD,  should  the indication  be  restricted  to  ' those  with  a  higher  risk  of  death  as  assessed  by  either  high APACHE II scores or acute physiology scores, or by the presence of shock '? · Recent surgery was a predictor of poor effect for Xigris in the ADDRESS study. However, the  effect  of  Xigris  has  been  demonstrated  unambiguously  in  the  more  severely  affected PROWESS  pivotal  patients,  so  in  the  CHMP's  opinion  recent  surgery  should  not  be  put forward as a contraindication, provided patients with sufficiently severe sepsis are selected. The combination  of  recent  surgery  and  a  single  organ  failure  is  already  excluded  from  the indicated population. · The comparison between ADDRESS-MOD and PROWESS-MOD reinforces the importance of treating patients as early as possible after the development of sepsis. In the trials, the timeto-onset of treatment was calculated starting with the first organ failure. Treating within 24 h or even less was clearly more beneficial than waiting until the second day. However, due to the  EU-based  restriction  to  treat  only  MOD  patients  (i.e.,  at  least  a  second  organ  must  fail before Xigris is started), physicians must keep on the alert for optimal timing of Xigris. Therefore the CHMP concluded that the involvement of an Ad Hoc Expert Group was necessary to address  some  issues,  including:  1)  the  definition  of  a  better  target  population  for  the  indication  of Xigris; 2) the question of patients with recent surgery and single organ failure; 3) the sequence effect and 4) the time to treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1) Target population

The analyses of the successful pivotal PROWESS study demonstrated that the benefit/risk balance of Xigris was best ensured by restricting its use to severe sepsis patients with higher risk of death. The MAH continued  to  believe  that  the  current  indication  of  multiple  organ  dysfunction  (MOD)  does define a high-risk target population with a positive benefit/risk balance. In the PROWESS MOD subgroup, Xigris was associated with a relative risk of death of 0.78 compared to placebo (p=0.004, 95% confidence  interval  =  0.66-0.93,  N=1271).  These  results  from  ADDRESS  are  consistent  with those  of  PROWESS  in  that  the  95%  confidence  interval  for  the  ADDRESS  results  encompass  the point estimate from PROWESS. In a combined analysis of all MOD patients from both PROWESS and ADDRESS, the relative risk was 0.82 (p=0.007, 95% confidence interval = 0.71-0.95, N=2133).

After assessing the Expert Group's conclusions, the majority of the CHMP acknowledged that there is a  strong  need  to  ensure  that  Xigris  is  used  exclusively  in  high-risk  patients,  as  an  add-on  to  best standard care.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Comparison  of  MOD  subgroup  data  from  PROWESS  and  ADDRESS  indicates  that  further clarification of the indicated MOD population would not result in the selection of clinically relevant populations with a greater or more consistent treatment benefit than the currently indicated group. For instance,  the  subgroups  common  to  each  study  that  had  qualitatively  similar  findings  (numerically lower mortality in the Xigris group compared to the placebo group) included: two organ dysfunctions at  baseline,  no  vasopressors  at  baseline,  mechanical  ventilation  at  baseline,  age  &gt;65  years,  surgical patients, and medical patients. None of these characteristics is likely to be clinically useful as a means of  further  refining  the  indication.  For  instance,  even  though  older  age  is  associated  with  higher mortality, probably reflecting lower physiological reserve, an arbitrary age cut-off would not appear to be an appropriate way to clarify the indication. In order to fully establish the benefit/risk balance, the MAH also evaluated the expected risks (serious adverse events, serious bleeding events, nonbleeding serious adverse events, CNS bleeding, and the combination of death or any serious bleeding event) in the chosen patient population in PROWESS, ADDRESS, and in the two studies combined. These analyses demonstrate that for both studies the relative risk of having a serious adverse event was similar for both Xigris and placebo patients. The  MAH  concluded  that  the  MOD  population  is  a  well-defined  and  easily  identified  patient population and therefore represents a suitable definition in clinical practice. As a matter of fact, postmarketing experience shows that as of November 2004, approximately 2000 patients have been treated across  the  EU,  supporting  the  idea  that  Xigris  is  not  being  used  broadly  outside  the  indication. Additionally, data from the Belgium Xigris Reimbursement Registry shows that Xigris is only being used  within  the  indicated  population,  and  that  73%  of  patients  even  had  three  or  more  organ dysfunctions, indicating that Xigris use is largely confined to the more severely ill subset of the MOD population. Data from a similar registry in Italy supports these conclusions. Such observations do not suggest that further clarification of the indication would benefit the severe sepsis patients in the EU. The Ad Hoc Expert Group and the MAH agreed that none of the characteristics identified by subgroup analyses  in  the  PROWESS  and  ADDRESS  studies  is  likely  to  be  clinically  useful  as  a  means  of further refining the indication. When asked whether a positive benefit/risk balance of Xigris had been demonstrated  beyond  reasonable  doubt  in  all  patients  suffering  from  multiple  organ  dysfunction (MOD),  the  Expert  Group  was  split.  The  lack  of  confirmatory  or  replication  study  in  this  very population was highlighted.

The majority of the CHMP concluded that the combined needs to target high-risk patients and to treat early can be met by amending the therapeutic indications in order to include ' The use of Xigris should be  considered  mainly  in  situations  when  therapy  can  be  started  within  24  hours  after  the  onset  of organ failure' (see paragraph 4 'Change of the product information' of this report) . Therefore  the revised indication is: 'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple  organ  failure  when  added  to  best  standard  care. The  use  of  Xigris  should  be  considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for further information see Section 5.1) '.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 2) Recent surgery and single organ failure

Xigris  may  increase  mortality  in  the  subgroup  of  patients  with  recent  surgery  and  a  single  organ failure, both in ADDRESS and PROWESS. This effect was statistically significant in the ADDRESS study,  but  not  in  PROWESS,  probably  because  the  number  of  patients  was  much  lower:  only  98 patients met these criteria in PROWESS (5.8% of the whole population) vs 636 in ADDRESS study (24.1% of the whole population).

Medicinal product no longer authorised Among the explanations, it is possible that surgery in itself mimics many of the signs of sepsis and also results in the need for cardiovascular and respiratory organ support. The CHMP agreed with the MAH  that  surgical  patients  with  single  organ  dysfunction  may  be  a  population  where  the  risks associated with bleeding are not outweighed by survival benefit, and thus may represent a group of patients  with  an  unfavourable  risk/benefit  profile  for  treatment  with  Xigris.  The  MAH  proposed  to translate  this  piece  of  information  into  a  new  warning  in  section  4.4  'Special  warnings  and  special precautions for use' in the SPC (see paragraph 4 'Change of the product information' of this report). 3) 'Sequence effect' The CHMP agreed that the sequence effect is present in all sites (or most sites), irrespective of the final  number  of  patients  enrolled  in  that  particular  site.  The  role  of  protocol  violations  is  possible although not formally proved in ADDRESS as such data were not available in that study. The analyses of  baseline  imbalances  in  early-  and  later-enrolled  patients  revealed  a  few  significant factors that could have played a role in the sequence effect, although this role should have been minor due to the small differences observed. In particular, later (3 rd and onward)-enrolled patients tended to originate a little bit more frequently from centres in Europe (33.7% vs 28.9% for the first 2 patients; p&lt;0.001) or in non-USA/Canada sites (60.5% vs 47.6% for the first 2 patients), and to be slightly more often  on  baseline  heparin  (60.7%  vs  55%  for  the  first  2  patients;  p&lt;0.005),  with  a  trend  towards unfractionated heparin. The mean time from first OD to treatment was 21.8 h for 3 rd patients onward vs 24.1 h for the first &gt;2 patients (p&lt;0.001), again a small but understandable difference. The CHMP was of the opinion that none of these factors is worth highlighting as a major explanation for the sequence/learning curve effect. Similarly, according to the MAH's analysis, no obvious bias seemed  to  have  been  introduced  between  patients  excluded  from  the  placebo  and  the  Xigris  arms during sequence effect analysis. Although  the  sequence  effect  was  clear  in  both  ADDRESS-MOD  and  in  ADDRESS  patients  with APACHE II score &gt;24, it was absent from the same subgroups in PROWESS. This disparity may be related to the fact that  patients  were sicker in PROWESS, but there  may also be other reasons that could  not be quantified based on the ADDRESS data. The involvement of an Ad Hoc Expert Group was necessary to address the issue of the 'sequence effect' and its clinical relevance. Overall,  the  expert  group  was  inclined  to  conclude  that  the  so-called  learning  curve  could  merely reflect a marginal efficacy of Xigris in the lower risk patients in the ADDRESS study. The majority of the  CHMP agreed with the MAH's suggestion to adapt Section 4.2 of the SPC to include 'Xigris should be used by experienced prescribed by doctors experienced in institutions skilled in the care of patients with severe sepsis'. The  majority  of  the  CHMP  concluded  that  the  information  on  the  'sequence  effect'  should  be reflected in section 5.1 of the SPC as well.

## 4) Time to treatment

The MAH was requested to discuss the effect of time-to-treat on the mortality rates. The MAH agrees that, once patients are diagnosed with severe sepsis with MOD, treatment with Xigris should be started as soon as possible. In the open label ENHANCE study, where the median time to treatment was 25 hours,  lower  mortality  was  observed  in  those  patients  treated  with  Xirgis ≤ 24  hours  from  the  first sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction  compared  to  those  treated  &gt;24  hours,  and  this  obsevation  is

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

mentioned in the SmPC. It should be noted that although the benefit might be increased in patients treated early, this does not mean that patients treated later have no benefit.

The involvement of an Ad Hoc Expert Group was necessary to assess the importance on the time to treatment.

The experts and the MAH were in general agreement on the need for early treatment of any patient with  newly-diagnosed sepsis-induced  multiple  organ  dysfunction.  Data  from  the  ENHANCE study, with a patient population very similar to that in PROWESS, reinforce this impression.

Medicinal product no longer authorised However, the CHMP noted that what has not been considered is the importance  of  the time-frame between the first and the second organ failures. Yet, it should be reminded that the PROWESS trial was globally positive, and in that trial 89% of the patients were treated within 24 hours of the first sepsis-induced organ dysfunction (median time to treatment = 18h). In ADDRESS-MOD, that time was appreciably longer: 26.6h. A short interval between the first and second organ failures may reflect either the severity of the disease or a lower physiological reserve, meaning a higher risk of death and therefore a better response to Xigris. It means that instead of using an illness severity score, with its many shortcomings, requiring the use of  Xigris  mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure may be a better way to restrict the indication to the sickest patients and thereby to increase the benefit/risk balance of Xigris. Therefore, the majority of the CHMP concluded to change the current indication to include ' The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure'. Therefore the revised indication is: 'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for further information see Section 5.1) '. (See paragraph 4 'Change of the product information' of this report). CHMP's conclusions 'Sequence effect' in PROWESS and ADDRESS Although the MAH stated that the sequence effect is a sign of a learning curve for the investigators, similar to what happens in the management of many complex disease states, it may rather reflect a marginal efficacy of Xigris in the lower risk patients in the ADDRESS study. The majority of the CHMP agreed with the MAH's suggestion to adapt Section 4.2 of the SPC to include 'Xigris should be used by experienced prescribed by doctors experienced in institutions skilled in the care of patients with severe sepsis'. Further the CHMP agreed that the observed sequence effect should be mentioned in section 5.1 in the SPC. Target population and early treatment None of the characteristics identified by subgroup analyses in the PROWESS and ADDRESS studies is likely to be clinically useful as a means of further refining the indication. However, the majority of the CHMP concluded that the combined needs to target high-risk patients and to treat early may be met by adapting the indication as follows:

'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for  further  information  see Section 5.1)'.

The arguments in support of this proposal are:

- In the globally positive pivotal trial PROWESS, 89% of the patients were treated within 24 hours  of  the  first  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction  (median  time  to  treatment  =  18h).  In ADDRESS-MOD,  that  time  was  appreciably  longer:  26.6h.  In  the  open  label  ENHANCE study,  where the  median time to treatment was 25h, lower  mortality was observed in those patients  treated  with  Xigris ≤ 24  hours  from  the  first  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction compared to those treated &gt;24 hours.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- A short interval between the first and second organ failures may reflect either the severity of the disease or a lower physiological reserve, meaning a higher risk of death and therefore a better response to Xigris.

Instead  of  using  an  illness  severity  score,  with  its  many  shortcomings,  requiring  the  use  of  Xigris mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure may be a better way to restrict the indication to the sickest patients and thereby to increase the benefit/risk balance of Xigris.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3.2 Safety and Pharmacovigilance aspects

## 3.2.1 Safety Reviews since the first annual risk/benefit assessment

The following safety review documents have been submitted to the CHMP since the last benefit/risk assessment:

Periodic Safety Update Reports:

PSUR n. 3 (22 May 2003 - 21 November 2003)

PSUR n. 4 (22 November 2003 - 21 May 2004)

PSUR n. 5 (22 May 2004 - 21 November 2004)

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised 3.2.2 SPC changes since the last risk/benefit assessment Following the review of the first two PSURs, the Type II variation EMEA/H/C/000396/II/0008 was submitted  on  23  December  2003  to  update  the  SPC  with  new  information  on  overdose  cases  from spontaneous reports. On 24 March 2004 the CPMP adopted an opinion on this variation. The variation included changes in section 4.9 (Overdose) and section 6.6 (Instruction for use and handling) in the SPC. The MAH also committed to make a proposal to reduce the number of overdose cases. On 15 December 2004, the CHMP adopted an opinion on Type II variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/0014, for an update of the sections 4.2 (Posology and method of administration), 4.4 (Special warnings and special  precautions  of  use),  4.8  (Undesirable  effects),  and  5.1  (Pharmacodynamic  properties)  in  the SPC with relevant data from the ENHANCE study. Further, in line with the post-opinion commitment from variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/008, the MAH proposed a further change to section 4.2 (Posology and  method  of  administration)  and  6.6  (Instructions  for  use  and  handling)  of  the  SPC  and  the instructions for use and handling in the Package Leaflet. 3.2.3 Safety in clinical trials Safety in ENHANCE study The incidence of serious bleeding events during the infusion period was higher in ENHANCE patients compared to drotrecogin alfa (activated) patients in PROWESS (3.6% vs 2.4%). This was attributed to the enrolment of patients with a higher risk of bleeding. Primary baseline predictors of bleeding during the infusion were hepatic SOFA score, any surgery, haematology SOFA score and site of infection class. The incidence of haemorrhage-related deaths and study-drug related deaths in ENHANCE was the same or lower than that observed in PROWESS. According  to  the  CHMP  who  assessed  the  results  of  the  ENHANCE  study,  the  most  important conclusions from the safety part of the study were: · there was a higher rate of serious bleeding event in this observational study than in the PROWESS trial (3.6% vs 2.4% during the infusion period and 6.5% vs 3.5% in the 28-day study period); a difference between the two studies was found for all indicators except for study-drug related deaths (0.4%) and hemorrhage-related deaths (0.7%), despite the fact that efficacy was similar in ENHANCE and PROWESS;

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

a higher percentage of patients presented risk factors for bleeding in the ENHANCE study, e.g., low platelet count, surgical procedure, organ dysfunction or age class; this might at least partly explain the differences between the two studies;

- the most frequent serious bleeding events during the infusion period were gastrointestinal and intraabdominal, both occurring at a rate of 0.8%, intracranial haemorrhage occurred at a rate of 0.6%; independent adjudication of the intracranial haemorrhage cases showed most of them had an underlying cause;
- in adults, 9 deaths were considered possibly related to the drug by the investigator; however, these cases had sepsis, organ dysfunction and multiple concomitant drugs; the cause of death was haemorrhage in all cases;
- co-administration of heparin did not increase the risk of bleeding;

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

- an original aspect of this study was the inclusion of children aged &lt;18 years; the serious bleeding rate (5.9% during infusion and 8.5% during the 28-day study period) was higher than in adults, but the two groups may probably not be compared; only one child died for a reason thought to be drugrelated and one death (due to haemorrhage) was considered possibly related to the drug;

## Safety in ADDRESS study

On the safety side, the ADDRESS study confirmed a small but statistically significant increased risk of serious  bleeding  during  the  infusion  period  (2.3%  of  Xigris  patients  vs  1.1%  of  controls).  The  expert states that this rate was similar to that in PROWESS (2.4%), but it should be reminded that the patient population in PROWESS had more severe sepsis. The numbers of hemorrhagic deaths during the 28-day period was 7 in the Xigris group (4 of which occurred in patients with recent surgery and single organ failure) and 2 in the placebo group. The rate of CNS bleeding appeared similar between drotrecogin alfa and placebo (0.3% and 0.2%, respectively). Although the DMC stated that there was a safety concern related  to  the  higher  incidence  of  serious  bleeding  events  for  patients  receiving  Xigris,  this  trend  was expected in patients receiving active treatment.

Rates of CNS bleedings from the spontaneous reporting system and studies

|                                                | Spontaneous reporting   | PROWESS   | ENHANCE   | ADDRESS   |
|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Non-CNS serious bleeding during infusion       | 0.51%                   | 2.1%      | 3.1%      | 2.1%      |
| Non-CNS serious bleeding, incl. unknown timing | 0.56%                   |           |           |           |

Medicinal product no longer authorised Bleedings Some factors that may predict a higher risk of bleeding have been highlighted in ADDRESS. Apart from those already mentioned in the SPC as contraindications or special warnings, one may note that recent  surgery  (within  30  days  prior  to  study  entry)  was  associated  with  a  numerically,  if  not statistically significantly, higher risk of serious bleed during the infusion period in ADDRESS: 18/496 (3.63%)  patients  with  recent  surgery  had  a  serious  bleeding  event  versus  13/818  (1.59%)  without recent surgery. For the placebo group, the corresponding values were 1.61% and 0.88%, respectively. However, the interaction p-value was not significant. The majority of the CHMP agreed on the proposal from the MAH to include information on bleeding events regarding the ADDRESS study in section 4.8 'Undesirable effects' in the SPC (see paragraph 4 'Change of the product information' of this report). 3.2.4 Update on Post-marketing safety data As of April 2004, it is estimated that 38,656 patients have been exposed to marketed drotrecogin alfa. Direct  comparison  of  spontaneous  reports  to  clinical  trial  reports  is  difficult  given  the  inherent reporting bias prevalent in spontaneous reporting. The reporting rate of bleedings is presented in the following tables, for CNS and non-CNS bleedings. Rates of non-CNS bleedings from the spontaneous reporting system and studies

|                                            | Spontaneous reporting   | PROWESS   | ENHANCE   | ADDRESS   |
|--------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| CNS serious bleeding during infusion       | 0.18%                   | 0.2%      | 0.6%      | 0.3%      |
| CNS serious bleeding, incl. unknown timing | 0.22%                   |           |           |           |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The MAH suggests that the severity of CNS bleedings is associated with a higher reporting rate than for non-CNS bleeds, explaining that the rate of CNS bleeding is similar for the spontaneous reporting system and for clinical trials.

In PSUR #4, the analysis of spontaneous events showed that reporting rates for serious bleeds were higher in Europe and rest of the world than in the U.S. A similar trend was noted for CNS bleeds in the ENHANCE study. There is no apparent explanation for the difference.

In PSURs numbers 3 and 4, cumulative review of cases of thrombosis, disseminated intracoagulation and thrombocytopenia were performed. In PSUR#4, the CHMP concluded that 'regular' monitoring through  line  listings  (there  is  no  need  to  include  a  specific  review  of  all  cases)  was  considered sufficient  for  the  following  events:  disseminated  intracoagulation  disorders,  thrombotic  disorders, coagulation disorders, cardiac disorders and allergic disorders. However, the following issues had to be continuously monitored: bleeding disorders, thrombocytopenia, and ADRs in children , including an estimation of their frequency in ongoing paediatric clinical trials.

| PSUR   | Conclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|--------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| #1     | A few cases of thrombocytopenia were believed to have been related to the administration of drotrecogin alfa (activated), but their assessment is difficult due to the underlying clinical condition and the lack of details in the ADR report. The company is asked to concentrate on such cases in the future.                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| #2     | no The MAHconcludes that the information reviewed from the data does not support a causal association between drotrecogin alfa and thrombocytopenia and platelet count decrease. However clinical trial data show that more patients experience a decrease in the platelet count during treatment with drotrecogin alfa than with placebo, even if the difference is small. Regarding the death rate and organ dysfunction, it is difficult to distinguish the effect on sepsis from the possible thrombocytopenic effect. |
| #3     | product Assessment of data of PSUR#3 does not lead to change the conclusion of PSUR#2. The reporting rate is 0.63%, to be compared to 0,56% in PSUR#2 and 1.27% in PSUR#1. Thrombocytopenia and decreased platelet count still require a specific monitoring in the following PSURs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| #4     | The CHMP agrees with the MAH's evaluation that at this stage there does not appear to be a causal relationship of drotrecogin alfa (activated) to thrombocytopenia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

The MAH has provided a line listing of spontaneous reports from 22 May 2004 to 21 August 2004. A total  of  80  reports  (73  spontaneous  and  7  post-marketing  study  cases)  containing  152  events  (109 serious and 43 non serious) have been received. They included 20 CNS bleeding events, 29 non-CNS serious  bleeding  events  and  11  non-serious  bleeding  events  reported.  There  were  also  9  serious thrombotic events and 20 thrombocytopenia/platelet count decreased events. All these rates are within reporting rate fluctuations seen on a monthly basis. There were no significant increases in reporting rates  compared to previous reporting periods for any group of events. The MAH concludes that no new significant safety issue has been identified during this reporting period.

Medicinal product no longer authorised The MAH proposes to discontinue the special monitoring of thrombocytopenia events that have been undertaken  since  PSUR#2,  because  the  rate  of  thrombocytopenia  or  platelet  count  decreased  has remained  constant  in  the  last  three  reports  and  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  a  link  between drotrecogin treatment and thrombocytopenia. The CHMP's conclusions regarding thrombocytopenia platelet count decreased in PSURs#2, #3 and #4 are reported in the table below: In  PSUR#4,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  monitoring  of  cases  of  thrombocytopenia  should  be continued. This conclusion is unchanged at the present time, and monitoring of cases of thrombocytopenia should be continued for PSUR#5.

## CHMP's conclusions

The majority of the CHMP agreed that no new safety issue has emerged from these data. In  PSUR#4,  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  monitoring  of  cases  of  thrombocytopenia  should  be continued. This conclusion is unchanged at the present time, and monitoring of cases of thrombocytopenia should be continued for PSUR#5.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 4. Change of the product information

The MAH and the majority of the CHMP agreed that the following changes were necessary at this time in light of the data coming from the ADDRESS study.

## SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERITICS

## Section 4.1 'Therapeutic indications'

Medicinal product no longer authorised Following the scientific discussion on the target population and the early treatment with Xigris, the majority of the CHMP and the MAH agreed to change the indication as follows: 'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for further information see Section 5.1).' Section 4.2 'Posology and method of administration' Following the scientific discussion on the 'sequence effect' with Xigris, the majority of the CHMP and the MAH agreed to add the following text: ' Xigris  should  be used  by  experienced prescribed  by  doctors  experienced in  institutions skilled in the care of patients with severe sepsis '. Section 4.4 'Special warnings and special precautions for use' The majority of the CHMP agreed on the following text based on the proposal from the MAH: 'Patients with single organ dysfunction and recent surgery Xigris is not approved for the treatment of patients with single organ dysfunction and should not  be  used  in  this  particular  subgroup  of  patients,  especially  if  they  had  recent  surgery (within  30  days).  In  each  of  two  randomized,  placebo-controlled  trials,  PROWESS  and ADDRESS (see  5.1),  post-hoc  analyses  showed  that  28-day  and  in-hospital  mortality  were higher in patients treated with drotrecogin alfa (activated) compared to placebo for the subpopulation of patients with single organ dysfunction and recent surgery (n=98 in PROWESS and n=636 in ADDRESS).The observation in this particular group may have resulted from difficulty in determining whether the organ dysfunction was sepsis-induced'. Section 4.8 'Undesirable effects' The majority of the CHMP agreed on the changes proposed by the MAH.

## Section 5.1 (Pharmacodynamic properties):

The majority of the CHMP agreed on the changes proposed by the MAH.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## II OBLIGATIONS PENDING TO BE FULFILLED

The MAH shall complete the following programme of studies within the specified time  frame,  the results of which form the basis of the second annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile.

## 1. Specific Obligations (SO)

## CLINICAL DATA

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised SPECIFIC OBBLIGATION 1 'A further clinical study will be conducted to investigate the possible interaction between Xigris and heparin. The study will start within 3 months of receiving the Scientific Advice final letter. Update on patient enrolment will be provided quarterly. The final study report will be provided by the end of June 2005.' The MAH was asked to further discuss a potential 'heparin phenomenon' based on observations from the pivotal PROWESS study (F1K-MC-EVAD). As part of the Specific Obligations for drotrecogin alfa (activated), the MAH agreed to undertake a clinical study to investigate the possible interaction between drotrecogin alfa (activated) and heparin. After obtaining scientific advice from the CHMP, two studies have been initiated : -Study  F1K-MC-EVCL/F1K-MC-EVCM  (ADDRESS) :  multicentre,  randomised,  doubleblind,  parallel,  placebo-controlled  study  design  to  evaluate  the  efficacy  and  safety  of drotrecogin alfa (activated) in patients with early stage severe sepsis who are at low risk of death. This study was discontinued. -Study  F1K-MC-EVBR ;  this  study  will  enrol  approximately  2,000  patients  who  will  be blindly  randomised  to  receive  unfractionated  heparin,  low  molecular  weight  heparin  or placebo in a 1:1:2 ratio. All patients will receive Xigris. After the early stop of ADDRESS, it is obvious that the data will not provide all of the anticipated information on the heparin-drotrecogin alfa (activated) relationship, and this is unfortunate. The expert discusses this issue in great detail. What is not easily explainable is the difference between PROWESS, ENHANCE and ADDRESS when it comes to the relative risk of death in the group of patients treated with heparin. Indeed, if one considers only the Xigris-treated patients: -a slightly higher mortality with heparin use was observed in PROWESS (RR=1.15 for all baseline heparin exposure, but only 1.03 after adjustment; RR=1.31 for any heparin exposure, reduced to 1.13 after adjustment; although these differences are not statistically significant); -whereas in ENHANCE, the trend was opposite (RR=0.88 for all baseline heparin exposure, with or without adjustment; R=0.85-0.82 for any heparin exposure; the latter RR reveals a significant interaction as mesured in a Cox regression model); -and in ADDRESS, heparin treatment was also associated with a lower risk of death (RR=0.950.91 for all baseline heparin exposure; RR=0.81-0.77 for any heparin exposure; p=0.05 in a Cox model  after  adjustment).  In  the  ADDRESS  MOD  subgroup,  'any  exposure'  to  heparin  was clearly associated with a better outcome (RR=0.57, Chi-square p=0.01).

If one considers the placebo patients in PROWESS and ADDRESS, all RR's for heparin use vs no use were slightly below 1 but non-significant. In the ADDRESS MOD subgroup, they were slightly above 1.

The  expert  reiterates  the  biases  induced  by  analyzing  a  variable  (heparin  exposure)  that  is  timedependent. These biases are well acknowledged.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

According to the expert, any further understanding of a potential 'heparin-drotrecogin alfa (activated) phenomenon' could only come from the data of a randomised study such as the ongoing EVBR study (Xigris therapy with or without randomised heparin). Quoting a large literature, the expert explains that the efficacy of high- or low-molecular weight heparin for preventing death in human sepsis has never  been  demonstrated  (even  in  patients  with  DIC),  that  heparin  and  LMWH  are  heterogeneous mixtures  and  may  very  well  have  different  effects,  and  that  preclinical  trials  of  heparins  in  animal models of sepsis have shown inconsistent results. The expert concludes that few data would support the conduct of a Phase III study of heparin vs placebo, or heparin vs Xigris, in severe sepsis.

Consequently,  the  MAH  states  it  has  made  every  effort  to  fulfil  the  Specific  Obligation  about  the heparin phenomenon.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Scientific discussion on specific obligation 1 The  only  consistent  conclusion  from  the  'heparin'  data  of  the  PROWESS,  ENHANCE  and ADDRESS studies  presented  in  the  expert  report  is  that  concomitant  heparin  use  in  Xigris-treated patients tends to signal a favourable outcome in ENHANCE and ADDRESS but not in PROWESS, whereas concomitant heparin use in placebo-treated patients was associated with a rather favourable outcome in both ADDRESS and PROWESS (there was no placebo group in ENHANCE). During the November 2004 CHMP plenary meeting the CHMP concluded that further supplementary information on clinical aspects, including also the heparin-Xigris interaction, should be submitted by the MAH before an agreement on the annual re-assessment could be reached. Therefore, during the November  2004  CHMP  plenary  meeting,  the  CHMP  adopted  the  request  for  supplementary information to be addressed by the Marketing Authorisation Holder. Further  analyses  of  the  potential  heparin-Xigris  interaction  across  the  three  studies  PROWESS, ENHANCE and ADDRESS confirmed the prediction that prophylactic heparin tends to be used in patients  with  a  lower  risk  of  death.  The  possible  reduced  efficacy  of  Xigris  when  combined  with heparin in the overall PROWESS study is not confirmed when the analysis is restricted to the MOD subgroup, or when the same analysis is performed on the ADDRESS study data. Prophylactic heparin does  not  raise  any  particular  safety  issue  and  it  should  not  be  contraindicated  in  patients  receiving Xigris. The results of the specific heparin-Xigris interaction study F1K-MC-EVBR will be available in 1Q2006. CHMP's conclusions on specific obligation 1 More  data  on  the  effect  of  heparin,  or  at  least  on  the  safety  of  concomitant  use  of  heparin  and drotrecogin alfa (activated), will come from the randomised study EVBR. Until then, the exceptional circumstances for granting Xigris a MA should not be lifted. Trials comparing Xigris with heparins would be interesting in MOD sepsis patients. Maybe one will have to wait until a particular type of heparin, or heparin mimetic, or a combination of anticoagulant and  antiinflammatory  medications,  has  demonstrated  some  benefit  in  early  Phase  II  studies  before such a comparison can be run. For instance, several published reports of heparins in 'classical' animal models  of  sepsis  (continuous  endotoxin  infusion  or  cecal  ligation-puncture)  have  demonstrated  a reduction in mortality when therapeutic, but not prophylactic, doses of unfractionated heparin were used (see Schiffer et al., 2002; Yang et al., 1994; and even Sun et al., 1997, where improvements in early survival rates and survival times were demonstrated).

Finally, it should be realized that the concern of the CHMP, when looking at the heparin data in the PROWESS study, was that some subgroup of patients may clearly not benefit, or may even suffer, from drotrecogin alfa (activated) treatment. The hint that heparin-treated patients may represent such a group  was  not  confirmed  by  the  subsequent  studies  ENHANCE  and  ADDRESS,  and  that  is  well acknowledged. However, the ADDRESS study has now identified a subgroup of patients who may suffer from Xigris treatment (patients with recent surgery and single organ failure).

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  majority  of  the  CHMP  was  favourable  to  maintain  the  specific  obligation  1.  According  to  the letter  of  Undertaking  submitted  by  the  MAH,  the  final  study  report  will  be  provided  by  end  of February 2006 instead of end of June 2005.

Therefore the revised specific obligation 1 will be:

'A  further  clinical  study  (F1K-MC-EVBR)  is  being  conducted  to  investigate  the  possible interaction between Xigris and heparin. Update on patient enrolment will be provided at the time of the annual license reassessment.  The final study report will be provided by the end of February 2006'.

Medicinal product no longer authorised SPECIFIC OBBLIGATION 2 'All  bleeding  events  will  be  addressed  every  6  months  by  providing  a  detailed  section  on bleedings in the PSURs.' Cumulative bleeding reports (risk of bleeding)  have been provided in each of the two PSURs (January 2004 and July 2004). According to the MAH, no new signals have arisen and the data confirms the safety of drotrecogin alfa as established at the time of initial approval. Given that the reporting of serious bleeding events (both CNS and non-CNS) has remained relatively constant, together with the difficulty in identifying specific risk factors from spontaneous reports in the population of severe sepsis which has a high rate of  associated  morbidity, the MAH proposes that it would be appropriate to discontinue the specific obligation of producing a six monthly bleed report. The monitoring of bleeding events could now be adequately covered by the general obligation of submitting a PSUR on a regular basis. The CHMP's conclusions from special reports on bleeding events in PSURs #1, #2, #3 and #4 are presented in the following table :

| PSUR   | Conclusion                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|--------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| #1     | Medicinal product • No new signal has arisen thus far. The apparently increased risk of bleeding in open trials versus controlled trials has already been stressed in the SPC. It does not seem to worsen, provided one follows the company's advice not to include the 'anaemia without bleeding site' in the 'bleeding events'. • The same holds for intracranial haemorrhage. Therefore, no changes to the SPC concerning this issue seem suitable at this time. • This bleeding safety issue needs further close monitoring. A special report on bleeding events should be prepared for the next PSUR. • The anticoagulant effect of Xigris, which relates to inactivation of factors Va and VIIIa, is probably increased in patients with low platelet counts. The relationship between adverse bleeding and thrombocytopenia should therefore be examined more carefully. • The company states that there seems to be no significant difference in the incidence of bleeding events in children versus adults, but since the number of paediatric patients who have been treated is unknown, this cannot be demonstrated. |
| #2     | The report provided with PSUR# 2 does not alter the evaluation made in PSUR#1. The apparently increased risk of bleeding in open trials versus controlled trials is already mentioned in the SPC. The overall bleeding rates provided by spontaneous reporting were small and in general consistent with the clinical data, although a direct comparison between both sources of information is impossible due to several reasons such as underreporting of spontaneous reports. Moreover, there is an association of an increased risk of bleeding and intracranial haemorrhage with severe thrombocytopenia and severe coagulopathy. Other risk factors, such as prophylactic heparin administration, should be further studied. Bleeding events should be continuously monitored. However, only new information should be assessed in the next PSUR.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| #3     | Data from the spontaneous reporting system are consistent with clinical trial data regarding the high risk of haemorrhage associated with Xigris. They also show that haemorrhage can occur in a large number of different sites. Although the fatality rate is much lower for Xigris-related non-ICH events than for Xigris- related ICH events (15.9% vs. 51.6%), both contributed to a large percentage of the total number of deaths in these patients (respectively 36.4% and 84.2%). In the analysis of the results of the ENHANCE study, the MAHhas assessed risk factors associated with fatality. It would also be useful to examine risk factors associated with lethality due to ICH and non-ICH haemorrhage and evaluate if they differ according to the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

|    | location of bleeding. For intracranial haemorrhage, it would be useful to have information on the long-term follow-up in terms of disabilities and neurological consequences. As there have been 83 spontaneous reports of serious bleeding events, 32 intracerebral haemorrhage and 51 non-intracerebral haemorrhage in this reporting period, information on bleeding events from post-marketing data should be reflected in section 4.8 of the SPC.                                                                                    |
|----|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| #4 | Bleeding rates from clinical trials are comparable to those reported in the previous PSUR. Data for the period of interest do not raise new concerns. Spontaneous pharmacovigilance data presented in the PSUR do not add new information with respect to the risk of bleeding. In the context of the evaluation of the results of the ENHANCE study, the assessor has recommended a revision of sections 4.4 and 4.8 of the SPC, especially regarding bleeding events and intracranial haemorrhage. The amendment of the SPC is ongoing. |

<!-- image -->

On  9  March  2005  the  MAH  decided  to  accept  the  DMC's  recommendation:  the  enrolment  was suspended and study drug administration was discontinued. The trial is still ongoing until all patients complete Day 28. The final study report will be provided by the end of October 2005.

Medicinal product no longer authorised It can be concluded from the evaluation of special reports provided in PSURs #1 to #4 that bleeding rates  from  open  post-marketing  studies  are  apparently  higher  than  in  controlled  trials.  Additional clinical trials carried out post-authorisation have confirmed data from previous trials. Data from the spontaneous  reporting  system  examined  in  the  four  PSURs  have  not  added  new  information  in comparison to what was already known from clinical trials. Results of the ENHANCE study suggest that  this  difference  is  probably  associated  with  differences  in  the  study  population,  particularly  in patients'  risk  set.  The  SPC  has  been  revised  insections  4.4  and  4.8  in  order  to  reflect  information gathered in the ENHANCE study regarding bleeding events and intracranial haemorrhage. CHMP's conclusions on specific obligation 2 Therefore, the majority of the CHMP was favourable to the MAH's request to discontinue the specific obligation of producing a six monthly bleed report. 2.  Follow-up Measure (FUM) CLINICAL Follow-up Measure 1 (FUM 017) Progress report on the paediatric study (F1K-MC-EVBP) (From letter of undertaking dated 20 th April 2005) 'FOM 1:  Paediatric  study: A  further  clinical  study  has  been  conducted  in  children  with  severe sepsis, including patients with purpura fulminans. The final study report will be provided by the end of October 2005.' The MAH is conducting a study, F1K-MC-EVBP, in children with severe sepsis, including patients with purpura fulminans. As of 31 st August 2004, 360 patients have been enrolled, with 130 centers in 18 countries currently active. Enrolment  in  the  paediatric  study  F1K-MC-EVBP  was  suspended  based  on  the  feedback  from  the Data Monitoring Committee (DMC). On 8 March 2005 the DMC met to review the interim analysis report of 400 patients enrolled in the trial and it recommended that Lilly should suspend enrolment based on futility in paediatric patients with severe sepsis.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Further commitment from variation EMEA/H/C/396/II/007:

## (From letter of undertaking dated 20 th April 2005)

Lilly agrees to provide data from a study on two full-scale lots to further support three freeze/thaw cycles in conjunction with 36 months storage.

Data will be submitted by September 2005.

## PHARMACEUTICAL

-

- -to discontinue the specific monitoring of disseminated intracoagulation disorders, thrombotic disorders, coagulation disorders, cardiac disorders and allergic disorders, such as recommended in PSUR#4;

Medicinal product no longer authorised Already submitted as of November 2004, but evaluation still ongoing FOM 4: From question 17 Data on the validation of the lyophilizer. FOM 5: From question 38 Lilly agrees to submit data on the Tandem Chromatography column lifetime. FOM 12: From questions 50, 52 and 58 Data on the clearance of SV40 by the Xigris nanofiltration process step.  Data on the evaluation of SV40 clearance by gamma irradiation of Fetal Bovine Serum and the ExCyte process steps will also be submitted. Testing  for  Bovine  Polyoma  Virus  in  Fetal  Bovine  Serum,  Thrombin  and  Excyte  and  in  5  Xigris process bioreactors will be conducted when a validated method is available.  It is estimated that data will be available by the end of July 2004. FOM 13: From the Inspection of DSM-Pharmaceuticals Additional  information  regarding  environmental  controls  (also  from  question  19  on  the  marketing authorisation application). FOM 18: From question 20 Lilly agrees to re-evaluate the acceptable Comparative Ratio ranges for the oligosaccharide profile method to mean +/- 4SD based on analysis of all full-scale Drug Substance batches using the current reference standard and the first 20 analyses of full-scale batches using the new rhAPC Reference Standard.  It is estimated that these data will be available for submission in July 2004. FURTHER COMMITMENTS ON PSURs The MAH commits to further monitor the following issues in the third PSUR: Thrombocytopenia, coagulation disorders (increased and prolonged prothrombin time), bleeding disorders, incl. Intracranial haemorrhage, with discussion of risk factors such heparin administration;  thrombotic  events,  including  stroke  and  acute  myocardial  infarction;  cardiac conduction disorders and allergic reactions. Concerning specific post-marketing measures, the CHMP recommends: to discontinue the specific obligation of producing a six monthly bleed report;

- -to continue the monitoring of cases of bleeding disorders, thrombocytopenia and ADRs occurring in children , including an estimation of their frequency in ongoing paediatric clinical trials.

<!-- image -->

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## III BENEFIT/RISK ASSESSMENT

The  majority  of  the  CHMP  concluded  that  there  is  a  strong  need  to  ensure  that  Xigris  is  used exclusively in high-risk patients, as an add-on to best standard care. This goal could be reached by: (i) requesting an amendment in section 4.2 in the SPC (' Xigris should be used by experienced doctors in institutions  skilled  in  the  care  of  patients  with  severe  sepsis '),  and  by:  (ii)  defining  the  target population  as  those  patients  that  can  be  treated  early,  i.e. 'The use of Xigris should  be  considered mainly in situations  when  therapy  can be  started  within  24  hours  after  the  onset  of  organ  failure' (section 4.1 in the SPC).

However, two CHMP members had a divergent opinion. They were of the view that the results of the ADDRESS study did not show a difference between Xigris and placebo either in the total, included population or in the subgroup with multiple organ failure and this raised concerns with regard to the efficacy  of  Xigris  in  the  indication  approved  in  the  EU.  They  considered  the  benefit/risk  profile  of Xigris unfavourable in the current indication and therefore these two CHMP members recommended the suspension of the Community Marketing Authorisation for Xigris.

Medicinal product no longer authorised 'Sequence effect' in PROWESS and ADDRESS Although the MAH stated that the sequence effect is a sign of a learning curve for the investigators, similar to what happens in the management of many complex disease states, it may rather reflect a marginal efficacy of Xigris in the lower risk patients in the ADDRESS study. The majority of the CHMP agreed with the MAH's suggestion to adapt Section 4.2 of the SPC to include 'Xigris should be used by experienced prescribed by doctors experienced in institutions skilled in the care of patients with severe sepsis'. The majority of the CHMP concluded that the sequence effect should be mentioned in section 5.1 in the SPC. Target population and early treatment None of the characteristics identified by subgroup analyses in the PROWESS and ADDRESS studies is likely to be clinically useful as a means of further refining the indication. However, the majority of the CHMP concluded that the combined needs to target high-risk patients and to treat early may be met by adapting the indication as follows: 'Xigris is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure (for  further  information  see Section 5.1)'. The arguments in support of this proposal are: · In the globally positive pivotal trial PROWESS, 89% of the patients were treated within 24 hours  of  the  first  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction  (median  time  to  treatment  =  18h).  In ADDRESS-MOD,  that  time  was  appreciably  longer:  26.6h.  In  the  open  label  ENHANCE study,  where the  median time to treatment was 25h, lower  mortality was observed in those patients  treated  with  Xigris ≤ 24  hours  from  the  first  sepsis-induced  organ  dysfunction compared to those treated &gt;24 hours. · A short interval between the first and second organ failures may reflect either the severity of the disease or a lower physiological reserve, meaning a higher risk of death and therefore a better response to Xigris. Instead  of  using  an  illness  severity  score,  with  its  many  shortcomings,  requiring  the  use  of  Xigris mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure may be a better way to restrict the indication to the sickest patients and thereby to increase the benefit/risk balance of Xigris.

Nevertheless  the  majority  of  the  CHMP  considered  that  the  benefit/risk  profile  of  Xigris  was favourable and concluded that the combined needs to target high-risk patients and to treat early could be met by amending the therapeutic indications of Xigris.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## IV OVERALL CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION

On the  basis  of  the  data  submitted  since  the  first  annual  re-assessment,  the  benefit/risk  profile  for Xigris  in  the  indication: 'treatment of adult patients with severe sepsis with multiple  organ failure when added to best standard care. The use of Xigris should be considered mainly in situations when therapy can be started within 24 hours after the onset of organ failure' remains positive.

The majority of the CHMP recommended the updating of the Annexes I and II of the Community Marketing Authorisation for Xigris.

On 21 April 2005 the CHMP adopted a positive Opinion by a majority of 24 out of 26 votes on the second annual re-assessment of the benefit/risk profile of Xigris.

<!-- image -->