---
document_datetime: 2023-09-21 19:13:48
document_pages: 8
document_pathfilename: www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-discussion-variation/zimulti-h-c-691-ii-04-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
document_name: zimulti-h-c-691-ii-04-epar-scientific-discussion-variation_en.pdf
version: success
processing_time: 2.11609
conversion_datetime: 2025-12-19 02:31:56.416799
docling_version:
  docling-serve: 1.9.0
  docling-jobkit: 1.8.0
  docling: 2.64.1
  docling-core: 2.55.0
  docling-ibm-models: 3.10.3
  docling-parse: 4.7.2
  python: cpython-313 (3.13.11)
  plaform: macOS-26.1-arm64-arm-64bit-Mach-O
---
European Medicines Agency

Post authorisation Evaluation of Medicines for Human Use

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised SCIENTIFIC DISCUSSION

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Medicinal product no longer authorised Rimonabant is a selective antagonist of cannabinoid type 1 (CB1) receptor. Rimonabant is the first member of a new class of compounds that target a novel physiological system, the endocannabinoid system (ECS). The endocannabinoid system has been shown to be involved in the central regulation of food intake and the central nervous system (CNS) reward system. CB1 receptors were first found in the brain, and later in several human tissues, including adipocytes. At the time of the initial Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA), the proposed indications for rimonabant were the management of multiple cardiovascular risk factors, weight management, type 2 diabetes, dyslipidaemia, smoking cessation and maintenance of abstinence. These indications were not acceptable to the CHMP. The final indication accepted by the CHMP is: \"As an adjunct to diet and exercise for the treatment of obese patients (BMI  30 kg/m2), or overweight patients (BMI &gt; 27 kg/m2) with associated risk factor(s), such as type 2 diabetes or dyslipidaemia.\" In  the  current  variation,  the  Marketing  Authorisation  Holder  (MAH)  applied  for  an  extension  of indication  to  include  the  treatment  of  type  2  diabetes  patients  (T2DM).  The  MAH  proposed  the addition of the following new indication: \"Treatment of type 2 diabetes patients, who are overweight (BMI &gt; 27 kg/m 2 ), as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycaemic control and to reduce weight in combination with metformin or a sulfonylurea when diet plus a single agent do not result in adequate glycaemic control\". 2. Clinical aspects 2.1 Clinical Efficacy Two phase III studies (RIO-Diabetes and SERENADE) have been submitted in support of the current application.  Both  studies  have  investigated  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  rimonabant  20  mg  in  type  2 diabetes  mellitus  (T2DM)  patients.  Furthermore,  the  results  of  a  pharmacodynamic  clamp  study (EFC5745) are included as support. The RIO-Diabetes study, which was submitted as part of the initial MAA (April 2005), investigated the effects of rimonabant or placebo on body weight when added to metformin or sulphonylurea (SU) in T2DM patients. SERENADE,  which  is  a  newly  submitted  trial,  studied  drug-naïve  T2DM  patients  administered rimonabant 20mg or placebo. The primary endpoint was reduction of HbA1c. The specific  difficulty  encountered  when  analysing  metabolic  effect  of  any  medicinal  product  with weight  reducing  effects  is  the  assessment  of  the  potential  weight  independent  effects  on  metabolic variables. Therefore, when assessing the effect of rimonabant, the portion of the effect due to body weight changes should be eliminated. This was the main issue for discussion during the initial MAA procedure and at that time it was concluded that the weight change independent effects were too small to allow for a specific indication in T2DM patients. The RIO-Diabetes results showed a reduction of HbA1c. Part of this effect seems to be independent of weight  reduction.  The  size  of  this  weight  independent  effect  is  difficult  to  estimate,  but  it  was considered that the reduction was around 0.37% in the rimonabant group. The analysis is based on the secondary efficacy end-point with the highest priority in the RIO-diabetes study with approximately 300  patients  in  each  treatment  group.  However,  of  more  importance  is  the  assessment  of  the  total effect  in  relation  to  approved  alternatives.  As  an  active  control  arm  of  this  trial  is  lacking  such comparison is difficult to perform. In  RIO-Diabetes the interaction between treatment and body weight loss was significant (p=0.007), and  it  was  considered  that  this  indicated  that  the  effect  on  HbA1c  was  not  enough  weight  change

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

independent.  The  body  weight-loss  adjusted  difference  in  HbA1c  was  -0.4%  (p&lt;0.001  for  20  mg rimonabant compared to placebo) compared with an unadjusted difference of -0.7% (p&lt;0.001).

In  addition,  the  MAH  stated  that  the  body  weight  and  HbA1c  changes  over  the  full  duration  of SERENADE (6 months) and RIO-Diabetes (1 year) were examined in the pooled cohort of 409 RIO-

Medicinal product no longer authorised The  results  of  SERENADE  showed  that  the  rimonabant  treated  patients  achieved  a  lower  HbA1c compared to the placebo treated patients. This change was of the same magnitude as the one seen in RIO-Diabetes. The body weight in the rimonabant group changed from 96.6 to 89.9 kg, a reduction of 6.7 kg over six months; in the placebo group the weight changed from 96.0 to 93.2 kg, a difference of 2.8  kg.  This  difference  makes  the  assessment  of  the  weight  independent  effect  of  rimonabant  more difficult. It is, however, acknowledged that the effects on HbA1c have been shown, but the magnitude of the weight independent effect is still not fully clarified. Furthermore an arm of this clinical trial with an active comparator is lacking. In SERENADE  no  significant  interaction  between  treatment  and  weight  loss was  observed. This implies that HbA1c change is homogenous across different categories of weight loss. Weight loss correlates with a decrease in HbA1c (p&lt;0.0001) and since weight loss is higher in the rimonabant than in  the  placebo  group,  an  additional  analysis  adjusting  for  weight  change  effect  on  HbA1c  was performed. The results, without taking into account weight loss, show an effect on HbA1c of -0.51% (p=0.0002 for rimonabant compared to placebo). When weight loss is included in the model, the effect on HbA1c is -0.29% (p=0.0418). The change in HbA1c is likely to be due to both weight loss and a weight loss independent effect of rimonabant. It could be estimated that approximately 57% of the change in HbA1c is directly due to the effect of rimonabant. This result therefore confirms the result obtained in the RIO-Diabetes study.  However, in SERENADE the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the difference compared to placebo was (-0.78, -0.24) with a point estimate of -0.51. The CHMP acknowledged that the analyses performed by the MAH demonstrated that rimonabant had an effect on HbA1c independent of weight loss. However, the size of this effect remained uncertain. The treatment alternatives in overweight type 2 diabetes patients failing on oral anti-diabetics (OAD) are limited and the weight gain that almost inevitably occurs when these patients are given insulin is a common and important clinical problem. However, a prospective confirmatory trial with rimonabant focusing on patients failing on OAD is lacking. In April 2007, the CHMP considered that the lack of comparison of rimonabant with an active control was a major objection to approve the new indication for type 2 diabetes. This view was strengthened by the fact that in the new study, SERENADE, the mean placebo subtracted effect of rimonabant on HbA1c was small and the calculated weight independent effect is only a -0.29% reduction in HbA1c. The CHMP also noted that SERENADE was not conducted in the population claimed. Hence, lack of an  adequately designed study in patients failing  on  OAD  makes  the efficacy assessment as well  as deciding rimonabant's place in the treatment of T2DM patients impossible. In response to this CHMP major objection, the MAH argued that the mean baseline HbA1c value in RIO-Diabetes was 7.3%, which was low in comparison to that seen in pivotal trials for other antidiabetic  agents.  In  RIO-Diabetes  the  placebo-subtracted  HbA1c  treatment  effect  in  the  rimonabant 20 mg group took approximately 9 months to fully develop, and was -0.7%. As per the MAH, the results of a number of other studies imply that the HbA1c treatment effect of rimonabant  20  mg  after  9  months  of  treatment  is  comparable  to  those  of  the  other  approved  antidiabetic  agents.  Both  RIO-Diabetes  and  SERENADE  had  mean  baseline  HbA1c  values  that  were lower than those of trials that support the labels of a number of anti-diabetic agents. The  MAH  further  argued  that  the  regression  analyses  performed  to  determine  the  magnitude  of weight-loss-independent effects on HbA1c in SERENADE and RIO-Diabetes indicated that a similar percentage of the effects in each case (57%) were due to weight-loss-independent effects. According to the MAH this may be because the weight-loss-independent effects of rimonabant develop gradually over time, as do the weight-loss-dependent factors. As per the MAH, it is likely that these non-weightloss effects would increase in absolute magnitude over the first year of treatment.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

Diabetes  and  SERENADE patients  (291  placebo  and  118  rimonabant  20  mg)  with  weight  changes (increases or decreases) of ≤ 2.5kg. In these patients, who can be considered as those with stable body weight,  the  mean  reduction  in  HbA1c  associated  with  rimonabant  20  mg  vs  placebo  was  -0.37% (p&lt;0.0001). The  associated placebo-subtracted weight loss for these patients associated with rimonabant 20mg treatment was -0.5kg.

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised The changes in mean HbA1c and body weight over time by treatment in RIO-Diabetes (see fig below) indicate that mean HbA1c increased in the placebo group over the last 6 months of the study. The fact that this was observed without a parallel increase in body weight in the placebo group over this period is an indication that it was based on other, non-weight-loss-related factors (eg diabetes progression), and the fact that the same increase in mean HbA1c did not occur in the rimonabant 20mg group over the last 6 months of the trial is an indication that rimonabant 20mg treatment successfully addressed these factors. Change (%) by visit and LOCF at 1 year (mean change ±SEM), ITT population for HbA1c (left) and body weight change (kg) (right). The CHMP also objected the lack of trials confirming the effects of rimonabant in diabetic patients failing monotherapy treatment with metformin or sulfonylurea. The MAH argued that when patients from  RIO-Diabetes  who  were  treated  with  maximal  or  near-maximal  doses  of  metformin  or sulfonylurea were analyzed separately in terms of HbA1c treatment effects, the effects of rimonabant 20 mg on HbA1c vs placebo were similar (even better for metformin treated patients) to what they were in the overall population, and the changes vs placebo in HbA1c were statistically (and clinically) significant in both cohorts treated with high doses of background agents, despite the smaller sample size of these cohorts. Additionally, the CHMP was of the view that the design of the clamp study (EFC5745) did not allow demonstration of any benefit from rimonabant compared to placebo. As the outcome of the study was inconclusive, the CHMP was of the opinion that the study does not support that rimonabant has an intrinsic anti-diabetic effect. The  clamp  study  was  an  exploratory,  short-term  (8  week),  placebo  controlled  study  of  rimonabant 20 mg vs placebo in 40 (20 per treatment group) non-diabetic insulin-resistant individuals, so defined based  on  the  presence  of  overweight  (BMI  27  to  35  kg/m2),  impaired  fasting  glucose  (IFG),  and hypertriglyceridemia.  It  was  undertaken  by  the  MAH  to  attempt  to  dissociate  effects  on  peripheral insulin sensitivity from changes in body weight and it was not intended to be a pivotal study to support the submission. The MAH argued that this study was included because it was completed during the period between the initial  submission  and  the  variation  application,  and  was  discussed  because  it  addressed  one  of  the secondary efficacy parameters of the variation, insulin sensitivity. Its population was not diabetic by design, and because of its defining metabolic abnormality (Impaired Fasting Glucose) it would have been unlikely that any significant response of blood glucose could have been demonstrated.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

The  MAH  recognised  that  the  results  of  the  clamp  study  are  inconclusive;  moreover  they  do  not support  the  conclusion  that  rimonabant  had  no  intrinsic  (i.e.  weight-loss-independent)  effect  on glucose lowering in type 2 diabetic patients.

Medicinal product no longer authorised Conclusion on efficacy The  CHMP  acknowledged  that  there  is  an  effect  on  glucose  metabolism.  However,  the  clinical relevance of the effect observed as well as the magnitude of the weight independent effects has not been established. The total effect on the HbA1c levels appears to be of moderate size. The CHMP and the MAH agreed that the weight independent effect on HbA1c of rimonabant is small. The lack of data from studies including an active control makes an assessment of the observed effects difficult. The CHMP was of the  opinion  that  the  SERENADE  study  provides  additional  support  for  the  already approved indication but is not sufficient to support the proposed indication. In  conclusion,  sufficient  data  have  not  been  submitted  to  justify  an  indication  in  type  2  diabetes patients. However, since treatment of overweight in patients with type 2 diabetes was already included in the current indication for treatment of overweight patients with additional risk factors, the CHMP agreed that results from the submitted studies could be included in the product information. 2.2 Clinical safety This  section  will  concentrate  on  the  pooled  safety  data  from  RIO-Diabetes  and  SERENADE.  The safety population consisted of all randomised patients who took at least 1 dose of investigational drug irrespective of duration of treatment. Patients were analyzed in the actual treatment group as dispensed at  the  randomisation  visit.  Prospectively,  in  SERENADE  all  treatment-emergent  adverse  events (TEAEs) in the nervous system disorder or psychiatric System Organ Class (SOCs) were queried via complementary  data  queries  (CDQs)  in  response  to  a  regulatory  request  to  obtain  additional information  on  the  diagnosis,  evaluation,  and  treatment  of  such  TEAEs.  For  RIO-Diabetes,  CDQs were issued retrospectively for all patients, after the study's conclusion, to gather the same information for AEs in the nervous system or psychiatric SOCs. Patient exposure A total of 965 patients were randomized and completed the planned treatment period and exposed to either  rimonabant  20  mg  (477  patients)  or  placebo  (488  patients)  in  the  2  studies.  The  cumulative exposure  in  patient  years  was  341.6  patient-years  in  the  placebo  group  compared  to  328.9  patientyears for rimonabant. The mean duration of exposure was similar between the placebo (256 days) and rimonabant (252 days) groups. About one-half of the total number of patients in the rimonabant group had received rimonabant 20 mg for &gt;300 days. Adverse events (AEs) There  were  slightly  more  TEAEs  in  the  rimonabant  group  (80.7%;  385  of  477)  compared  to  the placebo group (73.2%; 357 of 488) and a greater number of patients administered rimonabant (13.4%; 64 of 477) discontinued due to TEAEs compared with the placebo group (4.5%; 22 of 488). Among the  most  frequently  reported  SOC ( &gt; 10% in any group), those in which events were reported more frequently with rimonabant  than  with  placebo  were  in the psychiatric,  nervous  system,  and gastrointestinal (GI) disorders. The incidence of TEAEs leading to discontinuation was higher in the rimonabant (13.4%; 64 of 477) group compared with placebo (4.5%; 22 of 488). Among the most frequently reported SOC ( &gt; 2% in any group), those in which events were reported more frequently with rimonabant than with placebo were  in  the  psychiatric  (rimonabant:  5.2%;  placebo:  0.8%),  nervous  system  (rimonabant:  3.1%; placebo: 0.4%), and gastrointestinal (rimonabant: 2.9%; placebo: 0.6%) disorders.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## Adverse events of special interest

Medicinal product no longer authorised Mood alterations, depressive symptoms, and anxiety The  incidence  of  mood  alterations  and  depressive  symptoms  (includes  depressed  mood,  depressive symptoms and tearfulness)  was  higher  in  the  rimonabant  group  (6.1%)  than  in  the  placebo  (2.7%) group.  Analysis  of  these  TEAEs  showed  slightly  higher  incidences  in  the  rimonabant  group  when compared with placebo:  depressed  mood  (rimonabant:  4.2%;  placebo:  2.0%),  depressive  symptoms (rimonabant:  1.9%;  placebo:  0.6%),  and  tearfulness  (rimonabant:  0.2%;  placebo:  0%).  In  the rimonabant group,  the  majority  of  these  events  were  characterized  as  mild  or  moderate.  The  mood alterations and depressive symptoms were considered related to rimonabant in 2.1% of the patients. The incidence of anxiety was higher in the rimonabant group (5.2%) than in the placebo (2.9%) group. In  the  rimonabant  group,  the  majority  of  these  events  were  characterized  as  mild.  The  anxiety  was considered related to rimonabant in 1.5% of the patients. Anxiety led to discontinuation in 3 (0.6%) patients.  Among  the  psychiatric  symptoms,  that  were  reported  more  frequently  ( &gt; 2  patients)  in rimonabant  treated  patient  compared  to  placebo  were  anxiety  disorders  (11  patients),  melancholic symptom  (5  patients),  aggressivity  (4  patients),  suicidal  ideation/thought  of  death  (3  patients),  and feeling of worthlessness (2 patients). Nausea and vomiting The  incidence  of  nausea  was  higher  in  the  rimonabant  group  (11.3%)  than  in  the  placebo  (5.5%) group.  The  events  were  mainly  characterized  as  mild  or  moderate  in  intensity.  The  nausea  was considered related to rimonabant in 5.5% of the patients. Nausea as a serious adverse event (SAE) led to treatment discontinuation in 8 (1.7%) patients in the rimonabant group. The  incidence  of  vomiting  was  higher  in  the  rimonabant  group  (5.5%)  than  in  the  placebo  (1.8%) group. The events were mainly characterized as mild or moderate in intensity, with a majority of onset from  Day  31-Day  90  after  initiation  of  rimonabant.  The  vomiting  was  considered  related  to rimonabant in 1.3% of the patients. Vomiting led to treatment discontinuation in 3 (0.6%) patients in the rimonabant group. Dizziness The  incidence  of  dizziness  was  higher  in  the  rimonabant  group  (9.6%)  than  in  the  placebo  (4.3%) group.  The  majority  of  events  were  characterized  as  mild.  The  dizziness  was  considered  related  to rimonabant in 3.1% of the patients. Dizziness led to treatment discontinuation in 5 (1.0%) patients in the rimonabant group. Hypoglycaemia Hypoglycaemia was reported as a TEAE in a greater number of patients in the rimonabant (4.0%; 19 of 477) group when compared with placebo (1.4%; 7 of 488). In the RIO-Diabetes study, a blood glucose level of &lt; 2.5 mmol/L was to be reported as an adverse event.  Hypoglycaemia  was  reported  with  a  higher  incidence  in  the  rimonabant  group  (18;  5.3%) compared with the placebo group (6; 1.7%). Hypoglycaemic events were reported more frequently in the rimonabant group (18 cases). In the rimonabant group, 8 patients with TEAEs of hypoglycaemia were treated  with  biguanides  and  10  were  treated  with  sulfonylureas  (SU).  Seventeen  patients  with hypoglycaemia in RIO-Diabetes continued rimonabant 20 mg. Their anti-diabetic therapy was reduced in 9 cases, maintained at the same dosage in 7 cases, and switched to another treatment in 1. In  the  SERENADE  study,  symptomatic  hypoglycaemic  episodes  were  defined  as  an  event  with clinical  symptoms  considered  as  resulting  from  hypoglycaemia.  Two  patients  in  the  SERENADE study,  one  in  each  treatment  group,  reported  single  non-serious  episodes  of  mild  symptomatic hypoglycaemia. Paresthesia Paresthesia was reported as a TEAE in a greater number of patients in the rimonabant (2.9%; 14 of 477) group compared to placebo (0.8%; 4 of 488). A majority of the 14 cases were not considered

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

<!-- image -->

Medicinal product no longer authorised related  to  study  drug.  Most  cases  had  an  atypical  body  distribution  for  classical  diabetic  sensory neuropathy (sparing the lower limbs). Specific information about pre-existing diabetic neuropathy was not collected in either study. Paresthesia as medical history was reported for only one patient in the placebo group, and did not predispose to paresthesias as TEAEs. Six of the 14 patients with TEAEs of paresthesia in the rimonabant group had concomitant medical conditions (i.e. carpal tunnel syndrome, vitamin B12  deficiency, cardiovascular accident (CVA),  rheumatoid  arthritis) or  concomitant medication (anti-epileptic) that could have predisposed them to develop paresthesias. Five of the 14 affected patients in the rimonabant group discontinued treatment. Serious adverse events and deaths Serious TEAEs were slightly more frequent in the rimonabant (7.5%; 36 of 477) group compared with placebo (4.1%; 20 of 488). Among the most frequently reported SOC ( &gt; 1% in any group), those in which events  were  reported  more  frequently  with  rimonabant  than  with  placebo  were  in  the  injury poisoning  and  procedural  complications  (rimonabant:  1.5%;  placebo:  0.4%),  cardiac  (rimonabant: 1.9%;  placebo:  1.0%),  gastrointestinal  (rimonabant:  1.0%;  placebo:  0.0%),  and  nervous  system disorders (rimonabant: 1.0%; placebo: 0.4%). In  the  rimonabant  20  mg  group,  the  most  frequently  reported  serious  TEAEs  were,  road  traffic accident  (3  patients),  hypoglycaemia,  coronary  artery  disease,  cardiac  failure,  cholelithiasis,  renal colic, chest pain, fall, and traumatic fracture (2 patients each). All 3 cases of road traffic accident were in the RIO-Diabetes study; 2 of the 3 cases were associated with hypoglycaemia. Of note, in the RIODiabetes  study  all  patients  were  on  Oral  Anti-diabetics  (OADs).  In  the  placebo  group,  the  most frequently reported serious TEAE was cholelithiasis (2 patients). A total of 5 deaths (3 in the rimonabant 20 mg group, 1 in the rimonabant 5 mg group, and 1 in the placebo  group)  were  reported  in  the  two  studies  during  the  treatment  period.  The  investigators excluded a causal relationship to the investigational product for each of these events resulting in death. In the RIO-Diabetes study, there was also 1 death (cardiac arrest) during the placebo run-in period. Laboratory findings There  were  no  specific  changes  in  electrocardiographic,  chemistry,  or  haematology  parameters  for which rimonabant showed an increased incidence over placebo. Post-marketing data Rimonabant was approved on late 2006; therefore the post-marketing data is relatively sparse. The AEs from spontaneous reports  mirror  the  ones  found  in  the  clinical  trials  with  GI,  nervous  system disorder, and psychiatric AEs as the more common findings. Symptoms such as nausea, diarrhoea, and hyperhidrosis were the most common individual events reported. Conclusion on safety The  adverse  event  profile  in  the  new  data  is  comparable  to  events  previously  reported.  However, paresthesia  is  a  new  event  not  found  before  and  therefore  has  been  added  to  section  4.8  of  the Summary of Product Characteristics and to the Package Leaflet. Although  the  psychiatric  adverse  events  still  cause  concern,  and  this  concern  is  enhanced  by  the present report of three episodes of suicidal ideation, two of these occurred in patients without a prior history  of  psychiatric  illness,  it  was  considered  that  the  product  information  includes  sufficient information on them and the importance of the agreed Risk Management Plan was highlighted.

<div style=\"page-break-after: always\"></div>

## 3. OVERALL CONCLUSION AND BENEFIT-RISK ASSESSMENT

Medicinal product no longer authorised The RIO-Diabetes study investigated the effects of rimonabant or placebo when added to metformin or SU in T2DM patients on body weight. SERENADE studied drug-naïve T2DM patients administered rimonabant 20mg or placebo, the primary endpoint was reduction HbA1c. In  these  studies,  rimonabant  demonstrates  a  modest  decrease  in  HbA1c  compared  to  placebo.  The extent of decrease in HbA1c that can be attributed to a weight independent effect of rimonabant is undetermined. The difference in HbA1c decrease was estimated to be -0.29 percentage points. The new data submitted with the application does not expand the knowledge of the contribution of rimonabant in the treatment of T2DM patients. To determine this, studies including a comparison with an active control, especially metformin, are needed. The request for such studies is also supported by current guidelines. Safety data did not deviate from the results of previously submitted study data. The only new event is paresthesia,  which  the  MAH  agreed  to  add  to  section  4.8  of  the  SPC.  The  concerns  regarding psychiatric ADRs remain. In  conclusion,  rimonabant  has  a  modest  effect  on  HbA1c,  but  the  clinical  relevance  is  not demonstrated versus an active comparator. Therefore, the benefit-risk assessment for an indication in diabetes type 2 is currently negative. However, since treatment of overweight in patients with type 2 diabetes  was  already  included  in  the  current  indication  for  treatment  of  overweight  patients  with additional risk factors, the CHMP agreed that some data on the results of the submitted studies could be included in section 5.1 of the Summary of Products Characteristics.